


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Age grade
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				

Part of a series on


Political and
legal anthropology




Basic concepts


Status and rank


Ascribed status
Achieved status
Social status
Caste
Age grade/Age set
Leveling mechanism


Leadership


Big man
Matriarchy
Patriarchy
Pantribal sodalities
Chief
Paramount chief


Polities


Band society
Segmentary lineage
Tribe
Chiefdom
House society
Ethnic group
Theatre state


law and custom


Customary law
Legal culture








Case studies


Acephelous
Societies without hierarchical leaders


African Political Systems
Papuan Big man system
The Art of Not Being Governed


State
Non-western state systems


Negara
Mandala


Technology, Tradition,
and the State in Africa


Legal systems


Kapu


Colonialism and resistance


Europe and the People
Without History
Cargo cult








Related articles


Circumscription theory
Legal anthropology
Left-right paradigm
State formation
Political economy in anthropology
Network Analysis and Ethnographic Problems








Major theorists


E. Adamson Hoebel
Georges Balandier
F. G. Bailey
Fredrik Barth
Jeremy Boissevain
Robert L. Carneiro
Henri J. M. Claessen
Jean Comaroff
John Comaroff
Pierre Clastres
E. E. Evans-Pritchard
Wolfgang Fikentscher
Meyer Fortes
Morton Fried
Ernest Gellner
Lesley Gill
Ulf Hannerz
Thomas Blom Hansen
Ted C. Lewellen
Edmund Leach
Ralph Linton
Elizabeth Mertz
Sidney Mintz
Sally Falk Moore
Rodney Needham
Marshall Sahlins
James C. Scott
Elman Service
Aidan Southall
Jonathan Spencer
Bjorn Thomassen
Douglas R. White
Eric Wolf






Social and cultural anthropology





v
t
e





In sociology and anthropology, an age grade or age class is a form of social organization based on age, within a series of such categories, through which individuals pass over the course of their lives.
This is in contrast to an age set, to which individuals remain permanently attached as the set itself becomes progressively more senior.
The number of age classes, the determining ages and the terminology vary significantly between traditions. Even within a single society, a person may belong to several overlapping grades in different spheres of life, e.g. per year a different school class and yet for several years on end a child, then an adolescent, finally an adult.
In tribal societies entry into an age grade - generally gender-separated - is often marked by an initiation rite, which may be the crowning of a long and complex preparation, sometimes in retreat. After a period of some years, during which they often perform certain common activities, alone or under senior guidance, members may be initiated either collectively or individually into a more senior age grade. This progression is often accompanied by the revelation of secret knowledge. In most cultures, age grade systems, as with age sets, are the preserve of men, and it is the older men who control a society's secret knowledge, collectively or restricted to a council of elders and/or specific positions such as shaman entrusted with the preparation of initiants.
Closely related age-grade systems are common among East African Cushitic communities. Particularly, the Oromo, a trans-national nation living in Ethiopia and Kenya, have a well-developed age-grade system known as the Gadaa System.[ Another example is that of the Maasai] Gadaa through history came to organize social life around the series of five generation grades which assign obligations as well as rights to members of the society. Through Gadaa, many socio-political functions were carried out. For example, the system operated as an educational institution by providing periods of training and skill development in each grade and by casting all those YUBA (who had finished the full cycle consisting of five-grades) in the role of teachers and advisors. The system operated as a judicial institution by assigning a Chief Justice, jurors at the national level and making all LUBA wherever they were into arbitrators and councilors ready to defend the national law.[1]
Many male age grade systems are associated with patrilineal kinship systems.[2] Male age grade systems associated with matrilineal kinship systems are found among the Austronesian populations of Taiwan.[3]
References[edit]


^ http://www.gumii.org/gada/understd.html
^ Bernardi, B. (1985). Age Class Systems: Social Institutions and Polities Based on Age. Cambridge University Press.&#160;
^ Shepherd, J.R. (1995). Marriage and Mandatory Abortion among the 17th-century Siraya. American Anthropological Association.&#160;





This sociology-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.


v
t
e












					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Age_grade&amp;oldid=653230876"					
				Categories: Sociology stubsSocial groupsAnthropological categories of peoplesHidden categories: All stub articles				
							
		
		
			Navigation menu

			
									
						Personal tools
						
							Create accountLog in						
					
									
										
						Namespaces
						
															Article
															Talk
													
					
										
												
							Variants
						

						
							
															
						
					
									
				
										
						Views
						
															Read
															Edit
															View history
													
					
										
						More

						
							
															
						
					
										
						
							Search
						

						
							
														
						
					
									
			
			
				
						
			Navigation

			
									
						Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store					
							
		
			
			Interaction

			
									
						HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page					
							
		
			
			Tools

			
									
						What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page					
							
		
			
			Print/export

			
									
						Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version					
							
		
			
			Languages

			
									
						Українська					
				Edit links			
		
				
		
		
							
											 This page was last modified on 23 March 2015, at 23:46.
											Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
									
							
											Privacy policy
											About Wikipedia
											Disclaimers
											Contact Wikipedia
											Developers
											