


		
		
		
			

							
						


			Knight
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
This is the latest accepted revision, reviewed on 18 November 2015.



												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				"Knighthood" redirects here. For the modern British honour, see Orders, decorations, and medals of the United Kingdom § Knighthood. For honours of other nations, see Order (honour) § Modern ranks.
For other uses, see knight (disambiguation) and knights (disambiguation).




David I of Scotland knighting a squire



Royal, noble and
chivalric ranks




Emperor


King


Archduke




Grand Duke
Grand Prince




Prince / Infante


Duke


Sovereign Prince&#160;/ Fürst


Marquess&#160;/ Marquis&#160;/
Margrave&#160;/ Landgrave


Count&#160;/ Earl


Viscount&#160;/ Vidame


Baron




Baronet
Hereditary Knight




Knight


Esquire


Gentleman





v
t
e









The English fighting the French knights at the Battle of Crécy in 1346.


A knight (/naɪt/[1]) is a person granted an honorary title of knighthood by a monarch or other political leader for service to the Monarch or country, especially in a military capacity. Historically, in Europe, knighthood has been conferred upon mounted warriors.[2] During the High Middle Ages, knighthood was considered a class of lower nobility. By the Late Middle Ages, the rank had become associated with the ideals of chivalry, a code of conduct for the perfect courtly Christian warrior. Often, a knight was a vassal who served as a fighter for a lord, with payment in the form of land holdings.[3] The lords trusted the knights, who were skilled in battle on horseback. Since the early modern period, the title of knight is purely honorific, usually bestowed by a monarch, as in the British honours system, often for non-military service to the country. The modern female equivalent is Dame.
Historically, the ideals of chivalry were popularized in medieval literature, especially the Matter of Britain and Matter of France, the former based on Geoffrey of Monmouth's Historia Regum Britanniae ("History of the Kings of Britain"), written in the 1130s. Sir Thomas Malory's Le Morte d'Arthur ("The Death of Arthur"), written in 1485, was important in defining the ideal of chivalry which is essential to the modern concept of the knight as an elite warrior sworn to uphold the values of faith, loyalty, courage, and honour. Furthermore, Geoffroi de Charny's "Book of Chivalry" expounded upon the importance of Christian faith in every area of a Knights life. During the Renaissance, the genre of chivalric romance became popular in literature, growing ever more idealistic and eventually giving rise to a new form of realism in literature popularised by Miguel de Cervantes' Don Quixote. This novel explored the ideals of knighthood and their incongruity with the reality of Cervantes' world. In the late medieval period, new methods of warfare began to render classical knights in armour obsolete, but the titles remained in many nations.
Some orders of knighthood, such as the Knights Templar, have become the subject of legend; others have disappeared into obscurity. Today, a number of orders of knighthood continue to exist in several countries, such as the English Order of the Garter, the Swedish Royal Order of the Seraphim, and the Royal Norwegian Order of St. Olav. Each of these orders has its own criteria for eligibility, but knighthood is generally granted by a head of state to selected persons to recognise some meritorious achievement.
Knighthood in the Middle Ages was closely linked with horsemanship (and especially the joust) from its origins in the 12th century until its final flowering as a fashion among the high nobility in the Duchy of Burgundy in the 15th century. This linkage is reflected in the etymology of chivalry, cavalier and related terms (see Etymology section below). The special prestige given to mounted warriors finds a parallel in the furusiyya in the Muslim world, and the Greek hippeus (ιππεύς) and the Roman eques of Classical Antiquity.[4]



Contents


1 Etymology
2 Origins of medieval knighthood

2.1 Pre-Carolingian legacies
2.2 Carolingian age
2.3 Crusades


3 Culture

3.1 Training
3.2 Accolade
3.3 Chivalric code
3.4 Tournaments
3.5 Heraldry


4 Medieval and Renaissance literature
5 Decline
6 Types of knighthood

6.1 Military–monastic orders of knighthood
6.2 Chivalric orders
6.3 Honorific orders of knighthood
6.4 Hereditary knighthoods

6.4.1 Continental Europe
6.4.2 Ireland
6.4.3 British Baronetcies


6.5 Women in orders of knighthood

6.5.1 England and the United Kingdom
6.5.2 France
6.5.3 Italy
6.5.4 The Low Countries
6.5.5 Spain




7 Notable Knights
8 See also

8.1 Counterparts in other cultures


9 Notes
10 References



Etymology[edit]
The word knight, from Old English cniht ("boy" or "servant"),[5] is a cognate of the German word Knecht ("servant, bondsman").[6] This meaning, of unknown origin, is common among West Germanic languages (cf: Old Frisian kniucht, Dutch knecht, Danish knægt, Swedish knekt, Norwegian knekt, Middle High German kneht, all meaning "boy, youth, lad", as well as German Knecht "servant, bondsman, vassal").[5] Anglo-Saxon cniht had no particular connection to horsemanship, referring to any servant. A rādcniht (meaning "riding-servant") was a servant delivering messages or patrolling coastlines on horseback. Old English cnihthād ("knighthood") had the meaning of adolescence (i.e. the period between childhood and manhood) by 1300.[5]
A narrowing of the generic meaning "servant" to "military follower of a king or other superior" is visible by 1100. The specific military sense of a knight being a mounted warrior in the heavy cavalry emerges only in the Hundred Years' War. The verb "to knight" (i.e. to make someone a knight) appears around 1300, and from the same time, the word "knighthood" shifted from "adolescence" to "rank or dignity of a knight".
An Equestrian (Latin, from eques "horseman", from equus "horse")[7] was a member of the second highest social class in the Roman Republic and early Roman Empire. This class is often translated as "knight"; the medieval knight, however, was called miles in Latin, (which in classical Latin meant "soldier", normally infantry).[8][9][10] Both Greek hippos and Latin equus are derived from the Proto-Indo-European word root ekwo- meaning "horse".[11]
In the later Roman Empire the classical Latin word for horse, equus, was replaced in common parlance by vulgar Latin caballus, sometimes thought to derive from Gaulish caballos.[12] From caballus arose terms in the various Romance languages cognate to the (French-derived) English cavalier: Italian cavaliere, Spanish caballero, French chevalier (hence chivalry), Portuguese cavaleiro, Romanian cavaler.[13] The Germanic languages feature terms cognate to the English rider: German Ritter, and Dutch and Scandinavian ridder. These words are cognates derived from Germanic rīdan "to ride", derived from the Proto-Indo-European root reidh-.[14]
Origins of medieval knighthood[edit]
Further information: Bucellarius
Pre-Carolingian legacies[edit]




A Norman knight slaying Harold Godwinson (Bayeux tapestry, c. 1070). The rank of knight developed in the 12th century from the mounted warriors of the 10th and 11th centuries.


In Ancient Rome there was a knightly class Ordo Equestris (order of mounted nobles) from which European knighthood may have been derived.[15] Some portions of the armies of Germanic peoples who occupied Europe from the 3rd century AD onward had been mounted, and some armies, such as those of the Ostrogoths, were comprised mainly of cavalry.[16] However, it was the Franks who generally fielded armies composed of large masses of infantry, with an infantry elite, the comitatus, which often rode to battle on horseback rather than marching on foot. When the armies of the Frankish ruler Charles Martel defeated the Umayyad Arab invasion at the Battle of Tours in 732, the Frankish forces were still largely infantry armies, with elites riding to battle but dismounting to fight.
Carolingian age[edit]
In the Early Medieval period any well-equipped horseman could be described as a 'knight,' or miles in Latin.[17] The first knights appeared during the reign of Charlemagne in the 8th century.[18][19][20] As the Carolingian Age progressed, the Franks were generally on the attack, and larger numbers of warriors took to their horses to ride with the Emperor in his wide-ranging campaigns of conquest. At about this time the Franks increasingly remained on horseback to fight on the battlefield as true cavalry, rather than as mounted infantry with the discovery of the stirrup, and would continue to do so for centuries thereafter.[21] Although in some nations the knight returned to foot combat in the 14th century, the association of the knight with mounted combat with a spear, and later a lance, remained a strong one. The older Carolingian ceremony of presenting a young man with weapons influenced the emergence of knighthood ceremonies, in which a noble would be ritually given weapons and declared to be a knight, usually amid some festivities.[22]
These mobile mounted warriors made Charlemagne’s far-flung conquests possible, and to secure their service he rewarded them with grants of land called benefices.[18] These were given to the captains directly by the Emperor to reward their efforts in the conquests, and they in turn were to grant benefices to their warrior contingents, who were a mix of free and unfree men. In the century or so following Charlemagne’s death, his newly empowered warrior class grew stronger still, and Charles the Bald declared their fiefs to be hereditary. The period of chaos in the 9th and 10th centuries, between the fall of the Carolingian central authority and the rise of separate Western and Eastern Frankish kingdoms (later to become France and Germany respectively), only entrenched this newly landed warrior class. This was because governing power, and defense against Viking, Magyar and Saracen attack, became an essentially local affair which revolved around these new hereditary local lords and their demesnes.[19]
Crusades[edit]




The battle between the Turks and Christian knights during the Ottoman wars in Europe.


In the course of the 12th century knighthood became a social rank with a distinction being made between 'milites gregarii' (non-noble cavalrymen) and milites nobiles (true knights).[23] As the term 'knight' became increasingly confined to denoting a social rank, the military role of fully armoured cavalryman gained a separate term, 'man-at-arms'. Although any Medieval knight going to war would automatically serve as a man-at-arms, not all men-at-arms were knights. The first military orders of knighthood were of Knights Hospitaller and of the Holy Sepulchre, both founded at the First Crusade of 1099, followed by the Knights Templar (1119) and the Order of Saint Lazarus (1098). At the time of their foundation, these were intended as monastic orders, whose members would act as simple soldiers protecting pilgrims. It was only over the following century, with the successful conquest of the Holy Land and the rise of the crusader states, that these orders became powerful and prestigious.
The great European legends of warriors such as the paladins and the Matter of Britain popularized the notion of chivalry among the warrior class.[24][25] The ideal of chivalry as the ethos of the Christian warrior, and the transmutation of the term knight from the meaning "servant, soldier", and of chevalier "mounted soldier", to refer to a member of this ideal class, is significantly influenced by the Crusades, on one hand inspired by the military orders of monastic warriors, and on the other hand also cross-influenced by Islamic (Saracen) ideals of furusiyya.[25][26]
Culture[edit]
Training[edit]




The miles christianus allegory (mid 13th century), showing a knight armed with virtues and facing the vices in mortal combat. The parts of his armour are identified with Christian virtues, thus correlating essential military equipment with the religious values of chivalry: The helmet is spes futuri gaudii (hope of future bliss), the shield (here the shield of the Trinity) is fides (faith), the armour is caritas (charity), the lance is perseverantia (perseverance), the sword is verbum Dei (word of God), the banner is regni celestis desiderium (desire for the kingdom of heaven), the horse is bona voluntas (good will), the saddle is christiana religio (Christian religion), the saddlecloth is humilitas (humility), the reins are discretio (discretion), the spurs are disciplina (discipline), the stirrups are propositum boni operis (proposition of good works), and the horse's four hooves are delectatio, consensus, bonum opus, consuetudo (delight, consent, good work and exercise).


By the 10th century the institution of knights were already well-established.[27] While the knight was essentially a position denoting a military officer, the term can also be used on positions of higher nobility such as landholders. The higher nobles grant the vassals their fiefs or portions of land in return for their loyalty, protection and service. They also provided their necessities such as lodging, food, armor, weapons, horses and money.[28] The knight generally held his lands by military tenure which are measured through military service that usually lasts 40 days a year. This military service were exchanged for each fief given to the knights. Vassals and lords can own any number of knights, although those with more military experience are the ones sought after. Thus all nobles who are on the path of becoming knights must have a great deal of military exploits.[27] A knight fighting under another's banner was called a knight bachelor while a knight fighting under his own banner was a knight banneret.
In order to become a knight, one must be born in nobility, typically a son of knights or lords.[28] In some cases commoners can also apply for knighthood when awarded so. Children of nobility are cared for by women in castle until they reach the age of seven. They are then bestowed the title of page and are placed in the care of their lords. They were then forged in a training regime consisted of hunting with huntsmen and falconer, and religious and academic studies with priests or chaplains. Squires then become assistants to older knights in battle; carrying and cleaning armor, taking care of the horses and packing baggage even to foreign lands. Soon they are taught by older knights in swordsmanship, equestrianism, chivalry, warfare and combat using wooden swords and spears. When the young boy turns 14, he then succeeds to the title squire. In a religious ceremony, the new squire then swears to a consecrated sword with a bishop or priest, and he soon takes his place in his lord's household and attends to his duties. During this time they continue their training in combat and are now able to get hold of their own armor. He must master the prerequisite skills to becoming a knight, known as the "seven points of agilities": riding, swimming and diving, shooting different types of weapons, climbing, participation in tournaments, wrestling, fencing, long jumping and dancing; all of which are done even while wearing armor.[29] Upon turning 21, a squire was ready to be knighted.
Accolade[edit]
Main article: Accolade
The accolade or knighting ceremony was usually held during one of the great feasts or holidays, like Christmas or Easter, and sometimes in the wedding of a noble or royal. The knighting ceremony usually involved a ritual bath on the eve of the ceremony and in the night they do a prayer vigil. In the day of ceremony, the would-be knight would swear an oath and the master of the ceremony would dub the new knight on the shoulders with a sword.[27][28] Squires can also be awarded knighthood early if they show valor and efficiency in battle.
Chivalric code[edit]
Main article: Chivalry
Knights were expected, above all, to fight bravely and to display military professionalism and courtesy. When knights were taken as prisoners of war, they were customarily held for ransom in somewhat comfortable surroundings. This same standard of conduct did not apply to non-knights (archers, peasants, foot-soldiers, etc.) who were often slaughtered after capture, and who were viewed during battle as mere impediments to knights' getting to other knights to fight them.[30]
Chivalry developed as an early standard of professional ethics for knights, who were relatively affluent horse owners and were expected to provide military services in exchange for landed property. Early notions of chivalry entailed loyalty to one's liege lord and bravery in battle, similar to the values of the Heroic Age. During the Middle Ages, this grew from simple military professionalism into a social code including the values of gentility, nobility and treating others reasonably.[31] In The Song of Roland (c. 1100), Roland is portrayed as the ideal knight, demonstrating unwavering loyalty, military prowess and social fellowship. In Wolfram von Eschenbach's Parzival (c. 1205), chivalry had become a blend of religious duties, love and military service. Ramon Llull's Book of the Order of Chivalry (1275) demonstrates that by the end of the 13th century, chivalry entailed a litany of very specific duties, including riding warhorses, jousting, attending tournaments, holding Round Tables and hunting, as well as aspiring to the more æthereal virtues of "faith, hope, charity, justice, strength, moderation and loyalty."[32]
Knights of the late medieval era were expected by society to maintain all these skills and many more, as outlined in Baldassare Castiglione's The Book of the Courtier, though the book's protagonist, Count Ludovico, states the "first and true profession" of the ideal courtier "must be that of arms."[33] Chivalry, derived from the French word chevalier ('cavalier'), simultaneously denoted skilled horsemanship and military service, and these remained the primary occupations of knighthood throughout the Middle Ages.
Chivalry and religion were mutually influenced during the period of the Crusades. The early Crusades helped to clarify the moral code of chivalry as it related to religion. As a result, Christian armies began to devote their efforts to sacred purposes. As time passed, clergy instituted religious vows which required knights to use their weapons chiefly for the protection of the weak and defenseless, especially women and orphans, and of churches.[34]
With the rise of Renaissance humanism and moral relativism, the knight–and chivalry along with him–lost much of his relevance to society, and the idealism of chivalric romance was fundamentally rejected in Niccolò Machiavelli's Il Principe (1532) and more directly derided in Miguel de Cervantes's Don Quixote (1605–1615). The medieval literary genre of chivalric romance had been the high-water mark of idealism and romanticism in literature, but in the 16th century Machiavelli instructed aspiring political rulers to be ruthlessly pragmatic and to apply the principle that the ends justify the means, directly counter to the high-flown idealism of late medieval chivalry. Later, the high-flown values of chivalric romance were heavily satirized in Cervantes's Don Quixote, which portrayed the charmingly idealistic protagonist as a lovable but hopelessly delusional imbecile.
Tournaments[edit]
Main article: Tournament (medieval)




Tournament from the Codex Manesse, depicting the mêlée.


In peacetime, knights often demonstrated their martial skills in tournaments, which usually took place on the grounds of a castle.[35][36] Knights can parade their armor and banner to the whole court as the tournament commence. Medieval tournaments were made up of martial sports called hastiludes, and were not only a major spectator sport but also played as a real combat simulation. It usually ended with many knights either injured or even killed. One contest was a free-for-all battle called a melee, where large groups of knights numbering hundreds assembled and fought one another, and the last knight standing was the winner. The most popular and romanticized contest for knights was the joust. In this competition, two knights charge each other with blunt wooden lances in an effort to break their lance on the opponent's head or body, or unhorse them completely. The loser in these tournaments had to turn his armor and horse over to the victor. The last day was filled with feasting, dancing and minstrel singing.
Besides formal tournaments, they were also unformalized judicial duels done by knights and squires to end various disputes.[37][38] Countries like Germany, Britain and Ireland practiced this tradition. Judicial combat were of two forms in medieval society, the feat of arms and chivalric combat.[37] The feat of arms were done to settle hostilities between two large parties and supervised by a judge. The chivalric combat was fought when one party's honor was disrespected or challenged upon in which the conflict cannot be resolved in court. Weapons were standardized and must be of the same caliber. The duel lasted until the other party was to weak to fight back. In early cases, the defeated party are then subsequently executed. A far more chivalric duel which became popular in the Late Middle Ages was the pas d'armes or "passage of arms". In this hastilude, a knight or a group of knights would claim a bridge, lane or city gate, and challenge other passing knights to fight or be disgraced.[39] If a lady passed unescorted, she would leave behind a glove or scarf, to be rescued and returned to her by a future knight who passed that way.
Heraldry[edit]
One of the greatest distinguishing marks of the knightly class was the flying of coloured banners, to display power and to distinguish knights in battle and in tournaments.[40] Knights are generally armigerous (bearing a coat of arms), and indeed they played an essential role in the development of heraldry.[41][42] As heavier armour, including enlarged shields and enclosed helmets, developed in the Middle Ages, the need for marks of identification arose, and with coloured shields and surcoats, coat armory was born. Armorial rolls were created to record the knights of various regions or those who participated in various tournaments.
Medieval and Renaissance literature[edit]




Page from King René's Tournament Book (BnF Ms Fr 2695)


Main article: Knight-errant
Further information: Chivalry, Romance (heroic literature), Matter of Britain, Matter of France, Minnesang and Jinete
Knights and the ideals of knighthood featured largely in medieval and Renaissance literature, and have secured a permanent place in literary romance.[43] While chivalric romances abound, particularly notable literary portrayals of knighthood include The Song of Roland, Cantar de Mio Cid, The Twelve of England, Geoffrey Chaucer's The Knight's Tale, Baldassare Castiglione's The Book of the Courtier, and Miguel de Cervantes' Don Quixote, as well as Sir Thomas Malory's Le Morte d'Arthur and other Arthurian tales (Geoffrey of Monmouth's Historia Regum Britanniae, the Pearl Poet's Sir Gawain and the Green Knight, etc.).
The ideal courtier—the chivalrous knight—of Baldassarre Castiglione's The Book of the Courtier became a model of the ideal virtues of nobility.[44] Castiglione's tale took the form of a discussion among the nobility of the court of the Duke of Urbino, in which the characters determine that the ideal knight should be renowned not only for his bravery and prowess in battle, but also as a skilled dancer, athlete, singer and orator, and he should also be well-read in the Humanities and classical Greek and Latin literature.[45]
Later Renaissance literature, such as Miguel de Cervantes's Don Quixote, rejected the code of chivalry as unrealistic idealism.[46] The rise of Christian humanism in Renaissance literature demonstrated a marked departure from the chivalric romance of late medieval literature, and the chivalric ideal ceased to influence literature over successive centuries until it saw some pockets of revival in post-Victorian literature.

Decline[edit]
By the end of the 15th century, knights became obsolete as countries started creating their own professional armies that were quicker to train, cheaper and easier to mobilize.[47][48] The advancement of high-powered bows and firearms eradicated the use of plate armor and the time it took to train soldiers with it was less compared to that of the knight. The Battle of Agincourt in particular, fought between the French and the English, saw the French knights being decimated by English longbows as their armor couldn't defend them against bodkin arrows.[42] As the feudal system came to an end, lords saw no further use of knights. Many landowners found the duties of knighthood too expensive and so contented themselves with the use of squires. Mercenaries have also become an ergonomic alternative to knights when conflicts arise. In the 14th century the use of infantrymen armed with pikes and fighting in close formation also proved effective against heavy cavalry. During the Battle of Nancy, Charles the Bold and his armored cavalry were destroyed by Swiss Pikemen.[49] Armies of the time started adopting a more realistic approach to warfare that signified the end of chivalry. Soon, the remaining knights were absorbed in professional armies. Though having a higher rank due to their training and experience, and still proved valuable, the knights had lost their distinctive identity.[47] Even so, knightly orders, such as the Knights Hospitallers, still existed by the end of the Medieval Age and even adopted newer technology while still retaining their age-old chivalric traditions.[50]
Types of knighthood[edit]
Military–monastic orders of knighthood[edit]
For more details on this topic, see Military order (society).

Knights Hospitaller, founded during the First Crusade, 1099
Order of the Holy Sepulchre, also founded during the First Crusade in circa 1099
Order of Saint Lazarus established about 1100
Knights Templar, founded 1118, disbanded 1307
Teutonic Knights, established about 1190, and ruled the Monastic State of the Teutonic Knights in Prussia until 1525

Other orders were established in the Iberian peninsula, under the influence of the orders in the Holy Land and the Crusader movement of the Reconquista:

the Order of Aviz, established in Avis in 1143
the Order of Alcántara, established in Alcántara in 1156
the Order of Calatrava, established in Calatrava in 1158
the Order of Santiago, established in Santiago in 1164.

Chivalric orders[edit]
For more details on this topic, see Chivalric order.
After the Crusades, the military orders became idealized and romanticized, resulting in the late medieval notion of chivalry, as reflected in the Arthurian romances of the time. The creation of chivalric orders was fashionable among the nobility in the 14th and 15th centuries, and this is still reflected in contemporary honours systems, including the term order itself. Examples of notable orders of chivalry are:

the Order of Saint George, founded by Charles I of Hungary in 1325/6
the Order of the Most Holy Annunciation, founded by count Amadeus VI in 1346
the Order of the Garter, founded by Edward III of England around 1348
the Order of the Dragon, founded by King Sigismund of Luxemburg in 1408
the Order of the Golden Fleece, founded by Philip III, Duke of Burgundy in 1430
the Order of Saint Michael, founded by Louis XI of France in 1469
the Order of the Thistle, founded by King James VII of Scotland (also known as James II of England) in 1687
the Order of the Elephant, which may have been first founded by Christian I of Denmark, but was founded in its current form by King Christian V in 1693
the Order of the Bath, founded by George I in 1725

Honorific orders of knighthood[edit]
From roughly 1560, purely honorific orders were established, as a way to confer prestige and distinction, unrelated to military service and chivalry in the more narrow sense. Such orders were particularly popular in the 17th and 18th centuries, and knighthood continues to be conferred in various countries:

The United Kingdom (see British honours system) and some Commonwealth of Nations countries such as Australia;
Some European countries, such as The Netherlands and Belgium (see below).
The Holy See — see Papal Orders of Chivalry.





The Battle of Grunwald between the Teutonic Knights (black cross on white) and the Polish-Lithuanian forces, July 1410


There are other monarchies and also republics that also follow this practice. Modern knighthoods are typically awarded in recognition for services rendered to society, which are not necessarily martial in nature. The British musician Elton John, for example, is a Knight Bachelor, thus entitled to be called Sir Elton. The female equivalent is a Dame.
In the United Kingdom, honorific knighthood may be awarded in two different ways.
The first is the membership of one of the pure Orders of Chivalry such as the Order of the Garter, the Order of the Thistle and the dormant Order of Saint Patrick, of which all members are knighted. In addition, many British Orders of Merit, namely the Order of the Bath, the Order of St Michael and St George, the Royal Victorian Order and the Order of the British Empire are part of the British honours system, and the award of their highest ranks (Knight/Dame Commander and Knight/Dame Grand Cross), comes together with an honorific knighthood, making them a cross between orders of chivalry and orders of merit. By contrast, award of other British Orders of Merit, such as the Distinguished Service Order, the Order of Merit and the Order of the Companions of Honour does not confer a knighthood.
The second is being granted honorific knighthood by the British sovereign without membership of an order, the awardee being called Knight Bachelor.
In the British honours system the knightly style of Sir is accompanied by the given name, and optionally the surname. So, Elton John may be called Sir Elton or Sir Elton John, but never Sir John. Similarly, actress Judi Dench DBE may be addressed as Dame Judi or Dame Judi Dench, but never Dame Dench.
Wives of knights, however, are entitled to the honorific pre-nominal "Lady" before their husband's surname. Thus Sir Paul McCartney's ex-wife was formally styled Lady McCartney (rather than Lady Paul McCartney or Lady Heather McCartney). The style Dame Heather McCartney could be used for the wife of a knight; however, this style is largely archaic and is only used in the most formal of documents, or where the wife is a Dame in her own right (such as Dame Norma Major, who gained her title six years before her husband Sir John Major was knighted). The husbands of Dames have no honorific pre-nominal, so Dame Norma's husband remained John Major until he received his own knighthood.
Since the reign of Edward VII a clerk in holy orders in the Church of England has not normally received the accolade on being appointed to a degree of knighthood. He receives the insignia of his honour and may place the appropriate letters after his name or title but he may not be called Sir and his wife may not be called Lady. This custom is not observed in Australia and New Zealand, where knighted Anglican clergymen routinely use the title "Sir". Ministers of other Christian Churches are entitled to receive the accolade. For example, Sir Norman Cardinal Gilroy did receive the accolade on his appointment as Knight Commander of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire in 1969. A knight who is subsequently ordained does not lose his title. A famous example of this situation was The Revd Sir Derek Pattinson, who was ordained just a year after he was appointed Knight Bachelor, apparently somewhat to the consternation of officials at Buckingham Palace.[51] A woman clerk in holy orders may be appointed a Dame in exactly the same way as any other woman since there are no military connotations attached to the honour. A clerk in holy orders who is a baronet is entitled to use the title Sir.
Outside the British honours system it is usually considered improper to address a knighted person as 'Sir' or 'Dame'. Some countries, however, historically did have equivalent honorifics for knights, such as Cavaliere in Italy (e.g. Cavaliere Benito Mussolini), and Ritter in Germany and the Austro-Hungarian Empire (e.g. Georg Ritter von Trapp).




Miniature from Jean Froissart Chronicles depicting the Battle of Montiel (Castillian Civil War, in the Hundred Years' War)


State Knighthoods in the Netherlands are issued in three orders, the Order of William, the Order of the Netherlands Lion, and the Order of Orange Nassau. Additionally there remain a few hereditary knights in the Netherlands.
In Belgium, honorific knighthood (not hereditary) can be conferred by the King on particularly meritorious individuals such as scientists or eminent businessmen, or for instance to astronaut Frank De Winne, the second Belgian in space. This practice is similar to the award of the title of Knight Bachelor in the United Kingdom. In addition, there still are a number of hereditary knights in Belgium (see below).
In France and Belgium, one of the ranks conferred in some Orders of Merit, such as the Légion d'Honneur, the Ordre National du Mérite, the Ordre des Palmes académiques and the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres in France, and the Order of Leopold, Order of the Crown and Order of Leopold II in Belgium, is that of Chevalier (in French) or Ridder (in Dutch), meaning Knight. However, those awarded this order are not being knighted in the sense discussed in this article and should not be confused with honorific or hereditary knights.
In the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth the monarchs tried to establish chivalric orders but the hereditary lords who controlled the Union did not agree and managed to ban such assemblies. They feared the King would use Orders to gain support for absolutist goals and to make formal distinctions among the peerage which could lead to its legal breakup into two separate classes, and that the King would later play one against the other and eventually limit the legal privileges of hereditary nobility. But finally in 1705 King August II managed to establish the Order of the White Eagle which remains Poland's most prestigious order of that kind. The head of state (now the President as the acting Grand Master) confers knighthoods of the Order to distinguished citizens, foreign monarchs and other heads of state. The Order has its Chapter. There were no particular honorifics that would accompany a knight's name as historically all (or at least by far most) its members would be royals or hereditary lords anyway. So today, a knight is simply referred to as "Name Surname, knight of the White Eagle (Order)".
Hereditary knighthoods[edit]
Continental Europe[edit]




Maximilian Gothic plate armour, 15th century.


In continental Europe different systems of hereditary knighthood have existed or do exist. Ridder, Dutch for "knight", is a hereditary noble title in the Netherlands. It is the lowest title within the nobility system and ranks below that of "Baron" but above "Jonkheer" (the latter is not a title, but a Dutch honorific to show that someone belongs to the untitled nobility). The collective term for its holders in a certain locality is the Ridderschap (e.g. Ridderschap van Holland, Ridderschap van Friesland, etc.). In the Netherlands no female equivalent exists. Before 1814, the history of nobility is separate for each of the eleven provinces that make up the Kingdom of the Netherlands. In each of these, there were in the early Middle Ages a number of feudal lords who often were just as powerful, and sometimes more so than the rulers themselves. In old times, no other title existed but that of knight. In the Netherlands only 10 knightly families are still extant, a number which steadily decreases because in that country ennoblement or incorporation into the nobility is not possible anymore.
Likewise Ridder, Dutch for "knight", or the equivalent French Chevalier is a hereditary noble title in Belgium. It is the second lowest title within the nobility system above Écuyer or Jonkheer/Jonkvrouw and below Baron. Like in the Netherlands, no female equivalent to the title exists. Belgium still does have about 232 registered knightly families.
The German and Austrian equivalent of an hereditary knight is a Ritter. This designation is used as a title of nobility in all German-speaking areas. Traditionally it denotes the second lowest rank within the nobility, standing above "Edler" (Noble) and below "Freiherr" (baron). For its historical association with warfare and the landed gentry in the Middle Ages, it can be considered roughly equal to the titles of "Knight" or "Baronet".
The Royal House of Portugal historically bestowed hereditary knighthoods to holders of the highest ranks in the Royal Orders. Today, the head of the Royal House of Portugal HRH Duarte Pio, Duke of Braganza bestows hereditary knighthoods for extraordinary acts of sacrifice and service to the Royal House. There are very few hereditary knights and they are entitled to wear a breast star with the crest of the House of Braganza.
In France, the hereditary knighthood existed in regions formerly under Holy Roman Empire control. One family ennobled with that title is the house of Hauteclocque (by letters patents of 1752), even if its most recent members used a pontifical title of count.
Italy and Poland also had the hereditary knighthood that existed within the nobility system.
Ireland[edit]
There are traces of the Continental system of hereditary knighthood in Ireland. Notably all three of the following belong to the Welsh-Norman FitzGerald dynasty, created by the Earls of Desmond, acting as Earls Palatine, for their kinsmen.

Knight of Kerry or Green Knight (FitzGerald of Kerry) — the current holder is Sir Adrian FitzGerald, 6th Baronet of Valencia, 24th Knight of Kerry. He is also a Knight of Malta, and currently President of the Irish Association of the Sovereign Military Order of Malta.
Knight of Glin or Black Knight (FitzGerald of Limerick) — now dormant.
White Knight (see Edmund Fitzgibbon) — now dormant.

Another Irish family were the O'Shaughnessys, who were created knights in 1553 under the policy of Surrender and regrant[52] (first established by Henry VIII of England).
British Baronetcies[edit]
Since 1611, the British Crown has awarded a hereditary title in the form of the Baronetcy.[53] Like knights, baronets are accorded the title Sir. Baronets are not peers of the Realm, and have never been entitled to sit in the House of Lords, therefore like knights they remain commoners in the view of the British legal system. However, unlike knights, the title is hereditary and the recipient does not receive an accolade. The position is therefore more comparable with hereditary knighthoods in continental European orders of nobility, such as ritter, than with knighthoods under the British orders of chivalry.
Women in orders of knighthood[edit]
England and the United Kingdom[edit]
Women were appointed to the Order of the Garter almost from the start. In all, 68 women were appointed between 1358 and 1488, including all consorts. Though many were women of royal blood, or wives of knights of the Garter, some women were neither. They wore the garter on the left arm, and some are shown on their tombstones with this arrangement. After 1488, no other appointments of women are known, although it is said that the Garter was granted to Neapolitan poet Laura Bacio Terricina, by King Edward VI. In 1638, a proposal was made to revive the use of robes for the wives of knights in ceremonies, but this did not occur. Queen consorts have been made Ladies of the Garter since 1901 (Queens Alexandra in 1901,[54] Mary in 1910 and Elizabeth in 1937). The first non-Royal woman to be made Lady Companion of the Garter was The Duchess of Norfolk in 1990,[55] the second was The Baroness Thatcher in 1995[56] (post-nominal: LG). On 30 November 1996, Lady Fraser was made Lady of the Thistle,[57] the first non-Royal woman (post-nominal: LT). (See Edmund Fellowes, Knights of the Garter, 1939; and Beltz: Memorials of the Order of the Garter). The first woman to be granted a knighthood in modern Britain seems to have been H.H. Nawab Sikandar Begum Sahiba, Nawab Begum of Bhopal, who became a Knight Grand Commander of the Order of the Star of India (GCSI) in 1861, at the foundation of the order. Her daughter received the same honor in 1872, as well as her granddaughter in 1910. The order was open to "princes and chiefs" without distinction of gender. The first European woman to have been granted an order of knighthood was Queen Mary, when she was made a Knight Grand Commander of the same order, by special statute, in celebration of the Delhi Durbar of 1911.[58] She was also granted a damehood in 1917 as a Dame Grand Cross, when the Order of the British Empire was created[59] (it was the first order explicitly open to women). The Royal Victorian Order was opened to women in 1936, and the Orders of the Bath and Saint Michael and Saint George in 1965 and 1971 respectively.[60]
France[edit]




Helmeted Knight of France, illustration by Paul Mercuri in Costumes Historiques (Paris, 1860-1861)


Medieval French had two words, chevaleresse and chevalière, which were used in two ways: one was for the wife of a knight, and this usage goes back to the 14th century. The other was possibly for a female knight. Here is a quote from Menestrier, a 17th-century writer on chivalry: "It was not always necessary to be the wife of a knight in order to take this title. Sometimes, when some male fiefs were conceded by special privilege to women, they took the rank of chevaleresse, as one sees plainly in Hemricourt where women who were not wives of knights are called chevaleresses." Modern French orders of knighthood include women, for example the Légion d'Honneur (Legion of Honor) since the mid-19th century, but they are usually called chevaliers. The first documented case is that of Marie-Angélique Duchemin (1772–1859), who fought in the Revolutionary Wars, received a military disability pension in 1798, the rank of 2nd lieutenant in 1822, and the Legion of Honor in 1852. A recipient of the Ordre National du Mérite recently requested from the order's Chancery the permission to call herself "chevalière," and the request was granted (AFP dispatch, Jan 28, 2000).[60]
Italy[edit]
As related in Orders of Knighthood, Awards and the Holy See by H.E. Cardinale (1983), the Order of the Blessed Virgin Mary was founded by two Bolognese nobles Loderingo degli Andalò and Catalano di Guido in 1233, and approved by pope Alexander IV in 1261. It was the first religious order of knighthood to grant the rank of militissa to women. However, this order was suppressed by Sixtus V in 1558.[60]
The Low Countries[edit]
At the initiative of Catherine Baw in 1441, and 10 years later of Elizabeth, Mary, and Isabella of the house of Hornes, orders were founded which were open exclusively to women of noble birth, who received the French title of chevalière or the Latin title of equitissa. In his Glossarium (s.v. militissa), Du Cange notes that still in his day (17th century), the female canons of the canonical monastery of St. Gertrude in Nivelles (Brabant), after a probation of 3 years, are made knights (militissae) at the altar, by a (male) knight called in for that purpose, who gives them the accolade with a sword and pronounces the usual words.[60]
Spain[edit]
To honour those women who defended Tortosa against an attack by the Moors, Ramon Berenguer IV, Count of Barcelona, created the Order of the Hatchet (Orden de la Hacha) in 1149.[60]

The inhabitants [of Tortosa] being at length reduced to great streights, desired relief of the Earl, but he, being not in a condition to give them any, they entertained some thoughts of making a surrender. Which the Women hearing of, to prevent the disaster threatening their City, themselves, and Children, put on men's Clothes, and by a resolute sally, forced the Moors to raise the Siege. The Earl, finding himself obliged, by the gallentry of the action, thought fit to make his acknowlegements thereof, by granting them several Privileges and Immunities, and to perpetuate the memory of so signal an attempt, instituted an Order, somewhat like a Military Order, into which were admitted only those Brave Women, deriving the honour to their Descendants, and assigned them for a Badge, a thing like a Fryars Capouche, sharp at the top, after the form of a Torch, and of a crimson colour, to be worn upon their Head-clothes. He also ordained, that at all publick meetings, the women should have precedence of the Men. That they should be exempted from all Taxes, and that all the Apparel and Jewels, though of never so great value, left by their dead Husbands, should be their own. These Women having thus acquired this Honour by their personal Valour, carried themselves after the Military Knights of those days.
— Elias Ashmole, The Institution, Laws, and Ceremony of the Most Noble Order of the Garter (1672), Ch. 3, sect. 3

Notable Knights[edit]

William Marshal
John Hawkwood
Henry Percy (Hotspur)
William Wallace
Godfrey of Bouillon
Bertrand du Guesclin
Jean Le Maingre
Geoffroi de Charny
Joanot Martorell
Philippe de Nanteuil
Jean III d'Aa of Gruuthuse
Gio Matteo Natoli
Suero de Quinones
Adrian von Bubenberg
Franz von Sickingen
Gotz von Berlichingen
Heinrich von Winkelried
Philip Riedesel zu Camberg
Heinrich von Bulow (Grotekop)
Zawisza Czarny

See also[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Knights.





Look up knight in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



Accolade
Chivalric orders
Destrier
Heavy Cavalry
Knightly Virtues
Knight-errant
Knight banneret
Knight bachelor
Black knight
Prud'homme knights
Imperial Knight
Medieval warfare
Nobility
Orders, decorations, and medals of the United Kingdom
Papal Orders of Chivalry

Counterparts in other cultures[edit]

Cataphract
Kshatriya
Samurai
Youxia

Notes[edit]


^ "Knight". Collins Dictionary. n.d. Retrieved 23 September 2014.&#160;
^ Clark, p. 1.
^ Carnine, Douglas; et al. (2006). World History:Medieval and Early Modern Times. USA: McDougal Littell. pp.&#160;300–301. ISBN&#160;978-0-618-27747-6. Knights were often vassals, or lesser nobles, who fought on behalf of lords in return for land.&#160; CS1 maint: Explicit use of et al. (link)
^ Paddock, David Edge &amp; John Miles (1995). Arms &amp; armor of the medieval knight&#160;: an illustrated history of weaponry in the Middle Ages (Reprinted. ed.). New York: Crescent Books. p.&#160;3. ISBN&#160;0-517-10319-2.&#160;
^ a b c "Knight". Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved 2009-04-07.&#160;
^ "Knecht". LEO German-English dictionary. Retrieved 2009-04-07.&#160;
^ "Equestrian". The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language, 4th ed. Houghton Mifflin Company. 2000.&#160;
^ D'A. J. D. Boulton, "Classic Knighthood as Nobiliary Dignity", in: Stephen Church, Ruth Harvey (ed.), Medieval knighthood V: papers from the sixth Strawberry Hill Conference 1994, Boydell &amp; Brewer, 1995, pp. 41-100.
^ Frank Anthony Carl Mantello, A. G. Rigg, Medieval Latin: an introduction and bibliographical guide, UA Press, 1996, p. 448.
^ Charlton Thomas Lewis, An elementary Latin dictionary, Harper &amp; Brothers, 1899, p. 505.
^ "ekwo- [Appendix I: Indo-European Roots]". The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language, 4th ed. Houghton Mifflin Company. 2000.&#160;
^ Xavier Delamarre, entry on caballos, in Dictionnaire de la langue gauloise (Éditions Errance, 2003), p. 96. The entry on cabullus in the Oxford Latin Dictionary (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1982, 1985 reprinting), p. 246, does not give a probable origin, and merely compare Old Bulgarian kobyla and Old Russian komońb.
^ "Cavalier". The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language, 4th ed. Houghton Mifflin Company. 2000.&#160;
^ "Reidh- [Appendix I: Indo-European Roots]". The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language, 4th ed. Houghton Mifflin Company. 2000.&#160;
^ Royal Household staff. "The Monarchy Today &gt; Queen and public &gt; Honours &gt; Knighthoods". The British Monarchy website. Retrieved 22 August 2012.&#160;
^ Peterse, Leif Inge Ree. Siege Warfare and Military Organization in the Successor States (400-800 A.D.). BRILL (September 1, 2013). pp. 177-180, 243, 310-311. ISBN 978-9004251991
^ Church, Stephen (1995). Papers from the sixth Strawberry Hill Conference 1994. Woodbridge, England: Boydell. p.&#160;51. ISBN&#160;978-0-85115-628-6.&#160;
^ a b Nelson, Ken (2015). "Middle Ages: History of the Medieval Knight". Ducksters. Technological Solutions, Inc. (TSI).&#160;
^ a b Saul, Nigel (September 6, 2011). "Knighthood As It Was, Not As We Wish It Were". Origins.&#160;
^ Craig Freudenrich, Ph.D."How Knights Work". How Stuff Works. January 22, 2008.&#160;
^ "The Knight in Armour: 8th-14th century". History World.&#160;
^ Bumke, Joachim (1991). Courtly Culture: Literature and Society in the High Middle Ages. Berkely, US and Los Angeles US: University of California Press. pp.&#160;231–233. ISBN&#160;9780520066342.&#160;
^ Church, Stephen (1995). Papers from the sixth Strawberry Hill Conference 1994. Woodbridge, England: Boydell. pp.&#160;48–49. ISBN&#160;978-0-85115-628-6.&#160;
^ The Middle Ages: Charlemagne
^ a b Hermes, Nizar (December 4, 2007). "King Arthur in the Lands of the Saracen" (PDF). Nebula.&#160;
^ Richard Francis Burton wrote "I should attribute the origins of love to the influences of the Arabs' poetry and chivalry upon European ideas rather than to medieval Christianity." Burton, Richard Francis (2007). Charles Anderson Read, ed. The Cabinet of Irish Literature, Vol. IV. p.&#160;94. ISBN&#160;1-4067-8001-4.&#160;
^ a b c "Knight.". The Columbia Encyclopedia, 6th ed. November 15, 2015.&#160;
^ a b c Craig Freudenrich, Ph.D."How Knights Work". How Stuff Works. January 22, 2008.&#160;
^ Lixey L.C., Kevin. Sport and Christianity: A Sign of the Times in the Light of Faith. The Catholic University of America Press (October 31, 2012). p. 26. ISBN 978-0813219936.
^ See Marcia L. Colish, The Mirror of Language: A Study in the Medieval Theory of Knowledge; University of Nebraska Press, 1983. p. 105.
^ Keen, Maurice Keen. Chivalry. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press (February 11, 2005). pp. 7-17. ISBN 978-0300107678
^ Fritze, Ronald; Robison, William, eds. (2002). Historical Dictionary of Late Medieval England: 1272–1485. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press. p.&#160;105. ISBN&#160;9780313291241.&#160;
^ Deats, Sarah; Logan, Robert (2002). Marlowe's Empery: Expanding His Critical Contexts. Cranbury, NJ: Rosemont Publishing &amp; Printing–Associated University Presses. p.&#160;137.&#160;
^ Keen, p. 138.
^ Craig Freudenrich, Ph.D."How Knights Work". How Stuff Works. January 22, 2008.&#160;
^ Johnston, Ruth A. All Things Medieval: An Encyclopedia of the Medieval World, Volume 1. Greenwood (August 15, 2011). pp. 690-700. ASIN: B005JIQEL2.
^ a b David Levinson and Karen Christensen. Encyclopedia of World Sport: From Ancient Times to the Present. Oxford University Press; 1st edition (July 22, 1999). pp. 206. ISBN 978-0195131956.
^ Clifford J. Rogers, Kelly DeVries and John Franc. Journal of Medieval Military History: Volume VIII. Boydell Press (November 18, 2010). pp. 157-160. ISBN 978-1843835967
^ Hubbard, Ben. Gladiators: From Spartacus to Spitfires. Canary Press (August 15, 2011). Chapter: Pas D'armes. ASIN: B005HJTS8O.
^ Crouch, David (1993). The image of aristocracy in Britain, 1000-1300 (1. publ. ed.). London: Routledge. p.&#160;109. ISBN&#160;978-0-415-01911-8. Retrieved 4 December 2011.&#160;
^ Platts, Beryl. Origins of Heraldry. (Procter Press, London: 1980). p. 32. ISBN 978-0906650004
^ a b Norris, Michael (October 2001). "Feudalism and Knights in Medieval Europe". 'Department of Education, The Metropolitan Museum of Art.&#160;
^ W. P. Ker, Epic And Romance: Essays on Medieval Literature p 52-53
^ Hare (1908), p. 201.
^ Hare (1908), pp. 211-218.
^ Daniel Eisenberg, A Study of "Don Quixote", Newark, Delaware, Juan de la Cuesta,1987, ISBN 0936388315, pp. 41-77, revised Spanish translation in Biblioteca Virtual Cervantes.
^ a b Gies, Francis. The Knight in History. Harper Perennial (July 26, 2011). pp. Introduction: What is a Knight. ISBN 978-0060914134
^ "The History of Knights". All Things Medieval.&#160;
^ "History of Knights". How Stuff Works.&#160;
^ "Malta History 1000 AD–present". Carnaval.com. Retrieved 2008-10-12.&#160;
^ "Michael De-La-Noy, obituary in ''The Independent''". London: News.independent.co.uk. 2006-10-17. Retrieved 2009-11-19.&#160;
^ John O'Donovan, "The Descendants of the Last Earls of Desmond", Ulster Journal of Archaeology, Volume 6. 1858.
^ Burke, Bernard &amp; Ashworth Burke (1914). General and Heraldic Dictionary of the Peerage and Baronetage of the British Empire. London: Burke's Peerage Limited. p.&#160;7. Retrieved 4 December 2011. The hereditary Order of Baronets was erected by patent in England by King James I in 1611, extended to Ireland by the same Monarch in 1619 ,and first conferred in Scotland by King Charles I in 1625.&#160;
^ The London Gazette: (Supplement) no. 27284. p. 1139. 13 February 1901. Retrieved 20 June 2014.
^ The London Gazette: no. 52120. p. 8251. 24 April 1990. Retrieved 20 June 2014.
^ The London Gazette: no. 54017. p. 6023. 25 April 1995. Retrieved 20 June 2014.
^ The London Gazette: no. 54597. p. 15995. 3 December 1996. Retrieved 20 June 2014.
^ Biddle, Daniel A. Knights of Christ&#160;: Living today with the Virtues of Ancient Knighthood (Kindle Edition). West Bow Press. (May 22, 2012). p.xxx. ASIN: B00A4Z2FUY
^ The London Gazette: (Supplement) no. 30250. p. 8794. 24 August 1917. Retrieved 20 June 2014.
^ a b c d e "Women Knights". Heraldica.org. Retrieved 2011-08-23.&#160;


References[edit]

Arnold, Benjamin. German Knighthood, 1050-1300. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1985. ISBN 0-19-821960-1 LCCN&#160;85-235009
Bloch, Marc. Feudal Society, 2nd ed. Translated by Manyon. London: Routledge &amp; Keagn Paul, 1965.
Bluth, B. J. Marching with Sharpe. London: Collins, 2001. ISBN 0-00-414537-2
Boulton, D'Arcy Jonathan Dacre. The Knights of the Crown: The Monarchical Orders of Knighthood in Later Medieval Europe, 1325-1520. 2d revised ed. Woodbridge, UK: Boydell Press, 2000. ISBN 0-85115-795-5
Bull, Stephen. An Historical Guide to Arms and Armour. London: Studio Editions, 1991. ISBN 1-85170-723-9
Carey, Brian Todd; Allfree, Joshua B; Cairns, John. Warfare in the Medieval World, UK: Pen &amp; Sword Military, June 2006. ISBN 1-84415-339-8
Church, S. and Harvey, R. (Eds.) (1994) Medieval knighthood V: papers from the sixth Strawberry Hill Conference 1994. Boydell Press, Woodbidge
Clark, Hugh (1784). A Concise History of Knighthood: Containing the Religious and Military Orders which have been Instituted in Europe. London.&#160;
Edge, David; John Miles Paddock (1988) Arms &amp; Armor of the Medieval Knight. Greenwich, CT: Bison Books Corp. ISBN 0-517-10319-2
Edwards, J. C. "What Earthly Reason? The replacement of the longbow by handguns." Medieval History Magazine, Is. 7, March 2004.
Embleton, Gerry. Medieval Military Costume. UK: Crowood Press, 2001. ISBN 1-86126-371-6
Forey, Alan John. The Military Orders: From the Twelfth to the Early Fourteenth Centuries. Basingstoke, Hampshire, UK: Macmillan Education, 1992. ISBN 0-333-46234-3
Hare, Christopher. Courts &amp; camps of the Italian renaissance. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1908. LCCN&#160;08-31670
Keen, Maurice. "Chivalry". Yale University Press, 2005.
Laing, Lloyd and Jennifer Laing. Medieval Britain: The Age of Chivalry. New York: St. Martin's Press, 1996. ISBN 0-312-16278-2
Oakeshott, Ewart. A Knight and his Horse, 2nd ed. Chester Springs, PA: Dufour Editions, 1998. ISBN 0-8023-1297-7 LCCN&#160;98-32049
Robards, Brooks. The Medieval Knight at War. London: Tiger Books, 1997. ISBN 1-85501-919-1
Shaw, William A. (1906). The Knights of England: A Complete Record from the Earliest Time. London: Central Chancery.&#160; (Republished Baltimore: Genealogical Publishing Co., 1970). ISBN 0-8063-0443-X LCCN&#160;74-129966
Williams, Alan. "The Metallurgy of Medieval Arms and Armour", in Companion to Medieval Arms and Armour. Nicolle, David, ed. Woodbridge, UK: Boydell Press, 2002. ISBN 0-85115-872-2 LCCN&#160;2002-3680
De Charny, Geoffrey. The Book of Chivalry of Geoffrey De Charny&#160;: Text, Context, and Translation. 1996.









v
t
e





Social class
Status












Caste




Theories



Gilbert Model
Marxist
Mudsill theory
New class
Weberian (three-component)








Related topics



Chattering classes
Class conflict
Class discrimination
Classicide
Classless society
Euthenics
Nouveau riche&#160;/ Parvenu
Poverty
Social stigma
Subaltern















&#160;

By demographic











By status



Administrative detainee
Alien

illegal immigrant
refugee


Citizen

dual or multiple
native-born
naturalized
second-class


Convicted
Migrant worker
Political prisoner
Stateless








By "collar"



Blue
Gold
Green
Grey
Pink
White








By type




Creative



Bohemians
Robber baron
Business magnate
Overclass
Superclass








Middle



Lower middle class
Upper middle class
Bourgeoisie
Petite bourgeoisie








Working



Working poor
Proletariat
Lumpenproletariat








Warrior



Harii
Kshatriya
Yadav
Nair
Hashashin
Knight
Vanniyar
Samurai
Cuāuh
Ocēlōtl
Spartiate








Under



Outcast
Outlaw
Peasant&#160;/ Serf
Slave
Untouchable








Upper



Elite
Gentry
Global elite
Nobility
Old money








Ruling



Aristocracy
Hanseaten
Patrician
Royal family








Intellectual



Knowledge worker





















&#160;

By country or region











United States







Affluence
American Dream
Conflict
Social class in American history








Classes



Lower
Middle
Upper
Under








Income



Household
Inequality
Personal
Poverty








Standard of living



Educational attainment
Homelessness
Homeownership
Wealth











Other countries
or regions



Africa
Cambodia
Colombia
Ecuador
France
Haiti
India
Iran
Italy
New Zealand
Romania
Sri Lanka
Tibet
United Kingdom








Historic



Ancient Greece
Ancient Rome
Ottoman Empire
Soviet Union
Pre-industrial East Asia
Pre-industrial Europe

















 Category
















v
t
e


Orders of honour/merit and phaleristics






Types



Chivalric order
Dynastic order of knighthood
Military order
Religious order
Civil fraternal order











Offices and titles



Grand Master
Chancellor
Assessor
Bailli
Commander
Knight
Dame
Officer
Hospitaller
Prior
Chaplain
Master of ceremonies
Postulant








Jurisdictions



Charter
Bailiwick
Lieutenancy
Chapter
Commandry
Obedience
Grand Lodge
Lodge








Regalias and insignias



Collar
Grand Cross
Livery collar
Neck order
Medal
Medal bar
Service ribbon








Legitimation



Fount of honour
International Commission on Orders of Chivalry








People



Category:Grand Masters of chivalric orders
Category:Recipients of orders, decorations, and medals








See also



Nobility
Military awards and decorations
Civil awards and decorations
Honor society
Learned society
Guild
Gentlemen's club
Fraternity
Collar day
Prize
Award
Self-styled orders
Passage fee













Authority control



GND: 4050152-8
NDL: 00565995

















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Knight&amp;oldid=691304395"					
				Categories: KnightsMedieval knightsChivalryNoble titlesHidden categories: CS1 maint: Explicit use of et al.Wikipedia pending changes protected pages (level 1)Wikipedia protected pages without expiryCommons category with local link same as on WikidataWikipedia articles with GND identifiers				
							
		
		
			Navigation menu

			
									
						Personal tools
						
							Create accountLog in						
					
									
										
						Namespaces
						
															Article
															Talk
													
					
										
												
							Variants
						

						
							
															
						
					
									
				
										
						Views
						
															Read
															Edit
															View history
													
					
										
						More

						
							
															
						
					
										
						
							Search
						

						
							
														
						
					
									
			
			
				
						
			Navigation

			
									
						Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store					
							
		
			
			Interaction

			
									
						HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page					
							
		
			
			Tools

			
									
						What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page					
							
		
			
			Print/export

			
									
						Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version					
							
		
			
			Languages

			
									
						AfrikaansالعربيةAzərbaycancaБеларускаяБеларуская (тарашкевіца)‎БългарскиBosanskiBrezhonegCatalàCebuanoČeštinaCymraegDanskDeutschEestiΕλληνικάEspañolEsperantoفارسیFryskGaeilgeGaelgGalego한국어ՀայերենHrvatskiBahasa IndonesiaÍslenskaItalianoעבריתಕನ್ನಡქართულიҚазақшаKurdîLatinaLatviešuLietuviųMagyarBahasa MelayuNederlands日本語Norsk bokmålNorsk nynorskPlattdüütschPolskiPortuguêsRomânăРусскийShqipSicilianuSimple EnglishSlovenčinaSlovenščinaСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSuomiSvenskaTagalogТатарча/tatarçaไทยTürkçeУкраїнськаاردوTiếng Việt中文					
				Edit links			
		
				
		
		
							
											 This page was last modified on 18 November 2015, at 23:45.
											Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
									
							
											Privacy policy
											About Wikipedia
											Disclaimers
											Contact Wikipedia
											Developers
											