


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Roman province
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				




This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (September 2012)






Roman Empire under Augustus (31 BC – AD 14). Yellow: 31BC. Dark Green 31–19 BC, Light Green 19–9 BC, Pale Green 9–6 BC. Mauve: Client states






The Roman empire under Hadrian (125) showing the provinces as then organised


In Ancient Rome, a province (Latin: provincia, pl. provinciae) was the basic, and, until the Tetrarchy (293 AD), largest territorial and administrative unit of the empire's territorial possessions outside of Italy. The word province in modern English has its origins in the term used by the Romans.
Provinces were generally governed by politicians of senatorial rank, usually former consuls or former praetors. A later exception was the province of Egypt, incorporated by Augustus after the death of Cleopatra: it was ruled by a governor of equestrian rank only, perhaps as a discouragement to senatorial ambition. This exception was unique, but not contrary to Roman law, as Egypt was considered Augustus' personal property, following the tradition of earlier, Hellenistic kings.



Contents


1 Republican provinces

1.1 List of Republican provinces


2 Imperial provinces during the Principate

2.1 List of provinces created during the Principate


3 Late Antiquity
4 Primary sources for lists of provinces

4.1 Early Roman Empire provinces
4.2 Late Roman Empire provinces


5 See also
6 Notes
7 References
8 External links



Republican provinces[edit]
The Latin word provincia originally meant any task or set of responsibilities assigned by the Senate to an individual who held imperium ("right of command"), which was often a military command within a specified theater of operations.[1] Under the Roman Republic, the magistrates were elected to office for a period of one year, and those serving outside the city of Rome, such as consuls acting as generals on a military campaign, were assigned a particular provincia, the scope of authority within which they exercised their command.
The territory of a people who were defeated in war might be brought under various forms of treaty, in some cases entailing complete subjection (deditio). The formal annexation of a territory created a "province" in the modern sense of an administrative unit geographically defined. Republican provinces were administered in one-year terms by the consuls and praetors who had held office the previous year and who were invested with imperium.[2]
Rome started expanding beyond Italy during the First Punic War. The first permanent provinces to be annexed were Sicily (Sicilia) in 241&#160;BC and Sardinia (Corsica et Sardinia) in 237&#160;BC. Militarized expansionism kept increasing the number of these administrative provinces, until there were no longer enough qualified individuals to fill the posts.[3] The terms of provincial governors often had to be extended for multiple years (prorogatio), and on occasion the Senate awarded imperium even to private citizens (privati), most notably Pompey the Great.[4] Prorogation undermined the republican constitutional principle of annual elected magistracies, and the amassing of disproportionate wealth and military power by a few men through their provincial commands was a major factor in the transition from a republic to imperial autocracy.[5]
List of Republican provinces[edit]

240 BC - Sicilia
227 BC - Corsica et Sardinia
203 BC - Gallia Cisalpina (Northern Italy)
197 BC - Hispania Citerior and Hispania Ulterior (Iberian peninsula)
167 BC - Illyricum
147 BC - Macedonia
146 BC - Africa (parts of Mediterranean Africa)
129 BC - Asia (parts of Anatolia and Asia Minor)
120 BC - Gallia Transalpina or more specifically Gallia Narbonensis (southern France)
78 BC - Cilicia (after 64 BC Cilicia et Cyprus)
74 BC - Bithynia, from 64 BC Bithynia et Pontus
74 BC - Creta et Cyrenaica
66 BC - Corduene
64 BC - Cilicia et Cyprus
64 BC - Syria
30 BC - Egypt

Imperial provinces during the Principate[edit]




The Roman Empire at its greatest extent, under Trajan (117); imperial provinces are shaded green, senatorial provinces are shaded pink, and client states are shaded gray


In the so-called Augustan Settlement of 27&#160;BC, which established the Roman Empire, the governance of the provinces was regulated. Octavian Caesar, having emerged from the Roman civil wars as the undisputed victor and master of the Roman state, officially laid down his powers, and in theory restored the authority of the Roman Senate. Octavian himself assumed the title "Augustus" and was given to govern, in addition to Egypt, the strategically important provinces of Gaul, Hispania and Syria (including Cilicia and Cyprus). Under Augustus, Roman provinces were classified as either public or imperial, meaning that their governors were appointed by either the Senate or by the emperor. Generally, the older provinces that existed under the Republic were public. Public provinces were, as before under the Republic, governed by a proconsul, who was chosen by lot among the ranks of senators who were ex-consuls or ex-praetors, depending on which province was assigned. The major imperial provinces were under a legatus Augusti pro praetore, also a senator of consular or praetorian rank. Egypt and some smaller provinces where no legions were based were ruled by a procurator (praefectus in Egypt), whom the emperor selected from non-senators of equestrian rank. The status of a province could change from time to time. In AD&#160;68, of a total 36 provinces, 11 were public and 25 imperial. Of the latter, 15 were under legati and 10 under procuratores or praefecti.
During the Principate, the number and size of provinces also changed, either through conquest or through the division of existing provinces. The larger or more heavily garrisoned provinces (for example Syria and Moesia) were subdivided into smaller provinces to prevent any single governor from holding too much power.
List of provinces created during the Principate[edit]

27 BC – Achaea separated from Macedonia, public propraetorial province
27 BC – Hispania Tarraconensis (former Hispania Citerior)
25 BC – Galatia, imperial propraetorial province
22 BC – reorganization of Gaul following the conquests of Julius Caesar into Gallia Aquitania, Gallia Belgica, Gallia Lugdunensis, imperial propraetorial provinces
15 BC – Raetia, imperial procuratorial province
c. 13 BC – Hispania Ulterior divided into Baetica and Lusitania (public propraetorial and imperial propraetorial respectively)
12 BC – Germania Magna, lost after 9&#160;AD
6 AD – Judaea, imperial procuratorial province (renamed Syria Palaestina by Hadrian, and upgraded to proconsular province).
14 BC – Alpes Maritimae, imperial procuratorial province
18 – Cappadocia, imperial propraetorial (later proconsular) province
c. 20–50 – Illyricum divided into Illyricum Superior (Dalmatia) and Illyricum Inferior (Pannonia), imperial proconsular provinces
40 – Mauretania Tingitana and Mauretania Caesariensis, imperial procuratorial provinces
c. 40 – Noricum, imperial procuratorial province
43 – Britannia, imperial proconsular province
43 – Lycia et Pamphylia, imperial propraetorial province
46 – Thracia, imperial procuratorial province
c. 47 – Alpes Poeninae, imperial procuratorial province
63 – Alpes Cottiae, imperial procuratorial province
67 – Epirus, imperial procuratorial province
72 – Commagene annexed to Syria
c. 84 – Germania Superior and Germania Inferior, imperial proconsular provinces
85 – Moesia divided into Moesia Superior and Moesia Inferior, imperial proconsular provinces
105 – Arabia, imperial propraetorial province
107 – Dacia, imperial proconsular province (split into Dacia Superior and Dacia Inferior between 118 and 158)
107 – Pannonia divided into Pannonia Superior and Pannonia Inferior, imperial provinces (proconsular and propraetorial respectively)
c. 115 – Armenia, Assyria and Mesopotamia, formed by Trajan, abandoned by Hadrian in 118
166 – Tres Daciae formed: Porolissensis, Apulensis and Malvensis, imperial procuratorial provinces
193 – Syria divided into Syria Coele and Syria Phoenicia, imperial provinces (proconsular and propraetorial respectively)
193 – Numidia separated from Africa proconsularis, imperial propraetorial province
c. 197 – Mesopotamia, imperial praefectorial province
197 (formalized c. 212) – Britannia divided into Britannia Superior and Britannia Inferior, imperial provinces (proconsular and propraetorial respectively)
214 AD – Osroene


Many of the above provinces were under Roman military control or under the rule of Roman clients for a long time before being officially constituted as civil provinces. Only the date of the official formation of the province is marked above, not the date of conquest.

Late Antiquity[edit]
See also: List of Late Roman provinces




The Roman Empire and its administrative divisions, c. 395


Emperor Diocletian introduced a radical reform known as the Tetrarchy (284–305), with a western and an eastern Augustus or senior emperor, each seconded by a junior emperor (and designated successor) styled Caesar, and each of these four defending and administering a quarter of the Empire. In the 290s, Diocletian divided the Empire anew into almost a hundred provinces, including Italy. Their governors were hierarchically ranked, from the proconsuls of Africa proconsularis and Asia through those governed by consulares and correctores to the praesides. These last were the only ones recruited from the equestrian class. The provinces in turn were grouped into (originally twelve) dioceses, headed usually by a vicarius, who oversaw their affairs. Only the proconsuls and the urban prefect of Rome (and later Constantinople) were exempt from this, and were directly subordinated to the tetrarchs.
Although the Caesars were soon eliminated from the picture, the four administrative resorts were restored in 318 by Emperor Constantine&#160;I, in the form of praetorian prefectures, whose holders generally rotated frequently, as in the usual magistracies but without a colleague. Constantine also created a new capital, known after him as Constantinople, which was sometimes called 'New Rome' because it became the permanent seat of the government. In Italy itself, Rome had not been the imperial residence for some time and 286 Diocletian formally moved the seat of government to Mediolanum (modern Milan), while taking up residence himself in Nicomedia. During the 4th century, the administrative structure was modified several times, including repeated experiments with Eastern-Western co-emperors. Provinces and dioceses were split to form new ones, the praetorian prefecture of Illyricum was abolished and reformed. In the end, with the rise of Odoacer in 476 and the death of Julius Nepos in 480, administration of the effectively reduced Empire was permanently unified in Constantinople.
Detailed information on the arrangements during this period is contained in the Notitia Dignitatum (Record of Offices), a document dating from the early 5th century. Most data is drawn from this authentic imperial source, as the names of the areas governed and titles of the governors are given there. There are however debates about the source of some data recorded in the Notitia, and it seems clear that some of its own sources are earlier than others. It is interesting to compare this with the list of military territories under the duces, in charge of border garrisons on so-called limites, and the higher ranking Comites rei militaris, with more mobile forces, and the later, even higher magistri militum.
Justinian&#160;I made the next great changes in 534–536 by abolishing, in some provinces, the strict separation of civil and military authority that Diocletian had established. This process was continued on a larger scale with the creation of extraordinary Exarchates in the 580s and culminated with the adoption of the military theme system in the 640s, which replaced the older administrative arrangements entirely. Some scholars use the reorganization of the empire into themata in this period as one of the demarcations between the Dominate period and the Byzantine (or "Later Roman") period. (As a matter of scholarly convenience, the medieval phase of the Roman Empire is today conventionally referred to as Byzantine, after the original name of the city Constantine rebuilt into the new capital.)
Primary sources for lists of provinces[edit]
Early Roman Empire provinces[edit]

Germania (book) (ca. 100)
Geography (Ptolemy) (ca. 140)

Late Roman Empire provinces[edit]

Laterculus Veronensis (ca. 310)
Notitia dignitatum (ca. 400-420)
Laterculus Polemii Silvii (ca. 430)
Synecdemus (ca. 520)

See also[edit]

Roman Italy

Notes[edit]


^ John Richardson, "Fines provinciae," in Frontiers in the Roman World. Proceedings of the Ninth Workshop of the International Network Impact of Empire (Durhan, 16–19 April 2009) (Brill, 2011), p. 2ff., and "The Administration of the Empire," in The Cambridge Ancient History (Cambridge University Press, 1994), vol. 9, pp. 564–565, 580.
^ Clifford Ando, "The Administration of the Provinces," in A Companion to the Roman Empire (Blackwell, 2010), p. 179.
^ Andrew Lintott, The Constitution of the Roman Republic (Oxford University Press, 1999), p. 113ff.; T. Corey Brennan, The Praetorship in the Roman Republic (Oxford University Press, 2000), pp. 626–627.
^ Lintott, Constitution, p. 114; Brennan, Praetorship, p. 636.
^ Claude Nicolet, Space, Geography, and Politics in the Early Roman Empire (University of Michigan Press, 1991, originally published in French 1988), pp. 1, 15; Olivier Hekster and Ted Kaizer, preface to Frontiers in the Roman World, p. viii; Lintott, Constitution, p. 114; W. Eder, "The Augustan Principate as Binding Link," in Between Republic and Empire (University of California Press, 1993), p. 98.


References[edit]

Early Imperial Roman provinces, at livius.org
Pauly-Wissowa
Lintott, Andrew (1993). Imperium Romanum. London: Routledge.
Mommsen, Theodor (1909). The Provinces of the Roman Empire. 2 vols. London: Ares Publishers.
Scarre, Chris (1995). "The Eastern Provinces," The Penguin Historical Atlas of Ancient Rome. London: Penguin Books, 74–75.
Westermann, Großer Atlas zur Weltgeschichte (German)
Loewenstein, Karl (1973). The Governance of Rome. Springer. ISBN&#160;90-247-1458-3.&#160;

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Roman provinces.



Map of the Roman Empire
Map of the Roman Empire in the year 300










v
t
e


Provinces of the Roman Empire at its greatest extent (117 AD)









Achaea
Aegyptus
Africa proconsularis
Alpes Cottiae
Alpes Maritimae
Alpes Poeninae
Arabia Petraea
Armenia
Asia
Assyria
Bithynia et Pontus
Britannia
Cappadocia
Cilicia
Corsica et Sardinia
Creta et Cyrenaica
Cyprus
Dacia
Dalmatia
Epirus
Galatia
Gallia Aquitania
Gallia Belgica
Gallia Lugdunensis
Gallia Narbonensis
Germania Inferior
Germania Superior
Hispania Baetica
Hispania Tarraconensis
Italia †
Iudaea
Lusitania
Lycia et Pamphylia
Macedonia
Mauretania Caesariensis
Mauretania Tingitana
Mesopotamia
Moesia Inferior
Moesia Superior
Noricum
Pannonia Inferior
Pannonia Superior
Raetia
Sicilia
Syria
Thracia

† Italy was never constituted as a province, instead retaining a special juridical status until Diocletian's reforms.


















v
t
e


Late Roman provinces (4th–7th centuries AD)










&#160;
History







As found in the Notitia Dignitatum. Provincial administration reformed and dioceses established by Diocletian, c.&#160;293. Permanent praetorian prefectures established after the death of Constantine I. Empire permanently partitioned after 395. Exarchates of Ravenna and Africa established after 584. After massive territorial losses in the 7th century, the remaining provinces were superseded by the theme system in c.&#160;640–660, although in Asia Minor and parts of Greece they survived under the themes until the early 9th century.













&#160;
Western Empire (395–476)










Praetorian Prefecture
of Gaul




Diocese of Gaul



Alpes Poeninae et Graiae
Belgica I
Belgica II
Germania I
Germania II
Lugdunensis I
Lugdunensis II
Lugdunensis III
Lugdunensis IV
Maxima Sequanorum








Diocese of Vienne1



Alpes Maritimae
Aquitanica I
Aquitanica II
Narbonensis I
Narbonensis II
Novempopulania
Viennensis








Diocese of Spain



Baetica
Balearica
Carthaginensis
Gallaecia
Lusitania
Mauretania Tingitana
Tarraconensis








Diocese of the Britains



Britannia I
Britannia II
Flavia Caesariensis
Maxima Caesariensis
Valentia (?)











Praetorian Prefecture
of Italy




Diocese of Suburbicarian Italy



Apulia et Calabria
Campania
Corsica
Lucania et Bruttii
Picenum Suburbicarium
Samnium
Sardinia
Sicilia
Tuscia et Umbria
Valeria








Diocese of Annonarian Italy



Alpes Cottiae
Flaminia et Picenum Annonarium
Liguria et Aemilia
Raetia I
Raetia II
Venetia et Istria








Diocese of Africa2



Africa proconsularis (Zeugitana)
Byzacena
Mauretania Caesariensis
Mauretania Sitifensis
Numidia Cirtensis
Numidia Militiana
Tripolitania








Diocese of Pannonia3



Dalmatia
Noricum mediterraneum
Noricum ripense
Pannonia I
Pannonia II
Savia
Valeria ripensis





















&#160;
Eastern Empire (395–c. 640)










Praetorian Prefecture
of Illyricum




Diocese of Dacia



Dacia Mediterranea
Dacia Ripensis
Dardania
Moesia I
Praevalitana








Diocese of Macedonia



Achaea
Creta
Epirus nova
Epirus vetus
Macedonia I
Macedonia II Salutaris
Thessalia











Praetorian Prefecture
of the East




Diocese of Thrace5



Europa
Haemimontus
Moesia II4
Rhodope
Scythia4
Thracia








Diocese of Asia5



Asia
Caria4
Hellespontus
Insulae4
Lycaonia (370)
Lycia
Lydia
Pamphylia
Pisidia
Phrygia Pacatiana
Phrygia Salutaris








Diocese of Pontus5



Armenia I5
Armenia II5
Armenia Maior5
Armenian Satrapies5
Armenia III (536)
Armenia IV (536)
Bithynia
Cappadocia I5
Cappadocia II5
Galatia I5
Galatia II Salutaris5
Helenopontus5
Honorias5
Paphlagonia5
Pontus Polemoniacus5








Diocese of the East5



Arabia
Cilicia I
Cilicia II
Cyprus4
Euphratensis
Isauria
Mesopotamia
Osroene
Palaestina I
Palaestina II
Palaestina III Salutaris
Phoenice I
Phoenice II Libanensis
Syria I
Syria II Salutaris
Theodorias (528)








Diocese of Egypt5



Aegyptus I
Aegyptus II
Arcadia
Augustamnica I
Augustamnica II
Libya Superior
Libya Inferior
Thebais Superior
Thebais Inferior





















&#160;
Other territories









Taurica
Quaestura exercitus (536)
Spania (552)














1&#160;Later the Septem Provinciae
2&#160;Re-established after reconquest by the Eastern Empire in 534 as the separate Prefecture of Africa
3&#160;Later the Diocese of Illyricum
4&#160;Placed under the Quaestura exercitus in 536
5&#160;Affected (i.e. boundaries modified, abolished or renamed) by Justinian I's administrative reorganization in 534–536
















v
t
e


Designations for types of administrative territorial entities










&#160;
English terms











Common English terms1






Area



Insular area
Local government area
Protected area
Special area
Statistical area

Combined statistical area
Metropolitan statistical area
Micropolitan statistical area


Urban area








Canton

Half-canton






Borough



County borough
Metropolitan borough








Capital



Federal capital
Imperial capital








City



Autonomous city
Charter city
Independent city
Imperial city
Free imperial city
Royal free city








Community



Autonomous community
Residential community








County



Administrative county
Autonomous county
Consolidated city-county
Metropolitan county

Non-metropolitan


Viscountcy








Country



Constituent country
Overseas country








Department



Overseas department








District



Capital district
City district
Electoral district
Federal district
Indian government district
Land district
Metropolitan district

Non-metropolitan district


Military district
Municipal district
Police district
Regional district
Rural district
Sanitary district
Subdistrict
Urban district








Municipality



Direct-controlled municipality
District municipality
Mountain resort municipality
Neutral municipality
Regional municipality

County


Resort municipality
Rural municipality
Specialized municipality








Prefecture



Autonomous prefecture
Subprefecture
Super-prefecture
Praetorian prefecture








Province



Autonomous province
Overseas province
Roman province








Region



Administrative region
Autonomous region
Capital region
Development region
Economic region
Mesoregion
Microregion
Overseas region
Planning region
Special administrative region
Statistical region
Subregion








Reserve



Biosphere reserve
Ecological reserve
Game reserve
Indian reserve
Nature reserve








State



Federal state
Free state
Sovereign state








Territory



Capital territory

Federal capital territory


Dependent territory
Federal territory
Military territory
Organized incorporated territory
Overseas territory
Union territory
Unorganized territory








Town



Census town
Market town








Township



Charter township
Civil township
Paper township
Survey township
Urban township








Unit



Autonomous territorial unit
Local administrative unit
Municipal unit








Zone



Economic zone

Exclusive economic zone
Free economic zone
Special economic zone


Free trade zone
Neutral zone
Self-administered zone
Time zone













Other English terms






Current



Alpine resort
Bailiwick
Banner

Autonomous


Block
Cadastre
Circle
Circuit
Colony
Commune
Condominium
Constituency
Division

Police division
Subdivision


Duchy
Eldership
Federal dependency
Governorate
Hamlet
Indian reservation
Manor

Royal


Neighbourhood
Parish
Periphery
Precinct
Principality
Protectorate
Quarter
Regency
Autonomous republic
Riding
Sector

Autonomous


Shire
Suzerainty
Townland
Village

Administrative
Summer


Ward









Historical



Agency
Barony
Burgh
Exarchate
Hide
Hundred
Imperial Circle
March
Monthon
Presidency
Residency
Roman diocese
Seat
Tenth
Tithing





















&#160;
Non-English or loanwords










Current



Amt
Bakhsh
Barangay
Bezirk
Regierungsbezirk
Comune
Frazione
Fu
Gemeinde
Județ
Kunta&#160;/ kommun

Finland
Sweden


Län
Località
Megye
Muban
Oblast

Autonomous


Okrug
Ostān
Poblacion
Purok
Shahrestān
Sum
Sýsla
Tehsil
Vingtaine








Historical



Commote
Gau
Heerlijkheid
Köping
Maalaiskunta
Nome

Egypt
Greece


Pagus
Pargana
Plasă
Satrapy
Subah
Syssel
Zhou















v
t
e


Arabic terms for country subdivisions






First-level



Muhafazah&#160;(محافظة governorate)
Wilayah&#160;(ولاية province)
Mintaqah&#160;(منطقة region)
Mudiriyah&#160;(مديرية directorate)
Imarah&#160;(إمارة emirate)
Baladiyah&#160;(بلدية municipality)
Shabiyah&#160;(شعبية "popularate")








Second&#160;/ third-level



Mintaqah&#160;(منطقة region)
Qadaa&#160;(قضاء district)
Nahiyah&#160;(ناحية subdistrict)
Markaz&#160;(مركز district)
Mutamadiyah&#160;(معتمدية "delegation")
Daerah/Daïra&#160;(دائرة circle)
Liwa&#160;(لواء banner&#160;/ sanjak)








City&#160;/ township-level



Amanah&#160;(أمانة municipality)
Baladiyah&#160;(بلدية municipality)
Ḥai&#160;(حي neighborhood&#160;/ quarter)
Mahallah&#160;(محلة)
Sheyakhah&#160;(شياخة "neighborhood subdivision")









English translations given are those most commonly used.








v
t
e


French terms for country subdivisions









arrondissement
département
préfecture
subprefectures










v
t
e


Greek terms for country subdivisions






Modern



apokentroménes dioikíseis&#160;(el) / genike dioikesis§ / diamerisma§ / periphereia
nomos§ / peripheriake enoteta
demos / eparchia§ / koinoteta§








Historical



archontia/archontaton
bandon
demos
despotaton
dioikesis
doukaton
droungos
eparchia
exarchaton
katepanikion
kephalatikion
kleisoura
meris
naukrareia
satrapeia
strategis
thema
toparchia
tourma









§ signifies a defunct institution








v
t
e


Portuguese terms for country subdivisions






Regional subdivisions



Estado
Distrito federal
Província
Região
Distrito
Comarca
Capitania








Local subdivisions



Município
Concelho
Freguesia
Comuna
Circunscrição








Setlements



Cidade
Vila
Aldeia
Bairro
Lugar











Historical subdivisions in italics.










v
t
e


Slavic terms for country subdivisions






Current



dzielnica
gmina
krai
kraj
krajina / pokrajina
městys
obec
oblast / oblast' / oblasti / oblys / obwód / voblast'
okręg
okres
okrug
opština / općina / občina / obshtina
osiedle
powiat / povit
raion
selsoviet / silrada
sołectwo
voivodeship / vojvodina
županija








Historical



darugha
gromada
guberniya / gubernia
jurydyka
khutor
obshchina
okolia
opole
pogost
prowincja
sorok
starostwo / starostva
uyezd
volost
ziemia
župa










v
t
e


Spanish terms for country subdivisions






National, Federal



Comunidad autónoma
Departamento
Distrito federal
Estado
Provincia
Región








Regional, Metropolitan



Cantón
Comarca
Comuna
Corregimiento
Delegación
Distrito
Mancomunidad
Merindad
Municipalidad
Municipio
Parroquia

Ecuador
Spain










Urban, Rural



Aldea
Alquería
Anteiglesia
Asentamiento

Asentamiento informal
Pueblos jóvenes


Barrio
Campamento
Caserío
Ciudad

Ciudad autónoma


Colonia
Lugar
Masía
Población
Ranchería
Sitio
Vereda
Villa
Village (Pueblito/Pueblo)











Historical subdivisions in italics.










v
t
e


Turkish terms for country subdivisions






Modern



il (province)
ilçe (district)
belediye (municipality)
belde (town)
köy (village)
mahalle (neighbourhood/quarter)








Historical



ağalık (feudal district)
bucak (subdistrict)
beylerbeylik (province)
eyalet (province)
kadılık (subprovince)
kaza (sub-province)
hidivlik (viceroyalty)
mutasarrıflık (subprovince)
nahiye (subdistrict)
paşalık (province)
reya (Romanian principalities)
sancak (prefecture)
vilayet (subprovince)
voyvodalık (Romanian provinces)


















1 Used by ten or more countries or having derived terms. Historical derivations in italics.
See also: Census division, Electoral district, Political division and Table of administrative divisions by country














					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Roman_province&amp;oldid=685757290"					
				Categories: Ancient Roman provincesHistorical regionsProvincesHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from September 2012All articles needing additional referencesArticles containing Latin-language textArticles with German-language external linksCommons category with local link same as on WikidataArticles containing Arabic-language textInterlanguage link template link number				
							
		
		
			Navigation menu

			
									
						Personal tools
						
							Create accountLog in						
					
									
										
						Namespaces
						
															Article
															Talk
													
					
										
												
							Variants
						

						
							
															
						
					
									
				
										
						Views
						
															Read
															Edit
															View history
													
					
										
						More

						
							
															
						
					
										
						
							Search
						

						
							
														
						
					
									
			
			
				
						
			Navigation

			
									
						Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store					
							
		
			
			Interaction

			
									
						HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page					
							
		
			
			Tools

			
									
						What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page					
							
		
			
			Print/export

			
									
						Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version					
							
		
			
			Languages

			
									
						AlemannischالعربيةBân-lâm-gúБългарскиBrezhonegCatalàČeštinaCymraegDanskDeutschEestiΕλληνικάEspañolEsperantoEuskaraFrançaisGalego한국어HrvatskiBahasa IndonesiaÍslenskaItalianoעבריתქართულიKiswahiliLatviešuLietuviųMagyarNederlands日本語Norsk bokmålOccitanPolskiPortuguêsRomânăРусскийScotsSimple EnglishSlovenščinaСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSuomiSvenskaTagalogไทยTürkçeУкраїнськаTiếng Việt中文					
				Edit links			
		
				
		
		
							
											 This page was last modified on 14 October 2015, at 20:13.
											Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
									
							
											Privacy policy
											About Wikipedia
											Disclaimers
											Contact Wikipedia
											Developers
											