


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Women in Cyprus
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				







This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page.








This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (September 2014)







This article is outdated. Please update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information. (November 2010)









Women in Cyprus

Gender Inequality Index


Value
0.134 (2012)


Rank
22nd


Maternal mortality (per 100,000)
10 (2010)


Women in parliament
10.7% (2012)


Females over 25 with secondary education
71.0% (2010)


Women in labour force
57.2% (2011)


Global Gender Gap Index[1]


Value
0.6801 (2013)


Rank
79th out of 136




Women in society







Society


Women's history&#160;(legal rights)




Animal advocacy
Business
Education
Government

heads of government
heads of state
Queen regnant

List




Journalism and the media
Law enforcement
Military
Nobel Prize laureates
Positions of power
Venture capital
Workforce












Science
Technology






Computing
Engineering
Medicine

dentistry

in the United States




Telegraphy












Arts
Humanities






Architecture
Film and cinema
Dance
Fine arts
Literature
Philosophy
Photography
Music









Religion



Bahá'í Faith
Buddhism



Christianity&#160;(Mormonism)



Hinduism
Islam
Judaism
Sikhism









Popular culture



Portrayal in American comics
Speculative fiction
Sports
Video games









By country



Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
Angola
Argentina
Armenia
Australia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Belgium
Benin
Bhutan
Bolivia
Bosnia
Brazil
Brunei
Burma
Cambodia
Chad
Chile
China
Colombia
Comoros
Croatia
Cuba
Cyprus (North)
Denmark
DR Congo
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
East Timor
Ethiopia
FS Micronesia
Fiji
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Italy
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Ivory Coast
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Kiribati
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Lebanon
Libya
Madagascar
Malaysia
Maldives
Mali
Marshall Islands
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico
Mongolia
Morocco
Nepal
New Zealand
Niger
Nigeria
North Korea
Oman
Pakistan
Palau
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Portugal
Qatar
Russia
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Spain
Somalia
South Africa
South Korea
South Sudan
Sudan
Suriname
Sri Lanka
Sweden
Syria
Tajikistan
Thailand
Tonga
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Tuvalu
Trinidad and Tobago
Uganda
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
United States
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Vanuatu
Venezuela
Vietnam
Yemen









 Feminism portal







v
t
e





Cypriot women were greatly affected by changes in the wake of World War II, as they received expanded access to education and increased participation in the national workforce. Cyprus women have made great advancements in their society not just pertaining to education and the workplace, but also more women are beginning to hold political offices as well.



Contents


1 Population
2 History of Cypriot Women
3 Education
4 Female employment

4.1 Welfare


5 Politics
6 Notable Women
7 Violence Against Women in Cyprus
8 See also
9 References
10 External links



Population[edit]
According to World Population Review, in 2014, the population in Cyprus was 1,153,058. Women make up 48.944% of the total population in Cyprus.[2]
History of Cypriot Women[edit]
Even at the beginning of the 1990s, Cypriot women were still burdened with the expectation of safeguarding the honor of the family. According to tradition, a woman's duty was to protect herself against all criticism of sexual immodesty.
A study carried out in a farming community in the mid-1970s found that women were still expected to avoid any social contact with men that could be construed to have a sexual context. An expressed desire to participate in male society was seen to reflect poorly on a woman's honor, and virginity was seen by many villagers, both men and women, to be a precondition for marriage. The honor of a family, that is, the sense of dignity of its male members, depended on the sexual modesty and virtue of its women. These traditional attitudes have waned somewhat in recent decades, especially in urban areas, but were still prevalent in the early 1990s. Another indication of the conservative nature of Greek Cypriot society at the beginning of the 1990s was that the feminist movement in Cyprus was often the object of ridicule from both sexes. Nevertheless, women's increasing economic independence was a force for liberation in all sections of the population. Women in Cyprus roles have changes and altered over the years. In the past, Cyprus women's main expectations were to get married and have children. Their schooling was little to none and many women did not work outside their homes. If you ask a women in Cyprus if her social role is different than that of men, many of them will disagree. Today, many Cyprus women have jobs outside of their homes and receive a higher education. Even so, women still continue to keep up with the domestic work that their home life requires of them. Something that hasn't changed in Cyprus is the idea that women should be seen not heard or listen rather than speak. Due to gender socialization, women in Cyprus are known to keep their goals and successes to themselves.[3]
Education[edit]
At the beginning of the 20th century, the proportion of girls to boys enrolled in primary education was one to three. By 1943, some 80 percent of Cypriot girls attended primary school. When, in 1960, elementary education was made compulsory, the two sexes were equally enrolled. By the 1980s, girls made up 45 percent of those receiving secondary education. Only after the mid-1960s did women commonly leave Cyprus to receive higher education. In the 1980s, women made up about 32 percent of those studying abroad.
Female employment[edit]
The participation of Cyriot women in the workforce has been steadily increasing. In 1976 women's share in the workforce was 30 percent and a rise to 37 percent in 1985. Today women's share in the workforce is 44 percent. 62.1% of women between the ages of 15–64 years old are active in workforce.[4]
Cyprus has long had a high degree of female participation in the workforce. There were great changes in the nature of female employment. Women's share of the urban workforce rose from 22 percent to 41 percent, while their share of the rural workforce fell from 51 percent to 44.4 percent. The decline in rural areas stemmed from the overall shift away from agricultural work, where women's contribution had always been vital, to employment in urban occupations such as manufacturing and services.
The occupational segregation of the sexes was still persistent in Cyprus at the beginning of the 1990s. Even though the participation of women in clerical jobs had more than doubled since the late 1970s, only one woman in fifteen was in an administrative or managerial position in 1985. Women's share of professional jobs increased to 39 percent by the mid-1980s, compared with 36 percent ten years earlier, but these jobs were concentrated in medicine and teaching, where women had traditionally found employment. In fields where men were dominant, women's share of professional positions amounted to only 11 percent, up from 8 percent in 1976. In the fields where women were dominant, men took just under half the professional positions.
Nonetheless, there is still room for improvement pertaining to the gender equality Cyprus women are experiencing in the workforce. Not only do Women represent 14.4% of high posts, women are also paid on average 24% less per hour compared to their male counterparts.[4] The equal pay-equal work principal would help to solve this problem, but the women are generally in lower positions then men resulting in the unequal pay.
According the 2006 Population Census, the unemployment rate for women was 19%, whereas for men it was 6%. In 2010, the unemployment rate was 17.5% for women a and 8.9% for men. Even though the unemployment rate for women is decreasing, the rate is still twice as high compared to men.[5]
Welfare[edit]
Cypriot women enjoy the same rights to social welfare as men in such matters as social security payments, unemployment compensation, vacation time, and other common social provisions. In addition, after 1985 women benefited from special protective legislation that provided them with marriage and maternity grants that paid them 75 percent of their insurable earnings. Still, a large number of women, including the self-employed and unpaid family workers on farms, were not covered by the Social Insurance Scheme. These women constituted 28 percent of the economically active female population.
In 1985, the Republic of Cyprus ratified the United Nations Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women. Despite ratification of this agreement, as of late 1990 there was no legislation in the Republic of Cyprus that guaranteed the right to equal pay for work of equal value, nor the right of women to the same employment opportunities.
Politics[edit]
Women are present in very few political positions in Cyprus, but the following are some of the women who have held or currently hold a political position:

Praxoula Antoniadou- President of the United Democrats (March 2007 – Present), She attends the meetings of the leaders of the Greek and Cypriot political parties as well as being an active participant.[6]
Erato Kozakou-Marcoullis- Minister of Foreign Affairs (August 20111- February 2013), Ministry of Foreign Affairs (1980-2007), Ambassador of the Republic of Cyprus to the United States of America (1998-2003)[7]
Eleni Mavrou- First female mayor of Cyprus' capital (2006-2011), Minister of Interior of the Republic of Cyprus (until February 2013)[8]
Antigoni Papadopoulou- First Woman to serve as Chair of the House’s Committee of Economic Affairs and Budgeting (2006–2009), President of GOIDK, Member of the Municipal Council of Strovolos, Member of the House of Representative of Cyprus, Mayor of Morphu, Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe, Member of the European Parliament[9]
Androulla Vassiliou- European Commissioner for Health (March 2008- February 2010), European Commissioner for Education, Culture, Multilingualism and Youth (February 2010-November 2014)[10]

Notable Women[edit]

Caterina Cornaro- The last reigning Queen of Cyprus during the Lusignan/Venetian periods[11]


Suzan Ari- Advocate for reform in Cyprus pertaining to education, social movements, and protecting cultural heritage[12]
Lia Vissi- Singer, songwriter, and politician in Cyprus

Violence Against Women in Cyprus[edit]
Studies show that socioeconomic patterns play a big role in violence against women in Cyprus, specifically domestic violence. Women who possess characteristics such as having little to no education, reside in Urban areas, are of older age, and struggle financially are said to be prone to domestic violence. Due to there not being a national survey conducted focusing on domestic violence against women in Cyprus, statistics and findings can only be discovered through the police or through Association of the Prevention and Handling of Violence in the Family. The reports to the police have drastically been increasing each year. In 2002, 538 cases were reported, whereas in 2008 that number almost doubled with 969 cases being reported. During the years between 2002-2008, 71.18 percent of the victims were women. During the years between 2004-2009, the number of cases triples and 80 percent of victims are women, whereas 8.6% of victims are men. Of these cases, 79 percent involved physical violence, 18.5 percent involved psychological violence, and 2.4 percent involved sexual violence. The annual report from Association of the Prevention and Handling of Violence in the Family reveals that that out of a total of 1051 incidents, 815 of them include women between the ages of 41-50 who were abused. Furthermore. 96.1 percent of these incidents involve psychological violence and 78 percent reside with their attacker.[13]
See also[edit]

Women in Northern Cyprus

References[edit]


^ "The Global Gender Gap Report 2013" (PDF). World Economic Forum. pp.&#160;12–13.&#160;
^ "Cyprus Population 2014 - World Population Review". worldpopulationreview.com. Retrieved 2015-04-21.&#160;
^ "Cypriot People &amp; Culture - Cyprus.com". Cyprus.com. Retrieved 2015-04-21.&#160;
^ a b "Women in Cyprus". Anastasia. Retrieved 2015-04-21.&#160;
^ "http://eds.a.ebscohost.com.proxy.library.ohiou.edu/Legacy/Views/static/html/Error.htm?aspxerrorpath=/eds/pdfviewer/pdfviewer". eds.a.ebscohost.com.proxy.library.ohiou.edu. Retrieved 2015-04-21.&#160;
^ "Praxoula Antoniadou". hellenicaworld.com. Retrieved 2015-04-21.&#160;
^ "http://www.economistinsights.com/speaker/2075". www.economistinsights.com. Retrieved 2015-04-21.&#160;
^ "Eleni Mavrou - Phantis". wiki.phantis.com. Retrieved 2015-04-21.&#160;
^ "Antigoni PAPADOPOULOU". www.europarl.europa.eu. Retrieved 2015-04-21.&#160;
^ "Learn and talk about Androulla Vassiliou, Cypriot European Commissioners, Cypriot lawyers, Cypriot women in politics, Democratic Party (Cyprus) politicians". www.digplanet.com. Retrieved 2015-04-21.&#160;
^ "Great Women in Successful Literacy &amp; Notable Education Reforms -exemplary woman Suzan Ari". www.orhanseyfiari.com. Retrieved 2015-04-21.&#160;
^ "FAMOUS CYPRIOTS". Retrieved 2015-04-21.&#160;
^ "http://journals.ohiolink.edu.proxy.library.ohiou.edu/ejc/article.cgi?issn=03623319&amp;issue=v51i0002&amp;article=295_rfftpodvawic&amp;redir=bad_tracker". journals.ohiolink.edu.proxy.library.ohiou.edu. Retrieved 2015-04-21.&#160;


&#160;This article incorporates&#160;public domain material from websites or documents of the Library of Congress Country Studies.
External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Women of Cyprus.










v
t
e


Women in Asia






Sovereign states



Afghanistan
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei
Cambodia
China
Cyprus
East Timor (Timor-Leste)
Egypt
Georgia
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
North Korea
South Korea
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Lebanon
Malaysia
Maldives
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nepal
Oman
Pakistan
Philippines
Qatar
Russia
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Syria
Tajikistan
Thailand
Turkey
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen








States with
limited recognition



Abkhazia
Nagorno-Karabakh
Northern Cyprus
Palestine
South Ossetia
Taiwan








Dependencies and
other territories



British Indian Ocean Territory
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Hong Kong
Macau
















v
t
e


Women in Europe






Sovereign states



Albania
Andorra
Armenia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland

Italy
Kazakhstan
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Malta
Moldova
Monaco
Montenegro
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
San Marino
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom
Vatican City








States with limited
recognition



Abkhazia
Kosovo
Nagorno-Karabakh
Northern Cyprus
South Ossetia
Transnistria








Dependencies and
other territories



Åland
Faroe Islands
Gibraltar
Guernsey
Jersey
Isle of Man
Svalbard
















v
t
e


Cyprus&#160;articles






History




Prehistoric



Alasiya
Eteocypriot

Cypro-Minoan syllabary
Cypriot syllabary










Ancient



Neo-Assyrian Empire
Ten city-kingdoms
Achaemenid Persian Empire
Ionian Revolt
Ptolemaic dynasty
Hellenistic civilization
Kitos War








Medieval



Byzantine Empire
Arab Empire
Crusades
Kingdom
Venetian rule








Modern



Ottoman rule
Cyprus Convention
Post-1878 overview
Enosis
Taksim
Intercommunal violence
Turkish invasion
Refugees
Cyprus dispute
Annan Plan
EU accession











Geography







Cities, towns and villages
Climate
Districts
Lakes
Mountains
Rivers
Wildlife











Politics







Constitution
Cyprus dispute

Northern Cyprus
UN resolutions


Elections
Foreign relations
Human rights
Police
Political parties
Military
Governors
Chief Justice











Economy







Agriculture
Banks
Energy
Stock Exchange
Telecommunications
Tourism
Trade unions
Transport











Society







Languages
Education
Health
Public holidays
Religion








Culture



Art
Cinema
Cuisine
Literature
Media
Music
Sport








Demographics



Greeks

diaspora
Greek Cypriots left in Northern Cyprus


Turks

diaspora
Migrants from Turkey in Northern Cyprus


Armenians
Maronites








Symbols



Anthem
Coat of arms
Flag















Outline
Index



Category
Portal
WikiProject















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Women_in_Cyprus&amp;oldid=663417633"					
				Categories: Women in CyprusHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from September 2014All articles needing additional referencesWikipedia articles in need of updating from November 2010All Wikipedia articles in need of updatingWikipedia articles incorporating text from the Library of Congress Country StudiesCommons category without a link on Wikidata				
							
		
		
			Navigation menu

			
									
						Personal tools
						
							Create accountLog in						
					
									
										
						Namespaces
						
															Article
															Talk
													
					
										
												
							Variants
						

						
							
															
						
					
									
				
										
						Views
						
															Read
															Edit
															View history
													
					
										
						More

						
							
															
						
					
										
						
							Search
						

						
							
														
						
					
									
			
			
				
						
			Navigation

			
									
						Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store					
							
		
			
			Interaction

			
									
						HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page					
							
		
			
			Tools

			
									
						What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page					
							
		
			
			Print/export

			
									
						Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version					
							
		
			
			Languages

			
									
											
				Add links			
		
				
		
		
							
											 This page was last modified on 21 May 2015, at 15:35.
											Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
									
							
											Privacy policy
											About Wikipedia
											Disclaimers
											Contact Wikipedia
											Developers
											