


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Women's history
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				

Women in society







Society


Women's history&#160;(legal rights)




Animal advocacy
Business
Education
Government

heads of government
heads of state
Queen regnant

List




Journalism and the media
Law enforcement
Military
Nobel Prize laureates
Positions of power
Venture capital
Workforce












Science
Technology






Computing
Engineering
Medicine

dentistry

in the United States




Telegraphy












Arts
Humanities






Architecture
Film and cinema
Dance
Fine arts
Literature
Philosophy
Photography
Music









Religion



Bahá'í Faith
Buddhism



Christianity&#160;(Mormonism)



Hinduism
Islam
Judaism
Sikhism









Popular culture



Portrayal in American comics
Speculative fiction
Sports
Video games









By country



Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
Angola
Argentina
Armenia
Australia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Belgium
Benin
Bhutan
Bolivia
Bosnia
Brazil
Brunei
Burma
Cambodia
Chad
Chile
China
Colombia
Comoros
Croatia
Cuba
Cyprus (North)
Denmark
DR Congo
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
East Timor
Ethiopia
FS Micronesia
Fiji
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Italy
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Ivory Coast
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Kiribati
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Lebanon
Libya
Madagascar
Malaysia
Maldives
Mali
Marshall Islands
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico
Mongolia
Morocco
Nepal
New Zealand
Niger
Nigeria
North Korea
Oman
Pakistan
Palau
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Portugal
Qatar
Russia
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Spain
Somalia
South Africa
South Korea
South Sudan
Sudan
Suriname
Sri Lanka
Sweden
Syria
Tajikistan
Thailand
Tonga
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Tuvalu
Trinidad and Tobago
Uganda
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
United States
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Vanuatu
Venezuela
Vietnam
Yemen









 Feminism portal







v
t
e





Women's history is the study of the role that women have played in history and the methods required to do so. It includes the study of the history of the growth of woman's rights throughout recorded history, the examination of individual and groups of women of historical significance, and the effect that historical events have had on women. Inherent in the study of women's history is the belief that more traditional recordings of history have minimized or ignored the contributions of women and the effect that historical events had on women as a whole; in this respect, women's history is often a form of historical revisionism, seeking to challenge or expand the traditional historical consensus.
The main centers of scholarship have been the United States and Britain, where second-wave feminist historians, influenced by the new approaches promoted by social history, led the way. As activists in women's liberation, discussing and analyzing the oppression and inequalities they experienced as women, they believed it imperative to learn about the lives of their foremothers—and found very little scholarship in print. History was written mainly by men and about men's activities in the public sphere—war, politics, diplomacy and administration. Women are usually excluded and, when mentioned, are usually portrayed in sex-stereotypical roles such as wives, mothers, daughters and mistresses. The study of history is value-laden in regard to what is considered historically "worthy."[1] Other aspects of this area of study is the differences in women's lives caused by race, economic status, social status, and various other aspects of society.[2]



Contents


1 Regions

1.1 Europe

1.1.1 France

1.1.1.1 Pre-revolution
1.1.1.2 Education for girls


1.1.2 Germany
1.1.3 Russia


1.2 Asia

1.2.1 China

1.2.1.1 Tibet


1.2.2 Japan


1.3 Africa

1.3.1 South Africa


1.4 Americas

1.4.1 United States
1.4.2 Canada




2 Themes

2.1 Rights and equality
2.2 Employment
2.3 Sex and reproduction
2.4 Clothing
2.5 Status
2.6 Religion


3 Warfare
4 See also
5 References
6 Further reading

6.1 World

6.1.1 Primary sources


6.2 Ancient
6.3 Asia

6.3.1 China


6.4 Europe

6.4.1 Primary sources: Europe


6.5 Canada
6.6 United States

6.6.1 Surveys
6.6.2 Specific studies
6.6.3 Primary sources: U.S.


6.7 Historiography


7 External links



Regions[edit]
Europe[edit]
Changes came in the 19th and 20th centuries; for example, for women the right to equal pay is now enshrined in law. Women traditionally ran the household, bore and reared the children, were nurses, mothers, wives, neighbors, friends, and teachers. During periods of war, women were drafted into the labor market to undertake work that had been traditionally restricted to men. Following the wars, they invariably lost their jobs in industry and had to return to domestic and service roles.
The history of Scottish women in the late 19th-century and early 20th-century was not fully developed as a field of study until the 1980s. In addition, most work on women before 1700 has been published since 1980. Several recent studies have taken a biographical approach, but other work has drawn on the insights from research elsewhere to examine such issues as work, family, religion, crime, and images of women. Scholars are also uncovering women's voices in their letters, memoirs, poetry, and court records. Because of the late development of the field, much recent work has been recuperative, but increasingly the insights of gender history, both in other countries and in Scottish history after 1700, are being used to frame the questions that are asked. Future work should contribute both to a reinterpretation of the current narratives of Scottish history and also to a deepening of the complexity of the history of women in late medieval and early modern Britain and Europe.
Interest in the study of women's history in Eastern Europe[where?] has been delayed.[3] Representative is Hungary, where the historiography has been explored by Petö and Szapor (2007). Academia resisted incorporating this specialized field of history, primarily because of the political atmosphere and a lack of institutional support. Before 1945, historiography dealt chiefly with nationalist themes that supported the antidemocratic political agenda of the state. After 1945, academia reflected a Soviet model. Instead of providing an atmosphere in which women could be the subjects of history, this era ignored the role of the women's rights movement in the early 20th century. The collapse of Communism in 1989 was followed by a decade of promising developments in which biographies of prominent Hungarian women were published, and important moments of women's political and cultural history were the subjects of research. However, the quality of this scholarship was uneven and failed to take advantage of the methodological advances in research in the West[where?]. In addition, institutional resistance continued, as evidenced by the lack of undergraduate or graduate programs dedicated to women's and gender history at Hungarian universities.[4]
France[edit]
Further information: Women in the French Revolution
French historians have taken a unique approach: there has been extensive scholarship in women's and gender history despite the lack of women's and gender study programs or departments at the university level. But approaches used by other academics in the research of broadly based social histories has been applied to the field of women's history as well. The high level of research and publication in women's and gender history is due to the high interest within French society. The structural discrimination in academia against the subject of gender history in France is changing due to the increase in international studies following the formation of the European Union, and more French scholars seeking appointments outside Europe.[5]
Pre-revolution[edit]
In the Ancien Régime in France, few women held any formal power; some queens did, as did the heads of Catholic convents. In the Enlightenment, the writings of philosopher Jean Jacques Rousseau provided a political program for reform of the ancien régime, founded on a reform of domestic mores. Rousseau's conception of the relations between private and public spheres is more unified than that found in modern sociology. Rousseau argued that the domestic role of women is a structural precondition for a "modern" society.[6]
Salic law prohibited women from rule; however, the laws for the case of a regency, when the king was too young to govern by himself, brought the queen into the center of power. The queen could ensure the passage of power from one king to another—from her late husband to her young son—while simultaneously assuring the continuity of the dynasty.
Education for girls[edit]
Educational aspirations were on the rise and were becoming increasingly institutionalized in order to supply the church and state with the functionaries to serve as their future administrators. Girls were schooled too, but not to assume political responsibility. Girls were ineligible for leadership positions and were generally considered to have an inferior intellect to their brothers. France had many small local schools where working-class children - both boys and girls - learned to read, the better "to know, love, and serve God." The sons and daughters of the noble and bourgeois elites were given gender-specific educations: boys were sent to upper school, perhaps a university, while their sisters - if they were lucky enough to leave the house - would be sent to board at a convent with a vague curriculum. The Enlightenment challenged this model, but no real alternative was presented for female education. Only through education at home were knowledgeable women formed, usually to the sole end of dazzling their salons.[7]
Germany[edit]
Before the 19th century, young women lived under the economic and disciplinary authority of their fathers until they married and passed under the control of their husbands. In order to secure a satisfactory marriage, a woman needed to bring a substantial dowry. In the wealthier families, daughters received their dowry from their families, whereas the poorer women needed to work in order to save their wages so as to improve their chances to wed. Under the German laws, women had property rights over their dowries and inheritances, a valuable benefit as high mortality rates resulted in successive marriages. Before 1789, the majority of women lived confined to society’s private sphere, the home.
The Age of Reason did not bring much more for women: men, including Enlightenment aficionados, believed that women were naturally destined to be principally wives and mothers. Within the educated classes, there was the belief that women needed to be sufficiently educated to be intelligent and agreeable interlocutors to their husbands. However, the lower-class women were expected to be economically productive in order to help their husbands make ends meet.[8]
In the newly founded German State (1871), women of all social classes were politically and socially disenfranchised. The code of social respectability confined upper class and bourgeois women to their homes. They were considered socially and economically inferior to their husbands. The unmarried women were ridiculed, and the ones who wanted to avoid social descent could work as unpaid housekeepers living with relatives; the most able could work as governesses or they could become nuns.
A significant number of middle-class families became impoverished between 1871 and 1890 as the pace of industrial growth was uncertain, and women had to earn money in secret by sewing or embroidery to contribute to the family income.[8] In 1865, the Allgemeiner Deutscher Frauenverein (ADF) was founded as an umbrella organization for women's associations, demanding rights to education, employment and political participation. Three decades later, the Bund Deutscher Frauenverbände (BDF) replaced ADF and excluded from membership the proletarian movement that was part of the earlier group. The two movements had differing views concerning women's place in society, and accordingly, they also had different agendas. The bourgeois movement made important contributions to the access of women to education and employment (mainly office-based and teaching). The proletarian movement, on the other hand, developed as a branch of the Social Democratic Party. As factory jobs became available for women, they campaigned for equal pay and equal treatment. In 1908 German women won the right to join political parties, and in 1918 they were finally granted the right to vote. The emancipation of women in Germany was to be challenged in following years.[9]
Historians have paid special attention to the efforts by Nazi Germany to reverse the political and social gains that women made before 1933, especially in the relatively liberal Weimar Republic.[10] The role of women in Nazi Germany changed according to circumstances. Theoretically the Nazis believed that women must be subservient to men, avoid careers, devote themselves to childbearing and child-rearing, and be helpmates to the traditional dominant fathers in the traditional family.[11] But, before 1933, women played important roles in the Nazi organization and were allowed some autonomy to mobilize other women. After Hitler came to power in 1933, the activist women were replaced by bureaucratic women, who emphasized feminine virtues, marriage, and childbirth.
As Germany prepared for war, large numbers of women were incorporated into the public sector and, with the need for full mobilization of factories by 1943, all women were required to register with the employment office. Hundreds of thousands of women served in the military as nurses and support personnel, and another hundred thousand served in the Luftwaffe, especially helping to operate the anti—aircraft systems.[12] Women's wages remained unequal and women were denied positions of leadership or control.[13]
More than two million women were murdered in the Holocaust. The Nazi ideology viewed women generally as agents of fertility. Accordingly, it identified the Jewish woman as an element to be exterminated to prevent the rise of future generations. For these reasons, the Nazis treated women as prime targets for annihilation in the Holocaust.[14]
Russia[edit]
Main article: Feminism in Russia
Women's history in Russia started to become important in the Czarist era, and concern was shown in the consciousness and writing of Alexander Pushkin. During the Soviet Era, feminism was developed along with ideals of equality, but in practice and in domestic arrangements, men often dominate.
Asia[edit]
China[edit]
Published work generally deals with women as visible participants in revolution, employment as vehicles for women's liberation, Confucianism and the cultural concept of family as sources of women's oppression. While rural marriage rituals, such as bride price and dowry, have remained the same in form, their function has changed. This reflects the decline of the extended family and the growth in women's agency in the marriage transaction.[15] In recent scholarship in China, the concept of gender has yielded a bounty of new knowledge in English- and Chinese-language writings.[16]




Ladies of a Mandarin's Family at Cards, Thomas Allom; G. N. Wright (1843). China, in a Series of Views, Displaying the Scenery, Architecture, and Social Habits of That Ancient Empire. Volume 3. p. 18


Zhongguo fu nü sheng huo shi (simplified Chinese: 中国妇女生活史; traditional Chinese: 中國婦女生活史; pinyin: Zhōngguó Fùnǚ Shēnghuó Shǐ; literally: "Chinese Women's Life History") is a historical book written by Chen Dongyuan in 1928 and published by The Commercial Press in 1937. The book, deemed as the first to give a systematic introduction to women's history in China, has strongly influenced further research in this field.[17]
The book sheds a light on Chinese women's life ranging from ancient times (prior to Zhou Dynasty) to the Republic of China. In the book, sections are separated based on dynasties in China. Sections are divided into segments to introduce different themes, such as marriage, feudal ethical codes, education for women, virtues, positions, concept of chastity, foot-binding and women’s rights movement in modern China. Inspired by the anti-traditional thoughts in New Culture Movement, the author devoted much effort to disclosing and denouncing the unfairness and suppression in culture, institutions and life that victimize women in China. According to the book, women’s conditions are slightly improved until modern China. in the Preface of the book, the author writes: since women in China are always subject to abuse, the history of women is, naturally the history of abuse of women in China. The author revealed the motivation: the book intends to explain how the principle of women being inferior to men evolves; how the abuse to women is intensified over time; and how the misery on women’s back experience the history change. The author wants to promote women’s liberation by revealing the political and social suppression of women.
Mann (2009) explores how Chinese biographers have depicted women over two millennia (221 BCE to 1911), especially during the Han dynasty. Zhang Xuecheng, Sima Qian, and Zhang Huiyan and other writers often study women of the governing class, and their representation in domestic scenes of death in the narratives and in the role of martyrs.[18]
Tibet[edit]
The historiography of women in the history of Tibet confronts the suppression of women's histories in the social narratives of an exiled community. McGranahan (2010) examines the role of women in the 20th century, especially during the Chinese invasion and occupation of Tibet. She studies women in the Tibetan resistance army, the subordination of women in a Buddhist society, and the persistent concept of menstrual blood as a contaminating agent.[19] 1998
Japan[edit]




Japanese girl playing on gekin, Baron Raimund von Stillfried und Rathenitz (1839-1911)


Japanese women's history was marginal to historical scholarship until the late 20th century. The subject hardly existed before 1945, and, even after that date, many academic historians were reluctant to accept women's history as a part of Japanese history. The social and political climate of the 1980s in particular, favorable in many ways to women, gave opportunities for Japanese women's historiography and also brought the subject fuller academic recognition. Exciting and innovative research on Japanese women's history began in the 1980s. Much of this has been conducted not only by academic women's historians, but also by freelance writers, journalists, and amateur historians; that is, by people who have been less restricted by traditional historical methods and expectations. The study of Japanese women's history has become accepted as part of the traditional topics.[20]
Africa[edit]
South Africa[edit]




South Africa, breaking the cycle of violence


Prior to the end of apartheid, the study of women's history was generally neglected. Most history studied was centered on European Africans, rather than the indigenous peoples.
South Africa has been dealing with severe social issues due to the legacy of apartheid, rising unemployment, and the increasing gap between rich and poor. These conditions have fueled violence against women and girls, drug abuse and gang culture in South Africa. Around one in three registered sexual offences in the country are against children. Protecting children, especially orphans and those affected by HIV and AIDS, is critical for breaking the cycle of violence.
In March 2013 the United Nation's Commission on the Status of Women have met to discuss how to prevent all forms of violence against women and girls. This International Women's Day helped demand action by sending a message to global leaders to put a stop to this worldwide injustice.
The United Kingdom aid is working in 21 countries to address physical and sexual violence against women and girls. It will be supporting 10 million women and girls with improved access to security and justice services by 2015.[21]
Americas[edit]
United States[edit]
See also: History of women in the United States
Apart from individual women, working largely on their own, the first organized systematic efforts to develop women's history came from the United Daughters of the Confederacy (UDC) in the early 20th century. It coordinated efforts across the South to tell the story of the women on the Confederate homefront, while the male historians spent their time with battles and generals. The women emphasized female activism, initiative, and leadership. They reported that when all the men left for war, the women took command, found ersatz and substitute foods, rediscovered their old traditional skills with the spinning wheel when factory cloth became unavailable, and ran all the farm or plantation operations. They faced danger without having menfolk in the traditional role of their protectors.[22] Historian Jacquelyn Dowd Hall argues that the UDC was a powerful promoter of women's history:

UDC leaders were determined to assert women's cultural authority over virtually every representation of the region's past. This they did by lobbying for state archives and museums, national historic sites, and historic highways; compiling genealogies; interviewing former soldiers; writing history textbooks; and erecting monuments, which now moved triumphantly from cemeteries into town centers. More than half a century before women's history and public history emerged as fields of inquiry and action, the UDC, with other women's associations, strove to etch women's accomplishments into the historical record and to take history to the people, from the nursery and the fireside to the schoolhouse and the public square.[23]

The work of women scholars was ignored by the male-dominated history profession until the 1960s, when the first breakthroughs came.[24] Gerda Lerner in 1963 offered the first regular college course in women's history.[25] The field of women's history exploded dramatically after 1970, along with the growth of the new social history and the acceptance of women into graduate programs in history departments. In 1972, Sarah Lawrence College began offering a Master of Arts Program in Women’s History, founded by Gerda Lerner, that was the first American graduate degree in the field.[26] Another important development was to integrate women into the history of race and slavery. A pioneer effort was Deborah Gray White's 'Ar'n't I a Woman? Female Slaves in the Plantation South (1985), which helped to open up analysis of race, slavery, abolitionism and feminism, as well as resistance, power, and activism, and themes of violence, sexualities, and the body.[27] A major trend in recent years has been to emphasize a global perspective.[28] Although the word "women" is the eighth most commonly used word in abstracts of all historical articles in North America, it is only the twenty-third most used word in abstracts of historical articles in other regions.[29] Furthermore, "gender" appears about twice as frequently in American history abstracts compared to abstracts covering the rest of the world.[29]
Canada[edit]
Main articles: History of Canadian women and Feminism in Canada
Themes[edit]
Rights and equality[edit]
Main article: Women's rights
Women's rights refers to the social and human rights of women. In the United States, the abolition movements sparked an increased wave of attention to the status of women, but the history of feminism reaches to before the 18th century. (See protofeminism.) The advent of the reformist age during the 19th century meant that those invisible minorities or marginalized majorities were to find a catalyst and a microcosm in such new tendencies of reform. The earliest works on the so-called "woman question" criticized the restrictive role of women, without necessarily claiming that women were disadvantaged or that men were to blame. In Britain, the Feminism movement began in the 19th century and continues in the present day. Simone de Beauvoir wrote a detailed analysis of women's oppression in her 1949 treatise The Second Sex. It became a foundational tract of contemporary feminism.[30] In the late 1960s and early 1970s, feminist movements, such as the one in the United States substantially changed the condition of women in the Western world. One trigger for the revolution was the development of the birth control pill in 1960, which gave women access to easy and reliable contraception in order to conduct family planning.
Employment[edit]
Main article: Women in the workforce
The 1870 US Census was the first to count "Females engaged in each and every occupation" and provides a snapshot of women's history. It reveals that, contrary to popular myth, not all American women of the Victorian period were "safe" in their middle-class homes or working in sweatshops. Women composed 15% of the total work force (1.8 million out of 12.5). They made up one-third of factory "operatives," and were concentrated in teaching, as the nation emphasized expanding education; dressmaking, millinery, and tailoring. Two-thirds of teachers were women. They also worked in iron and steel works (495), mines (46), sawmills (35), oil wells and refineries (40), gas works (4), and charcoal kilns (5), and held such surprising jobs as ship rigger (16), teamster (196), turpentine laborer (185), brass founder/worker (102), shingle and lathe maker (84), stock-herder (45), gun and locksmith (33), hunter and trapper (2). There were five lawyers, 24 dentists, and 2,000 doctors.
Sex and reproduction[edit]
In the history of sex, the social construction of sexual behavior - its taboos, regulation and social and political effects - has had a profound effect on women in the world since prehistoric times. Absent assured ways of controlling reproduction, women have practiced abortion since ancient times; many societies have also practice infanticide to ensure the survival of older children. Historically, it is unclear how often the ethics of abortion (induced abortion) was discussed in societies. In the later half of the 20th century, some nations began to legalize abortion. This controversial subject has sparked heated debate and in some cases violence, as different parts of society have differing social and religious ideas about its meaning.
Women have been exposed to various tortuous sexual conditions and have been discriminated against in various fashions in history. In addition to women being sexual victims of troops in warfare, an institutionalized example was the Japanese military impressing prisoners of war as comfort women, women who were forced to work as prostitutes in military brothels in Japanese-occupied countries during World War II.
Clothing[edit]




Beauties Wearing Flowers, by Tang Dynasty Chinese artist Zhou Fang, 8th century.


The social aspects of clothing have revolved around traditions regarding certain items of clothing intrinsically suited different gender roles. In different periods, both women's and men's fashions have highlighted one area or another of the body for attention. In particular, the wearing of skirts and trousers has given rise to common phrases expressing implied restrictions in use and disapproval of offending behaviour. For example, ancient Greeks often considered the wearing of trousers by Persian men as a sign of an effeminate attitude. Women's clothing in Victorian fashion was used as a means of control and admiration. Reactions to the elaborate confections of French fashion led to various calls for reform on the grounds of both beauty (Artistic and Aesthetic dress) and health (dress reform; especially for undergarments and lingerie). Although trousers for women did not become fashionable until the later 20th century, women began wearing men's trousers (suitably altered) for outdoor work a hundred years earlier. In the 1960s, André Courrèges introduced long trousers for women as a fashion item, leading to the era of the pantsuit and designer jeans, and the gradual eroding of the prohibitions against girls and women wearing trousers in schools, the workplace, and fine restaurants. Corsets have long been used for fashion, and body modification, such as waistline reduction. There were, and are, many different styles and types of corsets, varying depending on the intended use, corset maker's style, and the fashions of the era.
Status[edit]
The Social status of women in the Victoria Era is often seen as an illustration of the striking discrepancy between the nation's power and richness and what many consider its appalling social conditions. Victorian morality was full of contradictions. A plethora of social movements concerned with improving public morals co-existed with a class system that permitted and imposed harsh living conditions for many, such as women. In this period, an outward appearance of dignity and restraint was valued, but the usual "vices" continued, such as prostitution. In the Victorian era, the bathing machine was developed and flourished. It was a device to allow people to wade in the ocean at beaches without violating Victorian notions of modesty about having "limbs" revealed. The bathing machine was part of sea-bathing etiquette that was more rigorously enforced upon women than men.
Religion[edit]
See also: Women as theological figures
The Hindu, Jewish, Sikh, Islamic and Christian views about women vary considerably today. They have varied throughout the last two millennia, evolving along with or counter to the societies in which people have lived. For much of history, the role of women in the life of the church, both local and universal, has been downplayed, overlooked, or simply denied.[31] When some women have interreligious marriage, or marriage (either religious or civil) between partners professing different religions, they can do so without disobeying both of these religions.



This section requires expansion. (October 2008)


Warfare[edit]
Main articles: Women and war and History of women in the military
See also: Women in the military by country, Women in combat and Women in the military
Warfare always engaged women as victims and objects of protection.[32][33] During the twentieth century civilian women on the home front became increasingly important in supporting total warfare, as housewives, munitions workers, replacements for men in service, nurses, and combat soldiers.[34]


Part of a series on


Feminism




Women
Girls
Femininity






History



Social




Women's history



Feminist history
History of feminism





Timelines





Women's suffrage

Muslim-majority countries
United States





Other women's rights




Suffrage by country





Australia
Japan
Kuwait
New Zealand
Sweden
Switzerland
United Kingdom
United States

South Carolina
Utah







Waves





First
Second
Third












Variants



Amazon
Analytical
Anarchist
Anti-pornography
Atheist
Black
Chicana
Conservative
Cultural
Cyber
Difference
Eco
Equality
Fat
French

French post-structuralist


Global
Hip-hop
Indigenous

Native American


Individualist
Lesbian
Liberal
Lipstick
Marxist
Material
Maternal
Neo
New
Postcolonial
Postmodern
Poststructural
Pro-life
Proto
Radical
Religious

Buddhist
Christian
Hindu
Islamic
Jewish
Mormon
Neopagan
Sikh


Separatist
Sex-positive
Social
Socialist
Standpoint
Third world
Trans
Transnational
Womanism









Concepts



Movement
Theory
Girl power
Networked feminism
Women's rights
War on Women
Effects on society
Feminism in culture
Political lesbianism
Pro-feminism
Antifeminism
Women's health
Postfeminism
Gender equality
Equality
Revisionist mythology
Male gaze
Femicide
State feminism









Theory






Gender studies
Gender mainstreaming
Gynocentrism
Matriarchy
Women's studies
Men's studies
Kyriarchy
Patriarchy
Écriture féminine





Feminist...





anthropology
archaeology
architecture
art
composition studies
criminology
economics
epistemology
ethics
existentialism
film theory
geography
international relations
legal theory
literary criticism
philosophy
political ecology
political theory
psychology
science fiction
sexology
sociology
technoscience
theology

Thealogy
Womanist theology














By country



Canada
China
Egypt
France
Germany
Greece
India
Indonesia
Iran
Republic of Ireland
Italy
Japan
Mexico
Nepal
Netherlands
Nicaragua
Norway
Poland
Russia
Saudi Arabia
South Korea
Sweden
Taiwan
Ukraine
United Kingdom
United States

history of women











Lists and categories



Lists





Articles
Feminists
Literature



Conservative feminisms
Ecofeminist authors
Feminist economists
Feminist rhetoricians
Suffragists and suffragettes
Women's rights activists
Women's studies journals
Women's suffrage organizations




Categories




Women's rights by country
Feminists by nationality









 Feminism portal





v
t
e





See also[edit]
The following is a list of articles in Wikipedia (and outside links where Wikipedia has no relevant articles) which are either about women's history, or containing relevant information, often in a "History" section.

Days and month of recognition


International Women's Day
Women's Equality Day
Women's History Month


Lists


List of American women's firsts
List of women's firsts
List of women's organizations
List of current and historical women's universities and colleges

A women's college is an institution of higher education where enrollment is all-female. Where formerly all-female institutions have become coeducational, this is noted, along with the year the enrollment policy was changed.


List of feminists
List of 20th century women artists
List of women who sparked a revolution


Timelines


Timeline of feminism
Timeline of feminism in the United States
Timeline of first-wave feminism worldwide
Timeline of second-wave feminism worldwide
Timeline of third-wave feminism worldwide
Timeline of women in basketball worldwide
Timeline of women's colleges in America
Timeline of women's colleges in America historically for black students
Timeline of women in computing worldwide
Timeline of women in ancient warfare worldwide
Timeline of women in warfare in the Postclassical Era worldwide
Timeline of women in warfare in the early modern era worldwide
Timeline of women in warfare from 1750 until 1799 in America
Timeline of women in warfare from 1750 until 1799 worldwide
Timeline of women in warfare in the 19th century in America
Timeline of women in warfare in the 19th century worldwide
Timeline of women in warfare from 1900 until 1939 in America
Timeline of women in warfare from 1900 until 1939 worldwide
Timeline of women in warfare from 1940 until 1944 worldwide
Timeline of women in warfare from 1945 until 1999 in America
Timeline of women in warfare from 1945 until 1999 worldwide
Timeline of women in warfare from 2000 until the present in America
Timeline of women in warfare from 2000 until the present worldwide
Timeline of women hazzans in America
Timeline of women hazzans worldwide
Timeline of women in dentistry in America
Timeline of women in dentistry worldwide
Timeline of women in education in America
Timeline of women in education worldwide
Timeline of women in mathematics in America
Timeline of women in mathematics worldwide
Timeline of women's ordination in America
Timeline of women's ordination worldwide
Timeline of women in religion in America
Timeline of women in religion
Timeline of women in science in America
Timeline of women in sports in America
Timeline of women in sports worldwide
Timeline of women in the history of America
Timeline of women lawyers
Timeline of women lawyers in the United States
Timeline of women rabbis in America
Timeline of women rabbis worldwide
Timeline of women suffrage in America
Timeline of women suffrage worldwide


General


Family history
Gender history
History of feminism


Political and legal


Equal Rights Amendment

A proposed amendment to the United States Constitution which would have guaranteed equal rights under law for Americans regardless of sex.


Women's suffrage.
Suffragette

Suffragettes are members of the women's suffrage movement in the Britain. Suffragist is a more general term for members of the movement, whether radical or conservative. American women preferred "suffragist" because of the violent connotations of the British "suffragette".


A History of Woman Suffrage

A history book of the suffrage movement, primarily in the United States, composed of six volumes from 1887 to 1922.


Men's League for Women's Suffrage
Woman's Christian Temperance Union

The Woman's Christian Temperance Union (WCTU) is the oldest continuing non-sectarian women's organization in the US and worldwide.


The Subjection of Women


Sexuality


Sexuality and gender identity-based cultures

It concerns the culture, knowledge, and references shared by various people by virtue of their membership in a minorities or their state of being transgendered.


Effeminacy

Effeminacy is character trait of a male showing femininity, unmanliness, womanliness, weakness, softness and/or a delicacy, which contradicts traditional masculine, male gender roles.




Research


Schlesinger Library
The Feminist Library (London)
The Women's Library (London)
GENESIS

Guide to sources for women's history in the British Isles
Leonore Davidoff, co-founder of The Feminist Library, and teacher of the first MA in the UK on women's history




Other


Demography, the study of human population dynamics. It encompasses the study of the size, structure and distribution of populations, and how populations change over time due to births, deaths, migration and aging.
Herstory
History of feminism
UNICEF
Women in the Middle Ages
Women-led uprisings

References[edit]


^ June Purvis, "Women's History Today," History Today, Nov 2004, Vol. 54 Issue 11, pp 40-42
^ Norton, Alexander, Block, Mary Beth, Ruth M., Sharon (2014). Major Problems in American Women's History. Stanford, Connecticut: CENGAGE Learning. p.&#160;1. ISBN&#160;978-1-133-95599-3.&#160;
^ Maria Bucor, "An Archipelago of Stories: Gender History in Eastern Europe," American Historical Review, Dec 2008, Vol. 113 Issue 5, pp 1375-1389
^ Andrea Petö and Judith Szapor, "The State of Women's and Gender History in Eastern Europe: The Case of Hungary," Journal of Women's History, Spring 2007, Vol. 19 Issue 1, pp 160-166
^ Françoise Thébaud, "Writing Women's and Gender History in France: A National Narrative?" Journal of Women's History, Spring 2007, Vol. 19 Issue 1, pp 167-172.
^ Jennifer J. Popiel, "Making Mothers: The Advice Genre and the Domestic Ideal, 1760-1830", Journal of Family History 2004 29(4): 339-350
^ Carolyn C. Lougee, "'Noblesse,' Domesticity, and Social Reform: The Education of Girls by Fenelon and Saint-Cyr", History of Education Quarterly 1974 14(1): 87-113
^ a b William W. Hagen, German History in Modern Times (2012)
^ Eva Kolinsky and Wilfried van der Will, The Cambridge Companion to Modern German Culture (1998)
^ Renate Bridenthal, Atina Grossmann, and Marion Kaplan, When Biology Became Destiny: Women in Weimar and Nazi Germany (1984)
^ Jill Stephenson, Women in Nazi Germany (2001)
^ Campbell, D'Ann. "Women in Combat: The World War Two Experience in the United States, Great Britain, Germany, and the Soviet Union" (PDF). Journal of Military History (April 1993), 57:301-323.&#160; (online edition)
^ Claudia Koonz, Mothers in the Fatherland: Women, the Family and Nazi Politics (1988)
^ "Spots of Light: Women in the Holocaust". online exhibition, Yad Vashem.&#160;
^ Gail Hershatter, Women in China's Long Twentieth Century (2007)
^ Gail Hershatter, and Zheng Wang, "Chinese History: A Useful Category of Gender Analysis," American Historical Review, Dec 2008, Vol. 113 Issue 5, pp 1404-1421
^ zh:中國婦女生活史
^ Susan Mann, "Scene-Setting: Writing Biography in Chinese History," American Historical Review, June 2009, Vol. 114 Issue 3, pp 631-639
^ Carole McGranahan, "Narrative Dispossession: Tibet and the Gendered Logics of Historical Possibility," Comparative Studies in Society and History, Oct 2010, Vol. 52 Issue 4, pp 768-797
^ Hiroko Tomida, "The Evolution Of Japanese Women's Historiography," Japan Forum, July 1996, Vol. 8 Issue 2, pp 189-203
^ [1], UK Department of International Development[dead link]
^ Gaines M. Foster, Ghosts of the Confederacy: Defeat, the Lost Cause and the Emergence of the New South, 1865-1913 (1985) p 30
^ Jacquelyn Dowd Hall, "'You must remember this': Autobiography as social critique." Journal of American History (1998): 439-465 at p 450. in JSTOR
^ Bonnie G. Smith, "Women's History: A Retrospective from the United States," Signs: Journal of Women in Culture &amp; Society, Spring 2010, Vol. 35 Issue 3, pp 723-747
^ Debra Taczanowsky. "Debra Taczanowsky | Women making inroads, but still fighting for equality - The Tribune-Democrat: Editorials". Tribdem.com. Retrieved 2015-11-02.&#160;
^ "Master of Arts in Women's History | Sarah Lawrence College". Sarahlawrence.edu. Retrieved 2015-11-02.&#160;
^ Jessica Millward, "More History Than Myth: African American Women's History Since the Publication of 'Ar'n't I a Woman?'" Journal of Women's History, Summer 2007, Vol. 19 Issue 2, pp 161-167
^ Mary E. Frederickson, "Going Global: New Trajectories in U.S. Women's History," History Teacher, Feb 2010, Vol. 43 Issue 2, pp 169-189
^ a b Block, Sharon; Norton, Mary Beth; Alexander, Ruth M. (2014). "1". In Paterson, Thomas G. Major Problems in American Women's History. CT: Cengage Learning. p.&#160;20. ISBN&#160;978-1-133-95599-3.&#160; |access-date= requires |url= (help)
^ Mary Lowenthal Felstiner, "Seeing 'The Second Sex' Through the Second Wave," Feminist Studies (1980) 6#2 pp 247-276
^ Blevins, Carolyn DeArmond, Women in Christian History: A Bibliography. Macon, Georgia: Mercer Univ Press, 1995. ISBN 0-86554-493-X
^ Jean Bethe Elshtain, Women and War (1995)
^ Jean Bethe Elshtain and Sheila Tobias, eds., Women, Militarism, and War (1990)
^ Bernard Cook, ed, Women and War: Historical Encyclopedia from Antiquity to the Present (2 vol, 2006)


Further reading[edit]
World[edit]

Clay, Catherine, Christine Senecal, and Chandrika Paul, eds. Envisioning Women in World History: Prehistory to 1500 (2008)

McVay, Pamela. Envisioning Women in World History: 1500-Present (2008)


Helgren, Jennifer, and Colleen A. Vasconcellos, eds. Girlhood: A Global History (Rutgers University Press; 2010) 422 pages; interdisciplinary essays on girlhood on six continents since 1750.
Offen, Karen M., ed. Writing women's history: international perspectives (Indiana UP, 1991) online edition
Stearns, Peter. Gender in World History (2nd ed. 2006) excerpt and text search

Primary sources[edit]

Hughes, Sarah S., and Brady Hughes, eds. Women in World History: Readings from Prehistory to 1500 (1995); Women in World History: Readings from 1500 to the Present (1997)

Ancient[edit]

Pomeroy, Sarah B. Women's History and Ancient History (1991) online edition

Asia[edit]

Edwards, Louise, and Mina Roces, eds. Women in Asia: Tradition, Modernity and Globalisation (Allen &amp; Unwin, 2000) online edition
Ramusack, Barbara N., and Sharon Sievers, eds. Women in Asia: Restoring Women to History (1999) excerpt and text search

China[edit]

Ebrey, Patricia. The Inner Quarters: Marriage and the Lives of Chinese Women in the Sung Period (1990)
Hershatter, Gail, and Wang Zheng. "Chinese History: A Useful Category of Gender Analysis," American Historical Review, Dec 2008, Vol. 113 Issue 5, pp 1404–1421
Hershatter, Gail. Women in China's Long Twentieth Century (2007), full text online
Hershatter, Gail, Emily Honig, Susan Mann, and Lisa Rofel, eds. Guide to Women's Studies in China (1998) online edition
Ko, Dorothy. Teachers of Inner Chambers: Women and Culture in China, 1573-1722 (1994)
Mann, Susan. Precious Records: Women in China's Long Eighteenth Century (1997)
Wang, Shuo. "The 'New Social History' in China: The Development of Women's History," History Teacher, May 2006, Vol. 39 Issue 3, pp 315–323

Europe[edit]

Anderson, Bonnie S. and Judith P. Zinsser. A History of Their Own: Women in Europe from Prehistory to the Present (2nd ed 2000)
Boxer, Marilyn J. Boxer, Jean H. Quataert, and Joan W. Scott, eds. ''Connecting Spheres: European Women in a Globalizing World, 1500 to the Present (2000), essays by scholars excerpt and text search
Bridenthal, Renate, Susan Stuard, and Merry E. Wiesner-Hanks eds. Becoming Visible: Women in European History (3rd ed. 1997), 608pp; essays by scholars
Fairchilds, Cissie. Women in Early Modern Europe, 1500-1700 (2007) excerpt and text search
Fout, John C. German Women in the Nineteenth Century: A Social History (1984) online edition
Hall, Valerie G. "Women At Work, 1860-1939: How Different Industries Shaped Women's Experiences"[Boydell &amp; Brewer Ltd, 2013] ISBN 978-1-84383-870-8. [2]
Herzog, Dagmar. Sexuality in Europe: A Twentieth-Century History (2011) excerpt and text search
Hufton, Olwen. The Prospect Before Her: A History of Women in Western Europe, 1500-1800 (1996) excerpt and text search
Levy, Darline Gay, et al. eds. Women in Revolutionary Paris, 1789-1795 (1981) 244pp excerpt and text search; primary sources
Offen, Karen M. European feminisms, 1700-1950: a political history (2000) online edition
Offen, Karen. "Surveying European Women's History since the Millenium: A Comparative Review", Journal of Women's History Volume 22, Number 1, Spring 2010 doi:10.1353/jowh.0.13
Smith, Bonnie. Changing Lives: Women in European History Since 1700 (1988)
Stearns, Peter, ed. Encyclopedia of European Social History from 1350 to 2000 (6 vol 2000), 209 essays by leading scholars in 3000 pp.; many aspects of women's history covered
Tilly, Louise A. and Joan W. Scott. Women, Work, and Family (1978)
Ward, Jennifer. Women in Medieval Europe: 1200-1500 (2003)
Wiesner-Hanks, Merry E. Women and Gender in Early Modern Europe (2008) excerpt and text search

Primary sources: Europe[edit]

DiCaprio, Lisa, and Merry E. Wiesner, eds. Lives and Voices: Sources in European Women's History (2000) excerpt and text search
Hughes, Sarah S., and Brady Hughes, eds. Women in World History: Readings from Prehistory to 1500 (1995), 270pp; Women in World History: Readings from 1500 to the Present (1997) 296pp; primary sources

Canada[edit]

Cook, Sharon Anne; McLean, Lorna; and O'Rourke, Kate, eds. Framing Our Past: Canadian Women's History in the Twentieth Century. (2001). 498 pp.
Strong-Boag, Veronica and Fellman, Anita Clair, eds. Rethinking Canada: The Promise of Women's History. (3d ed. 1997). 498 pp.
Prentice, Alison and Trofimenkoff, Susan Mann, eds. The Neglected Majority: Essays in Canadian Women's History (2 vol 1985)

United States[edit]
Surveys[edit]

Banner, Lois. Women in modern America: a brief history. San Diego 1984
Daniel, Robert L. American women in the twentieth century San Diego 1987
Dayton, Cornelia H., and Lisa Levenstein, “The Big Tent of U.S. Women’s and Gender History: A State of the Field,” Journal of American History, 99 (Dec. 2012), 793–817.
Degler, Carl. At Odds: Women and the Family in America from the Revolution to the Present (1980).
Diner, Hasia, ed. Encyclopedia of American Women's History (2010)
Feimster, Crystal N., “The Impact of Racial and Sexual Politics on Women’s History,” Journal of American History, 99 (Dec. 2012), 822–26.
Hewitt, Nancy A. A Companion to American Women's History (2005) excerpt and text search
Kerber, Linda K.; Kessler-Harris, Alice; and Sklar, Kathryn Kish, eds. U.S. History as Women's History: New Feminist Essays. (1995). 477 pp. online edition
Kessler-Harris, Alice. Out to Work: A History of Wage-Earning Women in the United States (2003) excerpt and text search
Melosh, Barbara. Gender and American History since 1890 (1993) online edition
Miller, Page Putnam, ed. Reclaiming the Past: Landmarks of Women's History. (1992). 232 pp.
Pleck, Elizabeth H. and Nancy F. Cott, eds. A Heritage of Her Own: Toward a New Social History of American Women (2008), essays by scholars excerpt and text search; online edition
Riley, Glenda. Inventing the American Woman: An Inclusive History (2001) vol 2 online edition
Woloch, Nancy. Women and The American Experience, A Concise History (2001)
Zophy, Angela Howard, ed. Handbook of American Women's History. (2nd ed. 2000). 763 pp. articles by experts

Specific studies[edit]

Brown, Kathleen M. Good Wives, Nasty Wenches, and Anxious Patriarchs: Gender, Race, and Power in Colonial Virginia (1996)
Campbell, D'Ann. Women at War with America: Private Lives in a Public Era, (1984), World War II; covers housewives, nurses, Wacs, war-workers
Mintz, Steven, and Susan Kellogg. Domestic Revolutions: A Social History of American Family Life (1988), 316pp; the standard scholarly history excerpt and text search

Primary sources: U.S.[edit]

Berkin, Carol and Horowitz, Leslie, eds. Women's Voices, Women's Lives: Documents in Early American History. (1998). 203 pp.
DuBois, Ellen Carol and Ruiz, Vicki L., eds. Unequal Sisters: A Multi-Cultural Reader in U.S. Women's History. (1994). 620 pp.

Historiography[edit]

Amico, Eleanor, ed. Reader's Guide to Women's Studies (1997) 762pp; advanced guide to scholarship on 200+ topics
Dayton, Cornelia H.; Levenstein, Lisa. "The Big Tent of U.S. Women's and Gender History: A State of the Field," Journal of American History (2012) 99#3 pp 793–817
Frederickson, Mary E. "Going Global: New Trajectories in U.S. Women's History," History Teacher, Feb 2010, Vol. 43 Issue 2, p169-189
Hershatter, Gail, and Wang Zheng. "Chinese History: A Useful Category of Gender Analysis," American Historical Review, Dec 2008, Vol. 113 Issue 5, pp 1404–1421
Hewitt, Nancy A. ed. A Companion to American Women’s History (2005).
Meade, Teresa A., and Merry Wiesner-Hanks, eds. A Companion to Gender History (2006) excerpt and text search
Offen, Karen. "Surveying European Women's History since the Millenium: A Comparative Review," Journal of Women's History, Volume 22, Number 1, Spring 2010, pp.&#160;154–177 doi:10.1353/jowh.0.0131
Offen, Karen; Pierson, Ruth Roach; and Rendall, Jane, eds. Writing Women's History: International Perspectives (1991). 552 pp. online edition
Petö, Andrea, and Judith Szapor, "The State of Women's and Gender History in Eastern Europe: The Case of Hungary," Journal of Women's History, Spring 2007, Vol. 19 Issue 1, pp 160–166
Scott, Joan Wallach. Gender and the Politics of History (1999), influential essays excerpt and text search
Spongberg, Mary. Writing Women's History Since the Renaissance. (2003) 308 pages; on Europe
Thébaud, Françoise. "Writing Women's and Gender History in France: A National Narrative?" Journal of Women's History, (2007) 19#1 pp 167–172.
Traister, Bryce. "Academic Viagra: The Rise of American Masculinity Studies," American Quarterly 52 (2000): 274–304 in JSTOR

External links[edit]


Library resources about
Women's history





Online books
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries







Wikimedia Commons has media related to Women in history.



Timeline of women's history worldwide by the Encyclopædia Britannica
Today in Women's History
The Gerritsen Collection - Women's History Online
Feminist Majority Foundation timeline
Genesis: a mapping initiative to identify and develop access to women's history sources in the British Isles
Places Where Women Made History, a National Park Service Discover Our Shared Heritage Travel Itinerary
Women in World History









v
t
e


Feminist theory






Academic fields



Anthropology
Archaeology
Architecture
Composition studies
Criminology
Economics
Epistemology
Ethics
Existentialism
Film theory
Geography
History
International relations (constructivism)
Legal theory
Literary criticism
Philosophy
Political ecology
Political theory
Postmodernism
Psychology
Sexology
Sociology
Technoscience
Theology









Feminism portal










Related subjects



Ecofeminism
Hegemonic masculinity
Women's history
Women's studies








Feminist theorists



Elizabeth Anderson
Simone de Beauvoir
Wendy Brown
Judith Butler
Hélène Cixous
Andrea Dworkin
Cynthia Enloe
Martha Fineman
Nancy Fraser
Germaine Greer
Donna Haraway
Sandra Harding
Luce Irigaray
Julia Kristeva
Catharine MacKinnon
Martha Nussbaum
Val Plumwood
Avital Ronell
Diana E. H. Russell
Dorothy E. Smith
Marilyn Waring















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Women%27s_history&amp;oldid=690096834"					
				Categories: History by topicHistoryWomen's historyHidden categories: All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from June 2014Pages using citations with accessdate and no URLVague or ambiguous geographic scope from April 2015Articles containing simplified Chinese-language textArticles containing traditional Chinese-language textArticles to be expanded from October 2008All articles to be expandedCommons category without a link on Wikidata				
							
		
		
			Navigation menu

			
									
						Personal tools
						
							Create accountLog in						
					
									
										
						Namespaces
						
															Article
															Talk
													
					
										
												
							Variants
						

						
							
															
						
					
									
				
										
						Views
						
															Read
															Edit
															View history
													
					
										
						More

						
							
															
						
					
										
						
							Search
						

						
							
														
						
					
									
			
			
				
						
			Navigation

			
									
						Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store					
							
		
			
			Interaction

			
									
						HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page					
							
		
			
			Tools

			
									
						What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page					
							
		
			
			Print/export

			
									
						Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version					
							
		
			
			Languages

			
									
						БългарскиCatalàEspañolFrançaisनेपाली日本語PolskiPortuguêsSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSuomiதமிழ்					
				Edit links			
		
				
		
		
							
											 This page was last modified on 11 November 2015, at 07:29.
											Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
									
							
											Privacy policy
											About Wikipedia
											Disclaimers
											Contact Wikipedia
											Developers
											