


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Amorites
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								  (Redirected from Amorite)
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				"Amorite" redirects here. For the language, see Amorite language.





It has been suggested that Amurru kingdom be merged into this article. (Discuss) Proposed since July 2014.


The Amorites (/ˈæməˌraɪts/; Sumerian 𒈥𒌅 MAR.TU; Akkadian Tidnum or Amurrūm; Egyptian Amar; Hebrew אמורי ʼĔmōrī; Ancient&#160;Greek: Ἀμορραῖοι) were an ancient Semitic-speaking people[1] from ancient Syria who also occupied large parts of southern Mesopotamia from the 21st century BC to the end of the 17th century BC, where they established several prominent city states in existing locations, notably Babylon which was raised from a small administrative town to an independent state and major city. The term Amurru in Akkadian and Sumerian texts refers to them, as well as to their principal deity.



Contents


1 Origin
2 History

2.1 Effects on Mesopotamia
2.2 Downfall of the Amorites
2.3 Amorite states


3 Biblical Amorites
4 Indo-European hypothesis
5 References
6 External links



Origin[edit]
In the earliest Sumerian sources concerning the Amorites, beginning about 2400 BC, the land of the Amorites ("the Mar.tu land") is associated not with Mesopotamia but with the lands to the west of the Euphrates, including Canaan and what was to become Syria.
They appear as an uncivilized and nomadic people in early Mesopotamian writings from Sumer, Akkad and Assyria, especially connected with the mountainous region of Jebel Bishri in northern Syria called the "mountain of the Amorites". The ethnic terms Amurru and Amar were used for them in Sumerian, Akkadian and Ancient Egyptian respectively. From the 21st century BC, possibly triggered by a long major drought starting about 2200 BC, a large-scale migration of Amorite tribes infiltrated southern Mesopotamia. They were one of the instruments of the downfall of the Sumerian Third Dynasty of Ur, and Amorite dynasties both usurped native Sumero-Akkadian rulers of long extant south Mesopotamian city states (such as Isin, Larsa, Eshnunna and Kish), and also established new city-states, the most famous of which was to become Babylon, although it was initially a minor and insignificant state.
Known Amorites wrote in a dialect of Akkadian found on tablets at Mari dating from 1800–1750 BC. Since the language shows northwest Semitic forms, words and constructions, the Amorite language is believed to be a northwest branch of the Canaanite languages, whose other members were Hebrew, Phoenician, Edomite, Moabite, Ammonite, Sutean, Punic/Carthaginian and Amalekite. The main sources for the extremely limited knowledge about Amorite are the proper names, not Akkadian in style, that are preserved in such texts. The Akkadian language of the native Semites of Mesopotamia (Akkad, Assyria, Isin, Larsa, Ur etc.), was from the east Semitic, as was Eblaite.
History[edit]
In the earliest Sumerian texts, all western lands beyond the Euphrates, including modern Syria and Canaan, were known as "the land of the MAR.TU (Amorites)". This term appears in Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta, which describes it in the time of Enmerkar as one of the regions inhabited by speakers of a different language. Another text known as Lugalbanda and the Anzud bird describes how, fifty years into Enmerkar's reign, the Martu people arose in Sumer and Akkad, (southern Mesopotamia) necessitating the building of a wall to protect Uruk.
There are also sparse mentions in tablets from the East Semitic speaking kingdom of Ebla, dating from 2500 BC to the destruction of the city ca. 2250 BC: from the perspective of the east Semitic speaking Eblaites, the Amorites were a rural group living in the narrow basin of the middle and upper Euphrates in northern Syria.[2] For the Akkadian kings of central Mesopotamia Mar.tu was one of the "Four Quarters" surrounding Akkad, along with Subartu/Assyria, Sumer, and Elam. The Akkadian king Naram-Sin records successful campaigns against them in northern Syria ca. 2240 BC, and his successor Shar-Kali-Sharri followed suit.
By the time of the last days of the Neo-Sumerian Empire, immigrating Amorites had become such a force that kings such as Shu-Sin were obliged to construct a 170 miles (270&#160;km) long wall from the Tigris to the Euphrates to hold them off.[3] These Amorites appear as nomadic clans ruled by fierce tribal chiefs, who forced themselves into lands they needed to graze their herds. Some of the Akkadian literature of this era speaks disparagingly of the Amorites, and implies that the Akkadian and Sumerian speakers of Mesopotamia viewed their nomadic and primitive way of life with disgust and contempt, for example:

The MAR.TU who know no grain... The MAR.TU who know no house nor town, the boors of the mountains... The MAR.TU who digs up truffles... who does not bend his knees (to cultivate the land), who eats raw meat, who has no house during his lifetime, who is not buried after death...[4]


They have prepared wheat and gú-nunuz (grain) as a confection, but an Amorite will eat it without even recognizing what it contains![5]

As the centralized structure of the Neo-Sumerian Empire slowly collapsed, the component regions, such as Assyria in the north, and the city-states of the south (such as Isin, Larsa and Eshnunna) began to reassert their former independence, and areas in southern Mesopotamia where Amorites resided were no exception. Elsewhere, the armies of Elam in southern Ancient Iran were attacking and weakening the empire, making it vulnerable.
Many Amorite chieftains in southern Mesopotamia aggressively took advantage of the failing empire to seize power for themselves. There was not an Amorite invasion of southern Mesopotamia as such, but Amorites did ascend to power in many locations, especially during the reign of the last king of the Neo-Sumerian Empire, Ibbi-Sin. Leaders with Amorite names assumed power in various places, usurping native Akkadian rulers, including in Isin, Eshnunna and Larsa. Babylon, hitherto a small, politically and military unimportant town was raised to the status of a minor independent city state under Sumuabum in 1894 BC.
The Elamites finally sacked Ur in ca. 2004 BC. Some time later, the Old Assyrian Empire became the most powerful entity in Mesopotamia immediately preceding the rise of the Amorite king Hammurabi of Babylon. The Assyrian monarchy was founded by ca. 1975 BC; their kings repelled attempted Amorite incursions, and may have countered their influence in the south as well under Ilushuma. However, eventually even Assyria found its throne usurped by an Amorite in 1809 BC: the latter two rulers of the Old Assyrian Empire period, Shamshi-Adad I and Ishme-Dagan, were Amorites who originated in Terqa (now in modern Syria).
There is a wide range of views regarding the Amorite homeland.[6] One extreme is the view that kur mar.tu/māt amurrim covered the whole area between the Euphrates and the Mediterranean, the Arabian peninsula included. The other extreme is the view that the “homeland” of the Amorites was a limited area in northern Syria (Jebel Bishri). Since the Amorite language is one of the Canaanite languages, a branch of the Northwestern Semitic languages, as opposed to the South Semitic languages found in the Arabian peninsula, they are usually considered native to the region around Syria.
Effects on Mesopotamia[edit]
The rise of the Amorite kingdoms in Mesopotamia brought about deep and lasting repercussions in its political, social, and economic structure, especially in southern Mesopotamia.
The division into kingdoms replaced the Sumero-Akkadian city-state in southern Mesopotamia. Men, land, and cattle ceased to belong physically to the gods or to the temples and the king. The new Amorite monarchs gave, or let out for an indefinite period, numerous parcels of royal or sacerdotal land, freed the inhabitants of several cities from taxes and forced labour, and seem to have encouraged a new society to emerge, a society of big farmers, free citizens, and enterprising merchants which was to last throughout the ages. The priest assumed the service of the gods, and cared for the welfare of his subjects, but the economic life of the country was no longer exclusively (or almost exclusively) in their hands.
In general terms, Mesopotamian civilization survived the arrival of Amorites, as the indigenous Sumero-Akkadian civilization had survived the short period of Gutian domination of the south during the restless period that had preceded the rise of the Third Dynasty of Ur (Neo-Sumerian Empire). The religious, ethical, technological, scientific and artistic directions in which Mesopotamia had been developing since the fourth millennium BC, were not greatly impacted by the Amorites' hegemony. They continued to worship the Sumero-Akkadian gods, and the older Sumerian myths and epic tales were piously copied, translated, or adapted, generally with only minor alterations. As for the scarce artistic production of the period, there is little to distinguish it from the preceding Ur III era.
The era of the Amorite kingdoms, ca. 2000–1595 BC, is sometimes known as the "Amorite period" in Mesopotamian history. The principal Amorite dynasties arose in Mari, Yamkhad, Qatna, fairly briefly in Assyria (under Shamshi-Adad I), Isin, Larsa, and also Babylon, which was founded as a small independent state by an Amorite named Sumuabum in 1894 BC.
Babylon, originally a minor state upon its founding in 1894 BC, became for a short period the major power in the ancient world under the reign of Hammurabi in the first part of the 18th century BC, and it was from this period that southern Mesopotamia came to be known as Babylonia, the north long before having evolved into Assyria.
Downfall of the Amorites[edit]
This era ended in northern Mesopotamia with the defeat and expulsion of the Amorites and Amorite dominated Babylonians from Assyria by Puzur-Sin and king Adasi between 1740 and 1735 BC, in the far south by the rise of the native Sealand Dynasty circa 1730 BC. The Amorites clung on in a once more small and weak Babylon until the Hittite sack of Babylon (c. 1595 BC) which ended the Amorite presence, and brought new ethnic groups—particularly the Kassites—to the forefront in southern Mesopotamia. From the 15th century BC onward, the term Amurru is usually applied to the region extending north of Canaan as far as Kadesh on the Orontes in northern Syria.
After their expulsion from Mesopotamia, the Amorites of Syria came under the domination of first the Hittite Empire and from the 14th century BC, the Middle Assyrian Empire. They appear to have been displaced or absorbed by a new wave of semi nomadic West Semitic speaking Semites, the Arameans, from circa 1200 BC onwards, and thus disappeared from the pages of history. From this period the region they had inhabited became known as Aram (Aramea).
Amorite states[edit]



In the Levant:

Amurru kingdom
Yamhad
Qatna
Ebla's Third Dynasty



In Mesopotamia:

First Babylonian Dynasty
Mari's Lim Dynasty
Apum
Kurda
Andarig




Biblical Amorites[edit]




Destruction of the Army of the Amorites by Gustave Doré.


The term Amorites is used in the Bible to refer to certain highland mountaineers who inhabited the land of Canaan, described in Genesis 10:16 as descendants of Canaan, son of Ham. They are described as a powerful people of great stature "like the height of the cedars," (Amos 2:9) who had occupied the land east and west of the Jordan. The height and strength mentioned in Amos 2:9 has led some Christian scholars, including Orville J. Nave, who wrote the classic Nave's Topical Bible to refer to the Amorites as "giants."[7]
The Amorite king, Og, was described as the last "of the remnant of the Rephaim" (Deut. 3:11). The terms Amorite and Canaanite seem to be used more or less interchangeably, Canaan being more general and Amorite a specific component among the Canaanites who inhabited the land.
The Biblical Amorites seem to have originally occupied the region stretching from the heights west of the Dead Sea (Gen. 14:7) to Hebron (13:8; Deut. 3:8; 4:46–48), embracing "all Gilead and all Bashan" (Deut. 3:10), with the Jordan valley on the east of the river (4:49), the land of the "two kings of the Amorites," Sihon and Og (Deut. 31:4; Josh. 2:10; 9:10). Both Sihon and Og were independent kings. These Amorites seem to have been linked to the Jerusalem region, and the Jebusites may have been a subgroup of them (Ezek. 16:3). The southern slopes of the mountains of Judea are called the "mount of the Amorites" (Deut. 1:7, 19, 20).
Five kings of the Amorites were first defeated with great slaughter by Joshua (10:10). Then more Amorite kings were defeated at the waters of Merom by Joshua (Josh. 11:8). It is mentioned that in the days of Samuel, there was peace between them and the Israelites (1 Sam. 7:14). The Gibeonites were said to be their descendants, being an offshoot of the Amorites who made a covenant with the Hebrews; when Saul later broke that vow and killed some of the Gibeonites, God sent a famine to Israel.
Indo-European hypothesis[edit]
The view that Amorites were fierce, tall nomads led to an idiosyncratic theory among some writers in the 19th century that they were a tribe of "Aryan" warriors who at one point dominated the Israelites. This was because the evidence fitted then-current models of Indo-European migrations. This theory originated with Felix von Luschan, who later abandoned it.[8]
Houston Stewart Chamberlain claimed that King David and Jesus were both Aryans of Amorite extraction. This argument was repeated by the Nazi ideologue Alfred Rosenberg.[9]
In reality the Amorites are known to have exclusively spoken a Semitic language, followed Near Eastern Semitic religions and had distinctly Semitic personal names. Their origins were believed to have been the lands immediately to the west of Mesopotamia, in the Levant (modern Syria).[10][11][12]
References[edit]


^ "Amorite (people)". Encyclopedia Britannica online. Encyclopedia Britannica Inc. Retrieved 30 November 2012.&#160;
^ Giorgio Bucellati, "Ebla and the Amorites", Eblaitica 3 (1992):83-104.
^ William H. Stiebing Jr. Ancient Near Eastern History And Culture Longman: New York, 2003: 79
^ Chiera 1934: 58 and 112
^ Chiera 1934: 3
^ Alfred Haldar, Who Were the Amorites (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1971), p. 7
^ Nave's Topical Bible: Amorites, Nave, Orville J., Retrieved:2013-03-14
^ "Are the Jews a Race?" by Sigmund Feist in "Jews and Race: Writings on Identity and Difference, 1880-1940", edited by Mitchell Bryan Hart, UPNE, 2011, p. 88
^ [1] Hans Jonas, New York Review of Books, 1981
^ Who Were the Amorites?, by Alfred Haldar, 1971, Brill Archive
^ Semitic Studies, Volume 1, by Alan Kaye, Otto Harrassowitz Verlag, 1991, p.867
^ The Semitic Languages, by Stefan Weninger, Walter de Gruyter, 23 Dec 2011, p.361



E. Chiera, Sumerian Epics and Myths, Chicago, 1934, Nos.58 and 112;
E. Chiera, Sumerian Texts of Varied Contents, Chicago, 1934, No.3.;
H. Frankfort, AAO, pp.&#160;54–8;
F.R. Fraus, FWH, I (1954);
G. Roux, Ancient Iraq, London, 1980.

External links[edit]

Amorites in the Jewish Encyclopedia









v
t
e


Ancient Syria and Mesopotamia











Syria
Northern Mesopotamia
Southern Mesopotamia


c. 3500–2350 BCE
Martu
Subartu
Sumerian city-states


c. 2350–2200 BCE
Akkadian Empire


c. 2200–2100 BCE
Gutians


c. 2100–2000 BCE
Third Dynasty of Ur (Sumerian Renaissance)


c. 2000–1800 BCE
Mari and other Amorite city-states
Old Assyrian Empire (Northern Akkadians)
Isin/Larsa and other Amorite city-states


c. 1800–1600 BCE
Old Hittite Kingdom
Old Babylonian Empire (Southern Akkadians)


c. 1600–1400 BCE
Mitanni (Hurrians)
Karduniaš (Kassites)


c. 1400–1200 BCE
New Hittite Kingdom

Middle Assyrian Empire


c. 1200–1150 BCE
Bronze Age collapse ("Sea Peoples")
Arameans


c. 1150–911 BCE
Phoenicia
Syro-Hittite states
Aram-
Damascus
Arameans
Middle Babylonia (Isin II)
Chal
de-
ans


911–729 BCE
Neo-Assyrian Empire


729–609 BCE




626–539 BCE
Neo-Babylonian Empire (Chaldeans)


539–331 BCE
Achaemenid Empire (Persians)


336–301 BCE
Macedonian Empire (Ancient Greeks)


311–129 BCE
Seleucid Empire


129–63 BCE
Seleucid Empire
Parthian Empire (Iranians)


63 BCE–243 CE
Roman Empire/Byzantine Empire (Syria)


243–636 CE
Sasanian Empire (Persians)

















v
t
e


Ancient Mesopotamia






Geography




Modern



Euphrates
Jezirah
Mesopotamian Marshes
Persian Gulf
Syrian Desert
Taurus Mountains
Tigris
Zagros Mountains








Ancient



Akkad
Assyria
Babylonia
Chaldea
Elam
Hatti
Media
Mitanni
Sumer
Urartu
Cities














History




Pre- / Protohistory



Acheulean
Mousterian
Zarzian
Natufian
Pre-Pottery Neolithic A (PPNA)
Pre-Pottery Neolithic B (PPNB)
Hassuna/Samarra
Halaf
Ubaid
Uruk
Jemdet Nasr
Kish civilization








History



Early Dynastic
Akkadian
Ur III
Old Babylonian
Kassite
Neo-Assyrian
Neo-Babylonian
Achaemenid
Seleucid
Parthian
Roman
Sasanian
Muslim conquest











Languages



Akkadian
Amorite
Aramaic
Eblaite
Elamite
Gutian
Hittite
Hurrian
Luwian
Middle Persian
Old Persian
Parthian
Proto-Armenian
Sumerian
Urartian








Culture / Society



Architecture
Art
Cuneiform
Akkadian literature
Sumerian literature
Music
Religion








Archaeology



Looting
Destruction by ISIL/ISIS
Tell









Portal














v
t
e


Iraq&#160;articles






History




Ancient



Sumer
Akkadian Empire
Babylonia
Assyria
Neo-Assyrian Empire
Neo-Babylonian Empire
Achaemenid Assyria
Seleucid Babylonia
Parthian Babylonia
Sassanid Asorestan








638–1958



Muslim conquest of Persia
Abbasid Caliphate
Buyid dynasty
Kara Koyunlu
Ak Koyunlu
Safavids
Ottoman Iraq&#160;(Mamluk dynasty)
Mandatory Iraq
Kingdom of Iraq
Arab Federation








Republic



1958–68
1968–2003
2003–11
2011–present


Arab Socialist Ba'ath Party – Iraq Region&#160;(National Command)
Saddam Hussein
Iran–Iraq War
Invasion of Kuwait
Gulf War
Sanctions
Iraq War

U.S. invasion
Iraqi insurgency
U.S. troop withdrawal


Insurgency since 2011











Geography











Al-Faw Peninsula
Al-Jazira
Districts
Euphrates
Governorates
Hamrin Mountains
Persian Gulf
Islands
Mesopotamia
Mesopotamian Marshes
Places
Shatt al-Arab
Syrian Desert
Tigris
Umm Qasr
Zagros Mountains








Lakes



Habbaniyah
Hammar
Milh
Tharthar
Sawa














Politics







Armed Forces

Army
Air Force
Navy


Constitution
Council of Representatives (legislative)
Elections
Foreign aid
Foreign relations
Government

Council of Ministers
Presidency Council
President
Prime Minister


Human rights

LGBT


Law
Police
Minorities
Political parties
Judiciary

Supreme Court
Supreme Criminal Tribunal
Central Criminal Court


Wars and conflicts











Economy







Central Bank
Dinar (currency)
Infrastructure
Oil Industry
Oil reserves
Reconstruction
Stock Exchange
Telecommunications
Transportation

Roads













Society







Cuisine
Culture
Education

schools


Health

hospitals


Media
Music (Assyrian folk dance)
Sports








Demographics



Iraqis

diaspora


Languages

Arabic
Aramaic
Kurdish
Persian
Turkmen


Minorities

Armenians
Assyrians
Circassians
Kurds
Mandaeans
Persians
Turkmen


Religion

Islam
Christianity
Mandaeism
Yazidis

















Outline
Index



Category
Portal
WikiProject
















v
t
e


Semitic topics






Peoples







Semitic
Soqotri
Hyksos
Amorite
Arab people
Qahtanite
Adnanite
Ishmaelites
Nabataeans
Bahrani people
Emirati people
Jordanian people
Iraqi people
Iranian Arabs
Qatari people
Omani people
Marsh Arabs
Syrian people
Lebanese people

Maronites


Sabians
Sabians of Harran
Arabs in Turkey
Palestinian people
Egyptian people
Libyan people
Tunisian people
Algerian people
Moroccan people
Mauritanian people
Sudanese people
Hadhrami people
Yemeni people
Bedouin
Saracen
Moors
Arma people
Maltese people
Arameans
Mandaeans
Assyrian people
Chaldeans
Mhallami
Habesha people
Amhara people
Argobba people
Gurage people
Harari people
Tigray-Tigrinya people
Tigre people
Arab (Gujarat)
Chaush
Arab diaspora

Ghanaian Arabs
Arabs in Pakistan
Sri Lankan Moors
Arab Indonesians
Arab Singaporean
Arab Filipino
Arab residents in Côte d'Ivoire
Arab Argentine
Arab Brazilian
Arab Mexican
Arab Canadians
Arab diaspora in Colombia
Ecuadorian of Lebanese origin
Arab Chileans
Arab Haitian
Arab American
Arab Venezuelan
Arabs in Europe
Arabs in Bulgaria
Arabs in France
Beur
Arab Dutch
British Arabs
Arabs in Spain
Arabs in Greece
Arabs in Italy
Arabs in Denmark
Arabs in Serbia
Arabs in the Republic of Macedonia
Arabs in Romania
Arabs in Austria
Arabs in Sweden
Arab Australian
Arabs in New Zealand


Israelites
Samaritan
Israelis
Jews

Israeli Jews
Ashkenazi Jews
Mizrahi Jews
Sephardi Jews
Yemenite Jews
Moroccan Jews
Ethiopian Jews


Jewish diaspora

American Jews
Russian Jews
French Jews
British Jews
Polish Jews
Canadian Jews
Australian Jews
South African Jews
Argentine Jews
Brazilian Jews













Politics



Pan-Islamism
Pan-Arabism
Arab nationalism
Arab socialism
Egyptian nationalism
Libyan nationalism
Tunisian nationalism
Algerian nationalism
Syrian nationalism
Iraqi nationalism
Lebanese nationalism

Phoenicianism


Palestinian nationalism
Saudi nationalism
Pan-Semitism
Assyrian nationalism
Jewish religious movements
Jewish political movements

Zionism
Territorialism
Bundism


Canaanism








Origins



Sons of Noah
Shem
Haplogroup IJK (Y-DNA)
Haplogroup IJ (Y-DNA)
Haplogroup J (Y-DNA)
Haplogroup J1 (Y-DNA)
Haplogroup J2 (Y-DNA)
Y-DNA haplogroups by populations of Near East and North Africa
Genetic studies on Jews
Y-chromosomal Aaron








History



Akkadian Empire
Babylonia
Assyria
Neo-Assyrian Empire
Chaldea
Neo-Babylonian Empire
Amorite
Canaan
Phoenicia
Carthage
Edom
Moab
Nabataeans
Palmyrene Empire
Aram-Naharaim
Bit Adini
Paddan Aram
Aram Rehob
Aram Damascus
Kingdom of Israel (united monarchy)
Kingdom of Judah
Kingdom of Israel (Samaria)
Hasmoneans
Herodian kingdom
Herodian Tetrarchy
Davidic line
Sabaeans
Himyarite Kingdom
Kingdom of Awsan
Qataban
Minaeans
Kingdom of Aksum
Zagwe dynasty
Solomonic dynasty
Midian
Qedarite
ʿĀd
Thamud
Lihyan
Lakhmids
Ghassanids
Kindah
Rashidun Caliphate
Umayyad Caliphate
Abbasid Caliphate
Fatimid Caliphate
Arabization
Judaization








Countries



Arab world
Iraq
Yemen
Syria
Jordan
Malta
Lebanon
Palestinian territories1
Bahrain
Algeria
Comoros
Djibouti
Egypt
Libya
Mauritania
Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic1 (Western Sahara)
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Somalia
Sudan
Tunisia
United Arab Emirates
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Israel









Flags and
coats of arms




Pan-Arab colors
Arab flags
Coat of arms of Iraq
Yemen
Syria
Jordan
Lebanon
Tunesia
Algeria
Libya
Mauritania
Morocco
Oman
Palestinian National Authority
Quatar
United Arab Emirates
Saudi Arabia
Kuwait
Bahrain
The Coromos
Egypt
Sudan
Djibouti
Flag of Malta
Malta
Flag of Ethiopia
Emblem of Ethiopia
Flag of Eritrea
Coat of arms of Eritrea
Flag of Israel
Emblem of Israel
Syriac flag
Assyria
Zulfiqar
Takbir
Maltese cross
Hamsa
Tanit
Shamash
Crescent
Cedrus libani
Jambiya
Khanjar
Scimitar
Lion of Judah
Star of David
Menorah (Temple)








Studies



Semitic studies
Semitic Museum
Arabist
Assyriology
Hebraist
Syriacist








Religions



Ancient Semitic religion
Arabian mythology
Assyro-Babylonian religion
Babylonian religion
Canaanite religion
Druze religion
Abrahamic religions
Judaism
Christianity
Islam
Mandaeism
Samaritan religion
Semitic neopaganism








Organizations



Arab League
Arab European League











1 Is a state with limited international recognition















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Amorites&amp;oldid=690668828"					
				Categories: AmoritesCanaanHebrew Bible nationsSemitic peoplesFertile CrescentAncient peoplesHidden categories: Articles to be merged from July 2014All articles to be mergedArticles containing Ancient Greek-language text				
							
		
		
			