


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Ancestor
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								  (Redirected from Ancestry)
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				"Ancestry" redirects here. For the genealogy website, see Ancestry.com.
For other uses, see Ancestor (disambiguation).





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2009)


An ancestor or forebear is a parent or (recursively) the parent of an ancestor (i.e., a grandparent, great-grandparent, great-great-grandparent, and so forth). Ancestor is "any person from whom one is descended. In law the person from whom an estate has been inherited."[1]
Two individuals have a genetic relationship if one is the ancestor of the other, or if they share a common ancestor from the past. In evolutionary theory, species which share an evolutionary ancestor are said to be of common descent. However, this concept of ancestry does not apply to some bacteria and other organisms capable of horizontal gene transfer.
Assuming that all of an individual's ancestors are otherwise unrelated to each other, that individual has 2n ancestors in the nth generation before him and a total of about 2g+1 ancestors in the g generations before him. In practice, however, it is clear that the vast majority of ancestors of humans (and indeed any other species) are multiply related (see pedigree collapse). Consider n = 40: the human species is more than 40 generations old, yet the number 240, approximately 1012 or one trillion, dwarfs the number of humans who have ever lived.
Ignoring the possibility of other inter-relationships (even distant ones) among ancestors, an individual has a total of 2046 ancestors up to the 10th generation, 1024 of which are 10th-generation ancestors. With the same assumption, any given person has over a billion 30th-generation ancestors (who lived roughly 1000 years ago) and this theoretical number increases past the estimated total population of the world in around AD 1000. (All of these ancestors will have contributed to one's autosomal DNA: this excludes Y-chromosomal DNA and mitochondrial DNA.)
Some cultures confer reverence to ancestors, both living and dead; in contrast, some more youth-oriented cultural contexts display less veneration of elders. In other cultural contexts, some people seek providence from their deceased ancestors; this practice is sometimes known as ancestor worship or, more accurately, ancestor veneration.
See also[edit]

Descendant
Collateral descendant
Ethnic group
Family
Most recent common ancestor
Myth of origins
Progenitor

Notes[edit]


^ Websters New World Dictionary. Cleveland and New York: The World Publishing Company.&#160;


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ancestors.





Look up ancestor in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



United States Census Bureau
 Quotations related to Ancestors at Wikiquote









v
t
e


Family









History
Household
Nuclear family
Extended family
Conjugal family
Matrifocal family
Blended family
Dysfunctional family
Polyfidelitous families








Immediate family



Spouse

Husband
Wife


Parent

Father
Mother


Child

Son
Daughter


Sibling

Brother
Sister










Extended family



Grandparent
Grandchild
Aunt
Uncle
Cousin
Nephew and niece
Common ancestor








Family-in-law



Parents-in-law
Mother-in-law
Father-in-law
Sister-in-law
Brother-in-law
Siblings-in-law
Son-in-law
Daughter-in-law
Children-in-law








Kinship



Adoption
Affinity
Consanguinity
Disownment
Divorce
Estrangement
Fictive kinship
Marriage
Nurture kinship








Lineage



Bilateral descent
Family name
Family tree
Genealogy
Heirloom
Heredity
Inheritance
Matrilineality
Patrilineality
Pedigree chart
Progenitor








Relationships



Agape (parental love)
Eros (marital love)
Filial piety
Philia (friendly love)
Storge (familial love)








Stepfamily



Stepparents
Stepmother
Stepfather
Half-sister
Half-brother
Half-siblings
Stepson
Stepdaughter
Stepchildren
Step-grandfather
Step-grandmother








Theories



Anti-Oedipus
Kommune 1















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ancestor&amp;oldid=686616654"					
				Categories: Kinship and descentHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from December 2009All articles needing additional referencesCommons category with local link same as on Wikidata				
							
		
		
			