


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Art of the Philippines
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				




This article has no lead section. Please help by adding an introductory section to this article. For more information, see the layout guide, and Wikipedia's lead section guidelines to ensure the section will be inclusive of all the essential details. Please discuss this issue on the article's talk page. (March 2015)







This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. No cleanup reason has been specified. Please help improve this article if you can. (October 2007)




Part of a series on the


Culture of Philippines





History


Languages


Traditions




Mythology and folklore


Mythology
folklore






Cuisine


Festivals


Religion


Literature




Music and performing arts


Music
Performing&#160;arts








Media


Cinema
Television
Radio








Sport


basketball
volleyball
football
martial arts
rugby union








Monuments


World Heritage Sites
Cultural properties
Historical markers
more








Symbols


Flag
Coat of arms
Motto
Anthem
Language
Flower
Tree
Bird
Gem
Sport









 Philippines  portal







v
t
e





Artistic paintings were introduced to the Filipinos in the 16th century when the Spaniards arrived in the Philippines. During this time, the Spaniards used paintings as religious propaganda to spread Catholicism throughout the Philippines. These paintings, appearing mostly on church walls, featured religious figures appearing in Catholic teachings. Due to the Church's supervision of Filipino art and Spanish occupation of the Philippines, the purpose of most paintings from the 16th-19th century were to aid the Catholic Church.[1]
In the early 19th century, wealthier, educated Filipinos introduced more secular Filipino art, causing art in the Philippines to deviate from religious motifs. The use of watercolor paintings increased and the subject matter of paintings began to include landscapes, Filipino inhabitants, Philippine fashion, and government officials. Portrait paintings featured the painters themselves, Filipino jewelry, and native furniture. The subject of landscape paintings featured artists' names painted ornately as well as day-to-day scenes of average Filipinos partaking in their daily tasks. These paintings were done on canvas, wood, and a variety of metals. [1]
During World War II, some painters focused their artwork on the effects of war, including battle scenes, destruction, and the suffering of the Filipino people.



Contents


1 Dance
2 Weaving
3 Pottery
4 Other art forms
5 Past Filipino artists
6 Museums
7 See also
8 References
9 External links



Dance[edit]
Main article: Philippine Dance





It has been suggested that this article be merged into Philippine Dance. (Discuss) Proposed since June 2012.


There are many different types of Filipino dances varying in influence and region. Types of Filipino dance include Cordillera, Muslim, tribal, rural, and Spanish style dances.
Within the cordillera dances, there is Banga, Bendayan, Lumagen/Tachok, Manmanok, Ragragsakan, Salisid, Talip, Tarektek, and Uyaoy/Uyauy. The Banga dance illustrates the grace and strength of women in the Kalinga tribe. Women performing the Banga balance heavy pots on their heads while dancing to beat of wind chimes. This mimics Kalinga women collecting and transporting water. Another dance, called Lumagen or Tachok, is performed to celebrate happy occasions. When Lumagen is performed, it is meant to symbolize flying birds and is musically-paired to the beat of gongs. Another cordillera dance, Salisid, is the dance to show courtship. In the Salisid dance, a male and a female performer represent a rooster attempting to attract a hen.[2]
Tribal dances include Malakas at Maganda, Kadal Blelah, Kadal Tahaw, Binaylan, Bagobo Rice Cycle, and Dugso. Malakas at Maganda is a national folklore dance. It tells the story of the origin of the Filipino people on the islands. Another dance, called the Binaylan dance, tells the story of a hen, the hen's baby, and a hawk. In this dance, the hawk is said to control a tribe's well-being, and is killed by hunters after attempting to harm the hen's baby.[3]
Two examples of traditional Filipino dances are Tinikling and Binasuan and many more. Filipinos have unique folk dances like tinikling where assistants take two long bamboo sticks rapidly and in rhythm, clap sticks for dancers to artistically and daringly try to avoid getting their feet caught between them. Also in the southern part of the Philippines, there is another dance called singkil using long bamboo poles found in tinikling; however, it is primarily a dance showing off lavish Muslim royalty. In this dance, there are four bamboo sticks arranged in a tic-tac-toe pattern in which the dancers exploit every position of these clashing sticks. Dancers can be found trying to avoid all 4 bamboo sticks all together in the middle. They can also try to dance an entire rotation around the middle avoiding all sticks. Usually these stick dances performed in teamwork fashion not solo. The Singkil dance is identifiable with the use of umbrellas and silk clothing.[4]
Weaving[edit]
Philippine weaving involves many threads being measured, cut, and mounted on a wooden platform. The threads are dyed and weaved on a loom.[5]
Before Spanish colonization, native Filipinos weaved using fibers from abaca, pineapple, cotton, and bark cloth. Textiles, clothes, rugs, and hats were weaved. Baskets were also weaved and used as vessels of transport and storage, and for hunting. These baskets were used to transport grain, store food, and catching fish.[6] They also used weaving to make just about all of the clothing that was worn.
They weaved rugs that they used for quilts and bedding. The quality of the quilt/bedding was based on how soft, how tight together, and the clean pattern. The patterns were usually thick stripes with different colors and with a nice pattern.
However, during Spanish colonization, Filipinos used fabric called nipis to weave white clothing. These were weaved with decorative, flower designs.[6]
Pottery[edit]
Traditional pot-making in certain areas of the Philippines would use clay found near the Sibalom River. Molding the clay required the use of wooden paddles, and the clay had to be kept away from sunlight.[7]
Native Filipinos created pottery since 3500 years ago.[7] They used these ceramic jars to hold the deceased.[8]
Other pottery used to hold remains of the deceased were decorated with anthropomorphic designs. These anthropomorphic earthenware pots date back to 5 BC. - 225 A.D and had pot covers shaped like human heads. [8]
Filipino pottery had other uses as well. During the Neolithic period of the Philippines, pottery was made for water vessels, plates, cups, and for many other uses.[9]
Kalinga Pottery [10]
Ceramic vessels of Kalinga are divided into three types: rice cooking (ittoyom), vegetable/meat cooking (oppaya), and water storage (immosso) pots. According to Skibo, the rice cooking pots are usually larger, thinner and have a smaller opening than vegetable/meat pots. On the other hand, water storage pots have an average and uniform size and a smaller neck size.
Except for water storage pots, which have a uniform size, the other two kinds can come in three different sizes, large, medium and small. Although this is true in some cases, another larger type of vegetable/meat pot and smaller water storage pot exists.
• Manufacture of Kalinga potteries
The first step in the manufacture of pots is the acquisition of the starting material, clay. The clay is then pounded, added with enough amount of water, to reach the wanted flexibility, and placed in a rotating plate. Using the hand-modeling and coil-and-scrape techniques, the height, thickness and shape of the pot is established. After this, the rim is designed by placing a wet rag on top of it and then rotating it in the other direction. Furthermore, scraping of the walls can also be done if the walls produced are too thick.
The pot, after the modeling stage, is then dried for a short period of time before the base is shaped. Also, after additional heating, small amounts of clay are added inside and outside the clay to maintain the evenness of the surface. A polishing step can also be done through the use of a polishing stone. In some cases, pots are also painted with red hematite paint for some stylized design.
Pottery Functions [10]
Pots are ceramic vessels that are made by molding clay into its wanted shape and then leaving it in an environment with an elevated temperature thereby making it solid and sturdy. It is widely recognized as one of better tools that humans invented since it managed to store the surplus of food Neolithic humans gathered.
In the book Pottery Function: A Use-Alteration Perspective, the author, James Skibo, reasoned out why the use of pots is far more advantageous than baskets and other organic containers. He said that since potteries are commonly made in clay, heat has little to none effect on the container, and its contents, and that it protects the food from moisture and pests. Furthermore, its range of storable contents is far wider than baskets and animal skins since it can store both liquid and dry goods.
Also, Rice, in his book Pottery Analysis, classified ceramic vessels into 17 categories depending on various factors that concern the use and production of the tool. One of these is the content wherein he further divided a type of pot into four depending on the state (liquid or solid) and temperature (hot or cold) of the food inside it. He also said that a ceramic has three main uses. These three are storage, processing, and transfer.
Based from these three uses that Rice gave, Skibo further characterized the usage of ceramic vessels by dividing the tool’s function into two, (1) intended use and (2) actual use.
Intended use, as the name implies, is how the tool’s supposed to be used. This is the basis of the manufacture of the ceramic vessel since the form follows the function. On the other hand, actual use is how the tool was used. This sometimes disregards the pot’s form as long it can do a specific function.
Kalinga Pottery and its Uses [10]
In Kalinga, ceramic vessels can be used for two situations: daily life use and ceremonial use. Daily life uses include the making of rice from the pots and the transfer of water from nearby water bodies to their homes.
• Determining actual function of Kalinga pots
As said, a pottery sometimes has a different actual use than intended use. This is the reason why when archaeologists study the function of a pottery, they tend to focus on how the tool was actually used. They do this by studying the alterations that the pottery has. These alterations, accretion and attrition, are commonly the abrasions and scratches on the vessel. In Skibo’s study of Kalinga potteries functions, he relied on three main tests, namely (1) dissolved residue, (2) surface attrition and (3) carbon deposition.

Dissolved residue – This test was done to determine the organic matters that were once placed in the vessel. Through the combination of a gas chromatograph and a mass spectrophotometer, the composition of the fatty acids inside the vessel was determined. Although a complete identification of the species of plant and animals was not possible, Skibo managed to know which pots were used for rice and vegetable/ meat cooking.
Surface Attrition – Skibo’s study on the attrition of the pots showed how the pot was used. By looking at the trace attritions inside the vessel, the type, frequency, angle and direction of stirring for each pot was determined. Furthermore, Skibo also concluded that two pots can be differentiated from each other, on the basis of what type of food it cooks, from the abrasions. He said that rice pots will have a little amount of stirring while the vegetable/meat pots will have numerous marks.
Carbon Deposition – This test, as said by Skibo, can determine the type of food cooked, how it was cooked and how the pot was placed on the flame. From this, another distinction between rice and vegetable/meat pots was established.

Iron Age pottery [11]
There are three major complexes in Philippine Iron Age according to Solheim, Kalanay, Novaliches and Bau pottery complexes. Kalanay pottery complex pertains to Beyer’s Early Iron Age pottery of the Visayan Islands found in Negros and Mindoro; novaliches pottery complex to Beyer’s Early Iron Age pottery from Rizal province. Bau pottery, on the other hand, does not fit into the two previous complexes and could correspond instead to the Late Iron Age pottery.
Kalanay Pottery Complex [11]
The type site of the Kalanay pottery complex is the Kalanay Cave found in Masbate. From this site, the pottery is further subdivided into pottery types Kalanay and Bagupantao.
Specific varieties of decoration are as follows:

Paired diagonals and borders, with variations including single diagonals or verticals and borders, or wavy lines and borders
Curvilinear scrolls and triangles
Rectangular scroll
Triangles, with variations including alternating triangles and borders or running triangles
Rectangles and diagonals
Zoomorphs
Punctate fieldwhere areas bonded by incised lines are emphasized by punctuations or dashes
Diagonals without borders, including a band of horizontal V’s and alternating diagonals off a center line
Impressed crenelations
Impressed or carved scallop design
Impressed tool
Carved cutouts in ring stands

Kalanay complex pottery can be divided into 16 groups according to Solheim.

Large jars with wide necks
Large jars with narrow necks
Small jars
Deep bowls
Shallow bowls
Very shallow bowls
Lids
Shallow bowls with ring stands
Tetrapods
Jars with angle between side and bottom
Spherical jars with small mouths, without angle at rim
Angular Vessels

Bau Pottery Complex [11]
It has less variation in both form and decoration compared to the Kalanay pottery complex.
Specific varieties of decoration are as follows:

Paddle Impressed
Tool Impressed, including simple-tool and compound-tool impressed
Stamp Impressed
Applique ribbons of clay

In terms of forms:

Small jars with everted rims
Small jars without everted rim
Small heavy jars with flat bottom
Cups with ring feet
Jars with ring feet

Novaliches Pottery Complex [11]
Most of Novaliches pottery can be distinguished from Bau pottery and Kalanay pottery. While it shares form and decoration with Kalanay pottery, it contains more variability compared to Bau pottery. According to Solheim (2002), “it is the most sophisticated pottery that has yet been found in the Philippines”
Novaliches pottery can be diagnosed by its form being a shallow bowl with a high right-foot. The shallow bowl is generally plain but the feet are highly decorated. Majority of Novaliches pottery were well polished. The form is so symmetrical that it looks as if it was made in a potter wheel, however, examinations showed that it wasn’t.
Specific varieties of decoration are as follows:

Cutouts
Narrow vertical elements; carved, tool impressed, or running impressed lines
Horizontal and diagonal elements, including simple tool impressions, compound tool impressions and carved elements
Horizontal broadline impressed lines

Vessel forms are as follows:

Shallow bowls with high ring stands
Shallow bowls with low-ring stands
Jars with low-ring stands
Angle jars
Jars with short necks and everted rims

Kalanay Cave Site [11]
The Kalanay cave site is a small burial cave. It is located at the northwest coast of Masbate.
• Kalanay Pottery

Kalanay Plain


Majority (80 per cent) of the excavated vessels.
Variations in size and shape
Technique used in the manufacture: Paddle-and-anvil technique
Differences in the base of the vessels (some have rounded bottom while some use a ring foot or a tetrapod for support).
Large observable differences in color that is associated with the inability of the potter to control the fire, causing the uneven distribution of the heat.

• Kalanay Incised

Incised around the neck, rim of a jar or the outside of a bowl in a band of repeating elements
Little care was given so the jars appear poorly made despite its well thought out designs. This can be attributed to the possibility that the certain tradition of this pot was no longer significant to the manufacturer
Kalanay-Impressed: simple tool and simple and compound tool
Simple tool impressing found around the jar or bowl with a flange

• Kalanay slipped

Forms: jars, large with wide mouth and everted rim, or small with everted rim; bowls, deep with inslanting sides, or very shallow which turned out lip
Some were polished, some were not.

Bagupantao Pottery [11]
• Bagupantao Plain

Majority of the pots’ paste is red-brown in color, with gray or black as the minority. Its texture ranges from fine to medium and its thickness is usually 5-8 mm in length. The common forms of the pots are jars with wide to narrow mouths and its normally large (a body diameter of 24 to 35 cm).
Difference between Kalanay Plain: Evenness of color and cleanness of clay

• Bagupantao Impressed

The type of paste is the same as Bagupantao plain, red-brown in color. It is also highly decorated on its rim with circles, punctuations and crenellations.
Larger (28 -31 cm body diameter) and thicker (9-14 thickness) than Bagupantao plain.

• Bagupantao Painted

The paste used is the same as Bagupantao impressed and plain but it is covered with heavy red hematite slip inside and outside of the neck.
Thinner (2-7 mm) and smaller than Bagupantao plain.

• Extraneous Pottery - Three vessels that did not belong to the Bagupantao and Kalanay style were also found.
First pot

Similar clay used as the Bagupantao and Kalanay vessels. The color, red-brown, was also the same, inside and out.
Ornamented with small crystals on the paste and black flakes on the surface.
As thin (3-8 mm) as the Bagupantao painted vessel.

Second pot

Same size and structure as the Bagupantao pots.
Used a different paste (fibrous texture and contained mineral inclusions)
Heavily polished and the surface color ranges from red-brown to light gray.
As thick as the Bagupantao plain jars (5-12 mm).

Third pot

The paste used is chocolate-brown in color and its texture is fine.
It is very thick (15-20 mm) when compared to the other pots.
Poorly made because of the uneven distribution of heat to the pot (pieces break longitudinally).

Other art forms[edit]
Tanaga is a type of Filipino poetry. Kut-kut is an art technique used between the 15th and 18th centuries. The technique was a combination of European and Oriental style and process mastered by indigenous tribes of Samar island.
• Indigenous arts

Some indigenous materials are also used as a medium in different kinds of art works especially in painting by Elito Circa, a famous folk artist of Pantabangan and a pioneer for using indigenous materials, natural raw materials including human blood.[12] Many Filipino painters and foreign artists were influenced by this and started using these materials such as extract from onion, tomato, tuba, coffee, rust, molasses and other materials available anywhere as paint.
In 2015/16, the Asia Society in New York presented an exhibit called Philippine Gold: Treasures of Forgotten Kingdoms. The exhibition presents spectacular works of gold primarily discovered over the past forty years on the Philippine islands of Luzon, the Visayas, and Mindanao. The regalia, jewelry, ceremonial weapons, and ritualistic and funerary objects attest to the recently uncovered evidence of prosperity and achievement of Philippine polities that flourished between the tenth and thirteenth centuries, long before the Spanish discovered and colonized the region. Although the forms and styles of the majority of these works developed locally, some indicate that Philippine craftsmen had been exposed to objects from beyond their borders through the robust cultural connections and maritime trade in Southeast Asia during what was an early Asian economic boom.

Past Filipino artists[edit]
Past notable Filipino artists include Juan Luna, Fernando Amorsolo, Augusto Arbizo, Félix Hidalgo, and David Cortés Medalla. Present-day Filipino artists featuring Filipino culture include Elito Circa, Anita Magsaysay-Ho, Fred DeAsis, Daniel Coquilla, Ang Kiukok, Lito Mayo, Mauro Malang Santos, Santiago Bosé, Francisco Viri Rey Paz Contreras, and Nunelucio Alvarado.[13] The Arts or Paintings by Zóbel, Amorsolo and many more could be seen in most of the art museums in the Philippines. Zobel's paintings can be seen in the Ayala museum.
Museums[edit]


Place
Museum
Description
Address


Manila
Bahay Tsinoy
A typical Chinese house in the Philippines
Kaisa Heritage Center, 32 Anda corner Cabildo Streets, Intramuros, Manila



Casa Manila
A typical Spanish colonial house in the Philippines
General Luna Street, Intramuros, Manila



San Agustín Museum
A church museum with wide collections of catholic religious items
San Agustín Monastery, General Luna Street Corner Real, Intramuros, Manila



National Museum of the Philippines
The national museum which showcases Philippine Arts
P. Burgos Avenue, Manila



Malacañang Museum
A museum inside the Presidential Palace complex
Malacañang Palace Complex, J.P. Laurel Street, San Miguel, Manila



Metropolitan Museum of Manila
A museum of contemporary arts
Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas Complex, Roxas Boulevard, Manila



Museum of Contemporary Arts and Design
A museum of contemporary Filipino arts
College of Saint Benilde, 950 P. Ocampo Street, Malate, Manila



The Museum
A museum of contemporary Filipino arts
De La Salle University, 2401 Taft Avenue, Manila



UST Museum
The oldest existing museum in the Philippines. UST Museum has permanent display on natural history specimens, coins, medals, memorabilia, ethnographic materials and oriental arts objects.
University of Santo Tomás Main Building, España Boulevard, Sampaloc, Manila



Museo Pambata
A museum for children
Roxas Boulevard corner South Drive, Ermita, Manila


Pasay
CCP Museo ng Kalinangang Pilipino and Asian Traditional Musical Instruments
A museum of performing arts.
Tanghalang Pambansa CCP Complex, Roxas Boulevard, Pasay



GSIS Museo ng Sining
A museum of Filipino Arts
Macapagal Avenue, Financial Center, Pasay


Makati
Ayala Museum
A museum of Filipino Arts
Makati Avenue corner De La Rosa Street, Greenbelt Park, Makati



Yuchengco Museum
A museum of Filipino and Filipino-Chinese Arts
RCBC Plaza, Ayala corner Senator Gil Puyal Avenue, Makati


Pasig
López Memorial Museum
A museum of Filipino Contemporary Arts
Benpres Building, Exchange Road corner Meralco Avenue, Pasig


Quezón City
Ateneo Art Gallery
A museum of Filipino Contemporary Arts
Special Collections Building, Ateneo de Manila University, Katipunan Avenue, Loyola Heights, Quezón City



Jorge B. Vargas Museum and Filipiniana Research Center
The only museum in the Philippines with wide range of Philippine Arts from 1880 to 1960
Roxas Avenue, University of the Philippines, Dilimán, Quezón City


Taguig
Mind Museum
A science museum
J.Y. Campos Park, 3rd Avenue, Bonifacio Global City, Taguig


Cebu
Paulina Constancia Museum of Naive Art [MoNA]
A museum of Naive Art, Poetry, &amp; Sustainability
110 Gorordo Ave., Cebu City


Aurora
Baler Museum
A museum of Naive Art and culture
Baler, Aurora


Nueva Ecija
Provincial Capitol Museum
A museum of Novo Esijano's Arts and Culture
Palayan City



Fred's Arts Gallery
A museum of Novo Esijano's Artist
Cabanatuan City


Benguet
BenCab Museum
A museum of BenCab Arts
Baqiuo City


See also[edit]

National Artist of the Philippines
National Arts Center in Los Baños, Laguna
Architecture of the Philippines
Cinema of the Philippines
Philippine comics
Filipino cartoon and animation
Literature of the Philippines
Music of the Philippines
Philippine Dance
Filipino martial arts
Culture of the Philippines

References[edit]


^ a b "History Of Philippine Painting". Wiziq.com. Retrieved 2013-08-01.&#160;
^ "Philippine Dances Cordillera". Seasite.niu.edu. Retrieved 2013-08-01.&#160;
^ "tribal dances". Seasite.niu.edu. Retrieved 2013-08-01.&#160;
^ "Hot Spots Filipino Cultural Dance - Singkil". Sinfonia.or.jp. Retrieved 22 February 2015.&#160;
^ "Banton Cloth&#160;: Age of Contact&#160;: Banton Is., Romblon". Nationalmuseum.gov.ph. Retrieved 22 February 2015.&#160;
^ a b Trish Sotto. "Fa 28 weaving history". Slideshare.net. Retrieved 2013-08-01.&#160;
^ a b "De La Salle University&#160;: University Library&#160;: Philippine Pottery". Dlsu.edu.ph. Retrieved 2013-08-01.&#160;
^ a b "Anthropomorphic Pots&#160;: Metal Age&#160;: Ayub Cave, Saranggani Province". Nationalmuseum.gov.ph. Retrieved 22 February 2015.&#160;
^ "Metropolitan Museum of Manila, Philippines: Art for All". Metmuseum.ph. 2012-09-01. Retrieved 2013-08-01.&#160;
^ a b c Skibo, J. (1992). Pottery Function: A use-alteration perspective. New York: Plenum Press.&#160;
^ a b c d e f Solheim, William (2002). The archaeology of central Philippines: A study chiefly of the Iron Age and its relationships. Manila: Bureau of Print.&#160;
^ "Artist uses own blood, hair in paintings". The Philippine Star. Philippine Star. 2011. Retrieved 2011-07-12.&#160;
^ "Kulay-Diwa Gallery of Philippine Contemporary Art - Gallery of Philippine Contemporary Art". Kulay-diwa.com. Retrieved 2013-08-01.&#160;


External links[edit]

YouTube tinikling video
YouTube singkil video
Paintings
Filipino Artist
Dances
Weaving
Pottery










v
t
e


Philippines&#160;articles






History




Timeline



Prehistory
Pre-colonial period (900–1521)
Spanish colonial period (1521–1898)
Revolution (1896–98)
Spanish–American War (1898)
American colonial period (1898–1946)
First Republic (1899–1901)
Philippine–American War (1899–1902)
Commonwealth (1935–46)
Japanese occupation (1942–45)
Second Republic (1943–45)
Third Republic (1946–65)
Marcos era (1965–86)
Cold War

Korean War
Vietnam War


1986 People Power Revolution
Fifth Republic (1986–present)
Civil conflict

CPP-NPA-NDF
Moro


War on Terror

OEF – Philippines










By topic



Demographic
Discoveries
Economic

1973-1986


Inventions
Military














Geography







Bays
Climate
Desert
Ecoregions
Environment
Extreme points
Headlands
Island groups

islands


Lakes
Landmarks
Mountains

Ultras


National parks
Protected areas
Rivers
Volcanoes

active
potentially active
inactive


Wildlife
World Heritage Sites











Politics








Government




Executive



President

Executive Office


Cabinet
Civil service
National Police








Legislature



Congress

Senate

Senate President
President pro tem


House of Representatives

Speaker












Judiciary



Supreme Court
Judiciary
Court of Appeals








Law



Constitution
Bill of rights
Philippine legal codes
Human rights








Intelligence



National Bureau of Investigation
National Counter-Terrorism Action Group
National Intelligence Coordinating Agency
Philippine Drug Enforcement Agency








Uniformed



Armed Forces of the Philippines

Philippine Air Force
Philippine Army
Philippine Navy
Philippine Marine Corps


Philippine Coast Guard














Administrative divisions
Elections
Foreign relations
Local governments
Political parties














Economy







Agriculture
Business process outsourcing
Central Bank
Energy
Fiscal policy
National debt
Labor
Peso (currency)
Stock Exchange
Taxation
Telecommunications
Tourism
Transportation
Science and technology











Society








Culture



Architecture
Art
Cinema
Cuisine
Cultural Properties
Dance
Fashion and clothing
Festivals
Historical Markers
Literature
Media
Music
Mythology
Public holidays
Psychology
Religion
Sexuality (LGBT culture · LGBT rights · Women)
Sports
Traditional games
Value system








Symbols



Anthem
Coat of arms
Arnis/Eskrima/Kali (martial art)
Flag
Name
Narra (tree)
Philippine eagle
Sampaguita (flower)


















Outline
Index



Book
Category
Portal
WikiProject
















v
t
e


Asian art






Sovereign states



Afghanistan
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei
Burma (Myanmar)
Cambodia
Chinese
East Timor (Timor-Leste)
Egypt
Georgia
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
North Korea
South Korea
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Lebanon
Malaysia
Maldives
Mongolia
Nepal
Oman
Pakistan
Philippines
Qatar
Russia
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Syria
Tajikistan
Thailand
Turkey
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen









States with limited
recognition




Abkhazia
Nagorno-Karabakh
Northern Cyprus
Palestine
South Ossetia
Taiwan









Dependencies and
other territories




Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Hong Kong
Macau















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Art_of_the_Philippines&amp;oldid=691901248"					
				Categories: Arts in the PhilippinesHidden categories: Wikipedia introduction cleanup from March 2015All pages needing cleanupPages missing lead sectionArticles covered by WikiProject Wikify from March 2015All articles covered by WikiProject WikifyArticles needing cleanup from October 2007All articles needing cleanupCleanup tagged articles without a reason field from October 2007Wikipedia pages needing cleanup from October 2007Articles to be merged from June 2012All articles to be mergedRegion topic template using suffix				
							
		
		
			