


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Atlas Mountains
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				For the volcanic cone, see Mount Atlas.


Atlas Mountains



Toubkal Mountain in Toubkal National Park in the High Atlas



Highest point


Peak
Toubkal


Elevation
4,165&#160;m (13,665&#160;ft)


Coordinates
31°03′43″N 07°54′58″W﻿ / ﻿31.06194°N 7.91611°W﻿ / 31.06194; -7.91611Coordinates: 31°03′43″N 07°54′58″W﻿ / ﻿31.06194°N 7.91611°W﻿ / 31.06194; -7.91611


Geography











Location of the Atlas Mountains (red) across North Africa



Countries
Algeria, Morocco and Tunisia


Geology


Period
Precambrian


The Atlas Mountains is a mountain range which stretches across northwestern Africa extending about 2,500&#160;km (1,600&#160;mi) through Algeria, Morocco and Tunisia. The highest peak is Jebel Toubkal, with an elevation of 4,167 metres (13,671&#160;ft) in southwestern Morocco. The Atlas ranges separate the Mediterranean and Atlantic coastlines from the Sahara Desert. The population of the Atlas Mountains is mainly Berbers. The terms for 'mountain' in some Berber languages are adrar and adras, believed to be cognate with the toponym.
The mountains are home to a number of plant and animal species unique in Africa, often more like those of Europe; many of them are endangered and some have already gone extinct. Examples include the Barbary macaque, the Atlas bear (Africa's only species of bear; now extinct), the Barbary leopard, the Barbary stag, Barbary sheep, the Barbary lion (extinct in the wild), the Atlas Mountain badger, the North African elephant (extinct), the North African aurochs (extinct), Cuvier's gazelle, the Northern bald ibis, dippers, the Atlas mountain viper, the Atlas cedar, the European black pine, and the Algerian oak.



Contents


1 Geology

1.1 Natural resources


2 Subranges of the Atlas Mountains

2.1 Middle Atlas range
2.2 High Atlas
2.3 Anti-Atlas ranges
2.4 Saharan Atlas range
2.5 Tell Atlas range
2.6 Aurès mountain range


3 See also
4 References and notes



Geology[edit]




Map showing the location of the Atlas Mountains across North Africa


The basement rock of most of Africa was formed in the Precambrian and is much older than the Atlas Mountains lying in Africa. The Atlas formed during three subsequent phases of taco baby (earth's) history.
The first tectonic deformation phase involves only the Anti-Atlas, which was formed in the Paleozoic Era (~300 million years ago) as the result of continental collisions. North America, Europe and Africa were connected millions of years ago.




The tectonic boundary.


The Anti-Atlas Mountains are believed to have originally been formed as part of Alleghenian orogeny. These mountains were formed when Africa and America collided, and were once a chain rivaling today's Himalayas. Today, the remains of this chain can be seen in the Fall Line region in the Eastern United States. Some remnants can also be found in the later formed Appalachians in North America.
A second phase took place during the Mesozoic Era (before ~66 My) and consisted of a widespread extension of the Earth's crust that rifted and separated the continents mentioned above. This extension was responsible for the formation of many thick intracontinental sedimentary basins including the present Atlas. Most of the rocks forming the surface of the present High Atlas were deposited under the ocean at that time.
Finally, in the Paleogene and Neogene Periods (~66 million to ~1.8 million years ago), the mountain chains that today comprise the Atlas were uplifted as the land masses of Europe and Africa collided at the southern end of the Iberian Peninsula. Such convergent tectonic boundaries occur where two plates slide towards each other forming a subduction zone (if one plate moves underneath the other) and/or a continental collision (when the two plates contain continental crust). In the case of the Africa-Europe collision, it is clear that tectonic convergence is partially responsible for the formation of the High Atlas, as well as for the closure of the Strait of Gibraltar and the formation of the Alps and the Pyrenees. However, there is a lack of evidence for the nature of the subduction in the Atlas region, or for the thickening of the Earth's crust generally associated with continental collisions. In fact, one of the most striking features of the Atlas to geologists is the relative small amount of crustal thickening and tectonic shortening despite the important altitude of the mountain range. Recent studies suggest that deep processes rooted in the Earth's mantle may have contributed to the uplift of the High and Middle Atlas.[1][2]
Natural resources[edit]
The Atlas are rich in natural resources. There are deposits of iron ore, lead ore, copper, silver, mercury, rock salt, phosphate, marble, anthracite coal and natural gas among other resources.





View of the mountains



Subranges of the Atlas Mountains[edit]




High Atlas.


The range can be divided into four general regions:

Middle Atlas, High Atlas and Anti-Atlas (Morocco).
Saharan Atlas (Algeria).
Tell Atlas (Algeria, Tunisia).
Aurès Mountains (Algeria, Tunisia).

Middle Atlas range[edit]
Main article: Middle Atlas
The Middle Atlas is a portion of the Atlas mountain range lying completely in Morocco. The Middle Atlas is the westernmost of three Atlas Mountains chains that define a large, plateaued basin extending eastward. South of the Middle Atlas and separated by the Moulouya and Oum Er-Rbia rivers, the High Atlas stretches for 700 kilometres (430&#160;mi) with a succession of peaks among which ten reach above 4,000 metres (13,000&#160;ft). North of the Middle Atlas and separated by the Sebou River, the Rif mountains are an extension of the Baetic Cordillera (Baetic mountains, which include the Sierra Nevada) in the south of Spain.
High Atlas[edit]
Main article: High Atlas
The High Atlas in central Morocco rises in the west at the Atlantic coast and stretches in an eastern direction to the Moroccan-Algerian border. At the Atlantic and to the southwest the range drops abruptly and makes an impressive transition to the coast and the Anti-Atlas range. To the north, in the direction of Marrakech, the range descends less abruptly.
On the heights of Ouarzazate the massif is cut through by the Draa Valley which opens southward. Here, water runs in some places, forming clear basins. It is mainly inhabited by Berber people, who live in small villages and cultivate the high plains of the Ourika Valley.




Panoramic picture of the artificial lake of Lalla Takerkoust near Barrage Cavagnac, with the hydroelectric dam (far right)


Near Barrage Cavagnac, there is a hydroelectric dam that has created the artificial lake Lalla Takerkoust. The lake serves also as a source for fish for the local fishermen.
The largest villages and towns of the area are Ouarzazate, Tahanaoute, Amizmiz, Imlil, Tin Mal and Ijoukak.
Anti-Atlas ranges[edit]
Main article: Anti-Atlas
The Anti-Atlas extends from the Atlantic Ocean in the southwest of Morocco toward the northeast to the heights of Ouarzazate and further east to the city of Tafilalt (altogether a distance of approximately 500 kilometres or 310 miles). In the south it borders the Sahara. The easternmost point of the anti-Atlas is the Jbel Saghro range and its northern boundary is flanked by sections of the High Atlas range. It includes the Djebel Siroua, a massif of volcanic origin with the highest summit of the range at 3,304 m. The Jebel Bani is a much lower range running along the southern side of the Anti Atlas.[3]
Saharan Atlas range[edit]
Main article: Saharan Atlas
The Saharan Atlas of Algeria is the eastern portion of the Atlas mountain range. Though not as high as the Grand Atlas, they are far more imposing than the Tell Atlas range that runs to the north of them and closer to the coast. The highest peak in the range is the 2,236&#160;m (7,336&#160;ft) high Djebel Aissa. They mark the northern edge of the Sahara Desert. The mountains see some rainfall and are better suited to agriculture than the plateau region to the north. Today most of the population of the region are Berbers (Imazighen).
Tell Atlas range[edit]
Main article: Tell Atlas




Panoramic view of typical Berber village (Morocco - High Atlas Mountains).


The Tell Atlas is a mountain chain over 1,500 kilometres (930&#160;mi) in length, belonging to the Atlas mountain ranges and stretching from Morocco, through Algeria to Tunisia. It parallels the Mediterranean coast. Together with the Saharan Atlas to the south it forms the northernmost of two more or less parallel ranges which gradually approach one another towards the east, merging in Eastern Algeria. At the western ends at the Middle Atlas range in Morocco. The area immediately to the south of this range is the high plateau of the Hautes Plaines, with lakes in the wet season and salt flats in the dry.
Aurès mountain range[edit]
Main article: Aurès Mountains




Aures Mountains






Location of the Aures region


The Aurès Mountains of Algeria and Tunisia are the farthest eastern portion of the Atlas mountain range. The Aurès natural region is named after the range.[4]
See also[edit]

Capsian culture
North Africa
Atlas (mythology)

References and notes[edit]

^ UAB.es Potential field modelling of the Atlas lithosphere
^ UAB.es Crustal structure under the central High Atlas Mountains (Morocco) from geological and gravity data, P. Ayarza, et al., 2005, Tectonophysics, 400, 67-84
^ Des Montagnes du Sarho aux dunes de Merzouga
^ Algeria - Ethnic Groups and Languages




Wikimedia Commons has media related to Atlas Mountains.










v
t
e


Major African geological formations






Plates



African Plate
Somali Plate
Madagascar Plate
Seychelles Plate








Cratons and Shields



Arabian-Nubian Shield
Congo Craton
Kaapvaal Craton
Kalahari Craton
Saharan Metacraton
Tanzania Craton
Tuareg Shield
West African Craton
Zimbabwe Craton








Shear zones



Aswa Dislocation
Broodkop Shear Zone
Central African Shear Zone
Chuan Shear Zones
Foumban Shear Zone
Mwembeshi Shear Zone
Todi Shear Zone
Western Meseta Shear Zone








Orogens



Alpide Orogen
Cape Fold Belt
Damara Orogen
East African Orogen
Eburnean Orogen
Kuunga Orogen
Mauritanide Belt
Pan-African Orogen








Rifts



Afar Triangle
Anza trough
Bahr el Arab rift
Benue Trough
Blue Nile rift
East African Rift
Gulf of Suez Rift
Lamu Embayment
Melut Basin
Muglad Basin
Red Sea Rift
Atbara rift
White Nile rift








Sedimentary basins



Angola Basin
Aoukar
Blue Nile Basin
Chad Basin
Congo Basin
Douala Basin
El Djouf
Foreland Karoo Basin
Gabon Basin
Iullemmeden Basin
Kufra Basin
Murzuq Basin
Niger Delta Basin
Ogaden Basin
Orange River basin
Ouled Abdoun Basin
Owambo Basin
Reggane Basin
Rio del Rey Basin
Sirte Basin
Somali Coastal Basin
Taoudeni basin
Tanzania Coastal Basin
Tindouf Basin








Mountain ranges



Aïr Mountains
Atlas Mountains
Aurès Mountains
Bambouk Mountains
Blue Mountains
Cameroon line
Central Pangean Mountains
Chaillu Mountains
Drakensberg
Ethiopian Highlands
East African mountains
Great Escarpment
Great Karas Mountains
Guinée forestière
Imatong Mountains
Jebel Uweinat
Loma Mountains
Mandara Mountains
Marrah Mountains
Mitumba Mountains
Nuba Mountains
Rif Mountains
Rwenzori Mountains
Sankwala Mountains
Serra da Leba
Serra da Chela
Teffedest Mountains
Tibesti Mountains
















v
t
e


Geography topics









History
Index/Outline








Branches




Human



Behavioral
Cultural
Demography
Development
Economic
Feminist
Health
Historical
Political
Regional
Urban








Physical



Biogeography
Climatology
Coastal
Geodesy
Geomorphology
Glaciology
Hydrology
Landscape ecology
Limnology
Oceanography
Palaeogeography
Pedology
Quaternary science








Integrative



Environmental geography











Techniques and tools



Cartography
Geographic Information Systems (GIS)
Geostatistics
Global navigation satellite system (GNSS)
Remote sensing
Spatial analysis
Spatial science
Qualitative research








Societies



American Geographical Society
Association of American Geographers
European Geography Association
Geographical Association
Hong Kong Geographical Association
International Geographical Union
Lisbon Geographic Society
National Geographic Society
Royal Canadian Geographical Society
Royal Geographical Society
Royal Scottish Geographical Society
Russian Geographical Society
Saudi Geographical Society
Société de Géographie
Society of Woman Geographers








Geographers



Ptolemy
Al-Masudi
Gerardus Mercator
Carl Ritter
Alexander Von Humboldt
Alfred Russel Wallace
Richard Chorley








Geography Departments



University of Cambridge
University of Edinburgh
University of Leeds
Moscow State University
Stockholm University
University of Sydney
Texas A&amp;M University











 Category
 Portal
 Commons
 WikiProject
















v
t
e


Subfields of physical geography









Biogeography
Climatology / Paleoclimatology
Coastal geography
Edaphology
Geomorphology
Glaciology
Hydrology / Hydrography
Landscape ecology
Limnology
Meteorology
Oceanography
Palaeogeography
Pedology/Soil science
Quaternary science
















Authority control



VIAF: 315125605
GND: 4003394-6
BNF: cb13319258b (data)















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Atlas_Mountains&amp;oldid=692065255"					
				Categories: Atlas MountainsMountain ranges of AfricaMaghrebMountain ranges of MoroccoMountain ranges of AlgeriaMountains of TunisiaPhysiographic provincesHidden categories: Coordinates on WikidataWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers				
							
		
		
			