


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Australian art
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				

Part of a series on the


Culture of Australia





History




People


Australian people
African Australian
Albanian Australian
American Australian
Anglo-Celtic Australian
Asian Australian
Assyrian Australian
Bosnian Australian
Chinese Australian
Cornish Australian
English Australian
European Australian
Filipino Australian
Greek Australian
Indian Australian
Indigenous Australian
Irish Australian
Italian Australian
Korean Australian
Latin American Australian
Lebanese Australian
Macedonian Australian
Pakistani Australian
Scottish Australian
Serbian Australian
South African Australian
Sudanese Australian
Taiwanese Australian
Welsh Australian






Languages




Traditions


Humour








Mythology and folklore


Mythology
folklore






Cuisine


Festivals




Religion


Aboriginal
Christianity (Roman Catholic
Anglican
Uniting Church
Presbyterian
Baptist
Lutheran
Coptic Orthodox
more)
Buddhism
Islam
Sikhism
Judaism
Hinduism
Bahá'í Faith
Irreligion








Art


Architecture








Literature


Comic books








Music and performing arts


Music
Performing&#160;arts








Media


Radio
Television
Cinema






Sport




Monuments


World Heritage Sites








Symbols


Flag
Coat of arms









 Australia  portal







v
t
e





Australian art is any art made in Australia or about Australia, from prehistoric times to the present. This includes Aboriginal, Colonial, Landscape, Atelier, early twentieth century painters, print makers, photographers, and sculptors influenced by European modernism, Contemporary art. The visual arts have a long history in Australia, with evidence of Aboriginal art dating back at least 30,000 years. Australia has produced many notable artists of both Western and Indigenous Australian schools, including the late-19th-century Heidelberg School plein air painters, the Central Australian Hermannsburg School watercolourists, the Western Desert Art Movement and coeval examples of well-known High modernism and Postmodern art.



Contents


1 Indigenous Australian art
2 Colonial art (1770–1900)

2.1 Early Colonial Art (1770–1850)
2.2 Later Colonial Art (1850–1885)
2.3 Heidelberg School (1885–1910)


3 List of artists
4 Notable collectors
5 Art museums and galleries in Australia
6 Institutions
7 Art market
8 Australian visual arts in other countries
9 See also
10 References
11 External links



Indigenous Australian art[edit]
Main article: Indigenous Australian art







Petroglyph at Uluru.









Quinkan paintings near Laura, Queensland.









Aboriginal Rock Art, Ubirr Art Site, Kakadu National Park.









Yankee Hat art, Namadgi National Park.











Painting of a Turtle.









Rock Art, Anbangbang Rock Shelter, Kakadu National Park, Australia.









Ku-ring-gai Chase - petroglyph carved into Triassic sandstone.









Painting of Baiame made by an unknown Wiradjuri artist in "Baiame's cave", near Singleton, NSW.




The first ancestors of Aboriginal Australians are believed to have arrived in Australia as early as 60,000 years ago, and evidence of Aboriginal art in Australia can be traced back at least 30,000 years.[1] Examples of ancient Aboriginal rock artworks can be found throughout the continent. Notable examples can be found in national parks, such as those of the UNESCO listed sites at Uluru and Kakadu National Park in the Northern Territory, and the Bradshaw rock paintings in the Kimberley region of Western Australia. Rock art can also be found within protected parks in urban areas such as Ku-ring-gai Chase National Park in Sydney.[2][3][4] The Sydney rock engravings are approximately 5000 to 200 years old. Murujuga in Western Australia has the Friends of Australian Rock Art advocating its preservation, and the numerous engravings there were heritage listed in 2007.[5][6]
In terms of age and abundance, cave art in Australia is comparable to that of Lascaux and Altamira in Europe,[7] and Aboriginal art is believed to be the oldest continuing tradition of art in the world.[8] There are three major regional styles: the geometric style found in Central Australia, Tasmania, the Kimberley and Victoria known for its concentric circles, arcs and dots; the simple figurative style found in Queensland; the complex figurative style found in Arnhem Land which includes X-Ray art.[9] These designs generally carry significance linked to the spirituality of the Dreamtime.[10]
William Barak (c.1824-1903) was one of the last traditionally educated of the Wurundjeri-willam, people who come from the district now incorporating the city of Melbourne. He remains notable for his artworks which recorded traditional Aboriginal ways for the education of Westerners (which remain on permanent exhibition at the Ian Potter Centre of the National Gallery of Victoria and at the Ballarat Fine Art Gallery). Margaret Preston (1875–1963) was among the early non-indigenous painters to incorporate Aboriginal influences in her works. Albert Namatjira (1902–1959) is a famous Australian artist and an Arrernte man. His landscapes inspired the Hermannsburg School of art.[11] The works of Elizabeth Durack are notable for their fusion of Western and indigenous influences. Since the 1970s, indigenous artists have employed the use of acrylic paints - with styles such as the Western Desert Art Movement becoming globally renowned 20th-century art movements.
The National Gallery of Australia exhibits a great many indigenous art works, including those of the Torres Strait Islands who are known for their traditional sculpture and headgear.[12] The Art Gallery of New South Wales has an extensive collection of indigenous Australian art. [4] In May 2011, the Director of the Place, Evolution, and Rock Art Heritage Unit (PERAHU) at Griffith University, Paul Taçon, called for the creation of a national database for rock art.[13] Paul Taçon launched the "Protect Australia’s Spirit" campaign in May 2011 with the highly regarded Australian actor Jack Thompson.[14] This campaign aims to create the very first fully resourced national archive to bring together information about rock art sites, as well as planning for future rock art management and conservation. The National Rock Art Institute would bring together existing rock art expertise from Griffith University, Australian National University, and the University of Western Australia if they were funded by philanthropists, big business and government. Rock Art Research is published twice a year and also covers international scholarship of rock art.
Colonial art (1770–1900)[edit]
Early Western art in Australia, from 1788 onwards, is often narrated as the gradual shift from a European sense of light to an Australian one. The lighting in Australia is notably different from that of Europe, and early attempts at landscapes attempted to reflect this. It has also been one of transformation, where artistic ideas originating from beyond (primarily Europe) gained new meaning and purpose when transplanted into the new continent and the emerging society.[15]
Early Colonial Art (1770–1850)[edit]




Sydney Parkinson, Two of the Natives of New Holland Advancing, To Combat, 1770


The first artistic representations of the Australia scene by European artists were mainly natural history illustrations, depicting the distinctive flora and fauna of the land for scientific purposes, and the topography of the coast. Sydney Parkinson, the Botanical illustrator on James Cook's 1770 voyage that first charted the eastern coastline of Australia, made a large number of such drawings under the direction of naturalist Joseph Banks. Many of these drawings were met with skepticism when taken back to Europe, for example claims that the platypus was a hoax.
Despite Banks' suggestions, no professional natural-history artist sailed on the First Fleet in 1788. Until the turn of the century all drawings made in the colony were crafted by soldiers, including British naval officers George Raper and John Hunter, and convict artists, including Thomas Watling.[16] However, many of these drawings are by unknown artists, most notably the Port Jackson Painter. Most are in the style of naval draughtsmanship, and cover natural history topics, specifically birds, and a few depict the infant colony itself.




John Lewin, Platypus, 1808, State Library of New South Wales


Several professional natural-history illustrators accompanied expeditions in the early 19th century, including Ferdinand Bauer, who travelled with Matthew Flinders, and Charles-Alexandre Lesueur, who travelled with a French expedition led by Nicolas Baudin. The first resident professional artist was John Lewin,[16] who arrived in 1800 and published two volumes of natural history art. Ornithologist John Gould was renowned for his illustration's of the country's birds.[16] In the late 19th Century Harriet and Helena Scott were highly respected natural history illustrators[17] Lewin's Platypus (1808) represents the fine detail and scientific observation displayed by many of these early painters.
As well as inspiration in natural history, there were some ethnographic portraiture of Aboriginal Australians, particularly in the 1830s. Artists included Augustus Earle in New South Wales[16] and Benjamin Duterrau, Robert Dowling and the sculptor Benjamin Law, recording the last Tasmanian Aborigines.




John Glover, My Harvest Home, 1835


The most significant landscape artist of this era[15] was John Glover. Heavily influenced by 18th Century European landscape painters, such as Claude Lorraine and Salvator Rosa, his works captured the distinctive Australian features of open country, fallen logs, and blue hills.[18]
Conrad Martens (1801–1878) worked from 1835 to 1878 as a professional artist, painting many landscapes and was commercially successful. His work, has been regarded as softening the landscape to fit European sensibilities.[16] His watercolour studies of Sydney Harbour are well regarded, and seen as introducing Romantic ideals to his paintings.[18] Martens is also remembered for accompanying scientist Charles Darwin on the HMS Beagle (as had Augustus Earle).
Later Colonial Art (1850–1885)[edit]
From 1851, the Victorian Gold Rush resulted in a huge influx of settlers and new wealth. S. T. Gill (1818–1880) documented life on the Australian gold fields,[16] however the colonial art market primarily desired landscape paintings, which were commissioned by wealthy landowners or merchants wanting to record their material success.[19]




John Skinner Prout, Fairlight Glen on the Warragambra (sic), c.1843


William Piguenit's (1836–1914) "Flood in the Darling" was acquired by the National Gallery of New South Wales in 1895.[20]




Eugene von Guerard, North-east View from the Northern Top of Mount Kosciuszko, 1863, National Gallery of Australia


Some of the artists of note included Eugene von Guerard, Nicholas Chevalier, William Strutt, John Skinner Prout and Knut Bull.
Louis Buvelot was a key figure in landscape painting in the later period. He was influenced by the Barbizon school painters, and so using a plein air technique, and a more domesticated and settled view of the land, in contrast to the emphasis on strangeness or danger prevalent in earlier painters. This approach, together with his extensive teaching influence, have led his to dubbed the "Father of Landscape Painting in Australia".[18]
A few attempts at art exhibitions were made in the 1840s, which attracted a number of artists but were commercial failures. By the 1850s, however, regular exhibitions became popular, with a variety of art types represented. The first of these exhibitions was in 1854 in Melbourne. An art museum, which eventually became the National Gallery of Victoria, was founded in 1861, and it began to collect Australian works as well as gathering a collection of European masters. Crucially, it also opened an Art School, important for the following generations of Australian-born and raised artists.
Heidelberg School (1885–1910)[edit]
Main article: Heidelberg School




Shearing the Rams (1890, National Gallery of Victoria) by Tom Roberts, leading figure of the Heidelberg School


The origins of a distinctly Australian painting tradition is often associated with the Heidelberg School of the 1880s-1890s. Named after a camp Tom Roberts and Arthur Streeton had set up at a property near Heidelberg (then on the rural outskirts of Melbourne), these painters, together with Frederick McCubbin, Charles Conder[21] and others, began an impressionistic plein air approach to the Australian landscape that remains embedded in Australia's popular consciousness, both in and outside the art world.




Arthur Streeton ‘The Purple Noon's Transparent Might’ (1896, National Gallery of Victoria)


Their most recognised paintings involve scenes of pastoral and outback Australia. Central themes of their art are considered those of work, conquering the land,[15] and an idealisation of the rural pioneer.[18] By the 1890s most Australian's were city-dwellers, as were the artists themselves, and a romantic view of pioneer life gave great power and popularity to images such as Shearing the Rams.[18] In this work Roberts uses formal composition and strong realism to dignify the rural workers[18] whilst the relative anonymity of the men and their subdued expressions, elevate their manual labour as the real subject, rather that the specific individuals portrayed.[15]
In their portrayal of the nobility of rural life, the Heidelberg artists reveal their debt to Millet, Bastien-Lepage and Courbet, but the techniques and aims of the French Impressionists provide more direct inspiration and influenced their actual practise. In their early and extremely influential Exhibition of 9 by 5 Impressions of small sketches, their impressionistic programme was clear, as evidenced from their catalogue: "An effect is only momentary: so an impressionist tries to find his place... it has been the object of artists to render faithfully, and thus obtain first records of effects widely differing, and often of very fleeting character."[18]
Other significant painters associated with the Heidelberg painters were Walter Withers (1854–1914), who won the inaugural Wynne Prize in 1896.,[21] and Jane Sutherland (1853–1928), a student of McCubbin.
List of artists[edit]
Main articles: List of Australian artists, Category:Australian sculptors and Category:Australian photographers
Notable collectors[edit]
Joseph Brown
Collector and art dealer Dr Joseph Brown developed what is "regarded as the country's finest private collection of 19th and early to mid-20th century Australian art"[22] over the course of the second half of the twentieth century. His collection included the work of artists including Wes Walters, Eugene von Guerard, Tom Roberts, Frederick McCubbin, E. M. Boyd, E. Phillips Fox, Roger Kemp, John Olsen, Margaret Preston, John Perceval, John Brack, Peter Booth, Grace Cossington Smith, Peter Purves Smith, Arthur Boyd, John Peter Russell, Brett Whiteley, and Fred Williams.
Having created a collection of over 300 works spanning over 200 years of Australian art, in 2004 Dr Brown donated 154 works to the National Gallery of Victoria, on the condition that the gallery keep the works on display, in what the gallery called "the most generous single gift of works of art ever made to a public gallery in Australia."[23] Alan Boxer's donation to the National Gallery of Australia in Canberra has since exceeded that gift.
Patrick White
Novelist Patrick White was a prolific collector of Australian artists, often only fleetingly interested in an artist and other times interested over the long term. Collecting work by only a few high profile artists like Sidney Nolan, Brett Whiteley, John Brack and Charles Blackman, his habit of collecting lesser-known artists led to some prescient choices, as the most flattered artists of White's lifetime (1912-1990) are brought into question. White bought work by tonalist Clarice Beckett, abstract painters Roy De Maistre, Ralph Balson and John Peart, abstract influenced painters with environmental concerns Erica McGilchrist and John Olsen and arte povera sculptor John Davis, formalist sculptor Clement Meadmore, surrealist and junk sculptor Robert Klippel, pop artist and pontillist Richard Larter and spiritual modernist painters Ian Fairweather, Lawrence Daws and James Clifford, painter of dreamings Clifford Possum Tjapaltjarri, Antipodean scene painters Jacqueline Hick, Chris O'Doherty and Max Watters.
White was a friend of one of Sydney's leading Abstract painters and Bauhaus aficionado, Margo Lewers. Margo Lewers and her artist husband Gerald Lewers were based at Penrith, NSW.
Joseph Stanislaus Ostoja-Kotkowski, an early media artist designed sets for the Adelaide production of White's play The Ham Funeral.
Ann Lewis
Ann Lewis had a voracious appetite for stylish dot paintings by painters such as Emily Kame Kngwarreye, Dorothy Napangardi, Jan Billycan, Elizabeth Nyumi, Gloria Petyarre, painters Rover Thomas, Paddy Bedford, Sally Gabori, Turkey Tolson Tjupurrula, Doreen Reid Nakamarra, Judy Watson Napangardi and bark painter John Mawurndjul. She also collected abstract painters Ralph Balson and Jan Riske, Robert Klippel, the conceptual artists Fiona Hall and Ian Burn, the environmentally themed painter John Olsen, sensualist abstract paintings by Janet Dawson and the textual assemblages of Rosalie Gascoigne, also works by sculptors Ricky Swallow and Bronwyn Oliver.
Roderick Meagher
Justice Roderick Meagher collected early Australian moderns like Margaret Preston, Russell Drysdale and Clarice Beckett, the mid century abstraction of Ian Fairweather, Clement Meadmore and John Coburn and contemporary artists like woodblock printer Cressida Campbell, portraitist Steve Cox and dot painters Eunice Napanangka and Emily Kame Kngwarreye.
David Walsh
David Walsh opened the Museum of Old and New Art in Hobart in 2011 with a collection of international contemporary art, sparking unprecedented public interest in post-1950s art.
Art museums and galleries in Australia[edit]




National Gallery of Victoria.


Main articles: List of Art museums and galleries in Australia and Category:Art museums and galleries in Australia




Picture of Albert Namatjira at the Albert Namatjira Gallery, Alice Springs Cultural Precinct, in 2007.


Institutions[edit]
Australia has major art museums and galleries subsidized by the national and state governments, as well as private art museums and small university and municipal galleries. The National Gallery of Australia, the Gallery of Modern Art and the Art Gallery of New South Wales have major strengths in collecting the art of the Asia Pacific Region. Others include the National Gallery of Victoria in Melbourne, which has the best Australian collection of Western art. The Museum of Contemporary Art, Sydney and the privately owned Museum of Old and New Art in Hobart, Tasmania and White Rabbit Gallery in Sydney are widely regarded as autonomously discerning collections of international contemporary art.
Other institutions include the Art Gallery of South Australia in Adelaide, Newcastle Art Gallery, the National Portrait Gallery of Australia, the National Museum of Australia, the Canberra Museum and Gallery, the Tasmanian Museum and Art Gallery in Hobart, the Museum and Art Gallery of the Northern Territory in Darwin, and the Art Gallery of Western Australia in Perth. A significant amount of colonial artwork is held by the National and State libraries.
Art market[edit]





This section does not cite any references (sources). Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2015)


The boom and bust cycle in contemporary art is evident in the 1980s colonial art boom ending at the time of the 1987 stock market crash and the exit of many artists and dealers, followed by the 2000s boom in Aboriginal dot painting and Australian late modernist painting, which ended at the time of the global financial crisis and growing collector and public interest in the international contemporary art circuit.
The introduction of a 5% resale royalty may have affected buyers in various ways. Some object to paying any resale royalty while others do not mind a royalty going directly to the artists, however they worry about further red tape and bureaucratic interference.
Information can be found through:

Social Media
Websites
Print media
Broadcast media
Trade fairs
Word of Mouth

In 2014 - 2015 there has been a rediscovery of colonial art at auction. Affordable Twentieth century rural scene painting is buoyant. While the inflated Northern Hemisphere art markets are anticipating a massive correction the Australian art market has already transitioned to the middle market.
Socially oriented art events such as art fairs and biennales have continued to grow in size and popularity in the contemporary art scene. The smaller venues that are commercial galleries have struggled to remain in business in the 2010s in spite of a functioning economy, although there is little consensus on the reasons for this.
Australian visual arts in other countries[edit]
The museum for Australian Aboriginal art "La grange"[24] (Neuchâtel, Switzerland) is one of the few museums in Europe that dedicates itself entirely to Aboriginal art.
See also[edit]

Arts in Australia
Australian artist groups and collectives
Australiana
Australian Cartoonists' Association
Australian Feminist Art Timeline
Photography in Australia

References[edit]


^ "Indigenous art". Australian Culture and Recreation Portal. Australia Government. Retrieved 26 September 2010.&#160;
^ Kakadu National Park - Home
^ Uluru-Kata Tjuta National Park Archived 17 January 2010 at WebCite
^ Ku Ring Gai Chase National Park, Sydney, Australia. Information and Map
^ * ABC Online 10.02.09 Pilbara Rock Art not Affected by Mining Emissions: Study
^ Phillips, Yasmine: World protection urged for Burrup art. 13.01.09 [1] Archived 25 October 2008 at the Wayback Machine
^ The spread of people to Australia - Australian Museum
^ "The Indigenous Collection". The Ian Potter Centre: NGV Australia. National Gallery of Victoria. Archived from the original on 2010-12-05. Retrieved 6 December 2010.&#160;
^ [2] Arnhem Land Rock Art on Archaeology TV
^ Australian Indigenous art - australia.gov.au
^ http://www.hermannsburgschool.com/
^ nga.gov.au
^ http://www.griffith.edu.au/humanities-languages/school-humanities/research/protect-australias-spirit
^ [3] Protect Australia's Spirit Interview with Prof. Paul Tacon and Jack Thompson
^ a b c d Art in Australia: From Colonization to Postmodernism. Christopher Allen (1997). Thames and Hudson, World of Art series.
^ a b c d e f James Gleeson, Australian Painting. Edited by John Henshaw. 1971.
^ http://australianmuseum.net.au/Beauty-from-Nature-art-of-the-Scott-Sisters
^ a b c d e f g Australian Painting: 1788-2000. Bernard Smith with Terry Smith and Christopher Heathcote (2001). Oxford University Press.
^ nga.gov.au
^ McCulloch, Alan McCulloch, Susan McCulloch &amp; Emily McCulloch Childs: McCulloch’s Encyclopedia of Australian Art Melbourne University Press, 2006
^ a b Alan McCulloch, Golden Age of Australian Painting: Impressionism and the Heidelberg School
^ The Australian - Joseph Brown: Mentor and collector who made a difference
^ The Joseph Brown Collection, National Gallery of Victoria
^ fondation-bf.ch


External links[edit]

National Association for the Visual Arts
Australian Commercial Galleries Association
Craft Australia's website
Australian Video Art Archive
Design and Art Australia Online
Art Collector Magazine's Indigenous Art Centres Guide
The Australian Arts Community - A free community website for the arts in Australia
Art Prizes Australia, a free listing of Australian Art Prizes









v
t
e


Oceanian art






Sovereign states



Australia
Federated States of Micronesia
Fiji
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Nauru
New Zealand
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu








Associated states
of New Zealand



Cook Islands
Niue








Dependencies
and other territories



American Samoa
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Easter Island
French Polynesia
Guam
Hawaii
New Caledonia
Norfolk Island
Northern Mariana Islands
Pitcairn Islands
Tokelau
Wallis and Futuna
















v
t
e


Australian art awards









Archibald
Bald Archy
Blake
Bowness
Clemenger
Conrad Jupiters
Dobell
Doug Moran
Fleurieu
Fremantle Print Award
Glover
Gold Coast Art Prize
Helen Lempriere
McCaughey
Mosman
NATSIA
National New Media Art Award
National Works on Paper
Portia Geach
Phoenix Prize for Spiritual Art
Photographic portrait
Salon des Refusés
Schubert Ulrick
Sculpture by the Sea
Sulman
Wynne

















v
t
e


Australia&#160;articles






History







Timeline
Bibliography
Prehistory
Archaeology
European Exploration
1788–1850
1851–1900
1901–1945
Since 1945








By topic



Constitutional
Diplomatic
Economic
Federation
Immigration
Indigenous
Military
Monarchy
Railway
Women











Geography







Climate
Continent
Deserts
Environment

issues


Flora
Fauna
Forests
Geology
Islands
Mountains
Regions
Protected areas
Rivers
Rabbits
Waterfalls








Subdivisions



States and Territories
Capitals
Cities

by population
by settlement













Politics







Constitution
Courts
Electoral system
Federal budget
Foreign relations
Government

overview


Independence
Intelligence and security
Law

Chief Justice
enforcement


Military
Monarchy
National debt
Parliament
Public Service
Elections
Donations
Parties
Attorney General











Economy







Agriculture
Companies
Dollar (currency)
Energy
Gross state product
Home ownership

Public housing


Homelessness
Household income
Manufacturing
Media
Mining
Reserve Bank
Stock Exchange
Superannuation
Taxation
Telecommunications
Tourism
Transportation
Welfare system











Society







Australians

indigenous


Crime
Demographics
Education
Health care
Human rights

LGBT rights


Immigration
Languages
Multiculturalism
Poverty








Culture



Architecture
Art
Arts
Australian English
Cinema
Cuisine

wine


Dance
Literature
Music
Public holidays
Radio
Religion
Sport
Television
Theatre








Symbols



Coat of arms
Flags
Honours
State and Territory symbols















Outline
Index



Book
Category
Portal
WikiProject















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Australian_art&amp;oldid=688055929"					
				Categories: Australian artAustralian cultureArt by nationalityHidden categories: Use dmy dates from June 2013Use Australian English from June 2013All Wikipedia articles written in Australian EnglishArticles needing additional references from March 2015All articles needing additional referencesRegion topic template using suffix				
							
		
		
			