


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Black Obelisk of Shalmaneser III
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				
For the band see: Black Obelisk (band)


Black Obelisk of Shalmaneser III


Black Obelisk of Shalmaneser III in the British Museum



Material
black limestone


Size
c.1.98 metres high, 45 cm Wide


Writing
Assyrian


Created
858-824 BC


Discovered
Nimrud, Iraq


Present location
British Museum, London


Registration
ME 118885


The Black Obelisk of Shalmaneser III is a black limestone Neo-Assyrian bas-relief sculpture from Nimrud (ancient Kalhu), in northern Iraq, commemorating the deeds of King Shalmaneser III (reigned 858-824 BC).
It is the most complete Assyrian obelisk yet discovered, and is historically significant because it is thought to display the earliest ancient depiction of a biblical figure - Jehu, King of Israel. The traditional identification of "Yaw" as Jehu has been questioned by some scholars, who proposed that the inscription refers to another king, Jehoram of Israel.[1][2] Its reference to 'Parsua' is also the first known reference to the Persians.
Tribute offerings are shown being brought from identifiable regions and peoples. It was erected as a public monument in 825 BC at a time of civil war. It was discovered by archaeologist Sir Austen Henry Layard in 1846 and is now in the British Museum. Replicas can be found at the Oriental Institute in Chicago, Illinois, at Harvard's Semitic Museum in Cambridge, Massachusetts, at the ICOR Library in the Semitic Department at The Catholic University of America, in Washington, District of Columbia, in Salem, Oregon, at Corban University's Prewitt/Allen Archaeological Museum, at the Siegfried H. Horn Museum at Andrews University in Berrien Springs, MI and in the library of the Theological University of the Reformed Churches in Kampen, the Netherlands.



Contents


1 Description
2 Second register
3 See also
4 References
5 External links



Description[edit]




The Assyrian king Shalmaneser III receives tribute from Sua, king of Gilzanu, The Black Obelisk.


This artifact features twenty reliefs, five on each side. They depict five different subdued kings, bringing tribute and prostrating before the Assyrian king. From top to bottom they are: (1) Sua of Gilzanu (in north-west Iran), (2) "Jehu of Bit Omri" (Jehu of the House of Omri), (3) an unnamed ruler of Musri (probably Egypt), (4) Marduk-apil-usur of Suhi (middle Euphrates, Syria and Iraq), and (5) Qalparunda of Patin (Antakya region of Turkey). Each scene occupies four panels around the monument and is described by a cuneiform script above them.
On the top and the bottom of the reliefs there is a long cuneiform inscription recording the annals of Shalmaneser III. It lists the military campaigns which the king and his commander-in-chief headed every year, until the thirty-first year of reign. Some features might suggest that the work had been commissioned by the commander-in-chief, Dayyan-Assur.
Second register[edit]




Jehu, or Jehu's ambassador, bows before Shalmaneser III.


The second register from the top is thought to include the earliest surviving picture of a biblical figure. The name appears as mIa-ú-a mar mHu-um-ri-i. Rawlinson's original translation in 1850 seminal work "On the Inscriptions of Assyria and Babylonia" stated: "The second line of offerings are said to have been sent by Yahua, son of Hubiri, a prince of whom there is no mention in the annals, and of whose native country, therefore, I am ignorant"[3][4] Over a year later, a connection with the bible was made by Reverend Edward Hincks, who wrote in his diary on 21 August 1851: "Thought of an identification of one of the obelisk captives — with Jehu, king of Israel, and satisfying myself on the point wrote a letter to the Athenaeum announcing it".[5] Hincks' letter was published by Athenaeum on the same day, entitled "Nimrud Obelisk".[6] Hincks' identification is now the commonly held position by biblical archaeologists.
The identification of "Yaw" as Jehu was questioned by contemporary scholars such as George Smith[7] as well as in more recent times by P. Kyle McCarter and Edwin R. Thiele,[1][2] based on the fact that Jehu was not an Omride, as well as transliteration and chronology issues. However, the name read as "Yaw, son of Omri (Bit-Khumri", see House of Omri), is generally accepted to follow Hincks as the Biblical Jehu, king of Israel.
The stele describes how Jehu brought or sent his tribute in or around 841 BC.[8] Jehu severed Israel’s alliances with Phoenicia and Judah, and became subject to Assyria. The caption above the scene, written in Assyrian cuneiform, can be translated:

“The tribute of Jehu, son of Omri: I received from him silver, gold, a golden bowl, a golden vase with pointed bottom, golden tumblers, golden buckets, tin, a staff for a king [and] spears."

See also[edit]

Kurkh Monoliths
List of artifacts significant to the Bible
White Obelisk of Ashurnasirpal I

References[edit]


^ a b P. Kyle McCarter, Bulletin of the American Schools of Oriental Research, No. 216 (Dec., 1974), pp. 5-7
^ a b Edwin R. Thiele, Bulletin of the American Schools of Oriental Research, No. 222 (Apr., 1976), pp. 19-23
^ On the Inscriptions of Assyria and Babylonia, 1850
^ The Bible in the British Museum: Interpreting the Evidence, T. C. Mitchell, page 14
^ Studies on the Text and Versions of the Hebrew Bible in Honour of Robert Gordon, edited by Geoffrey Khan, Diana Lipton, p159
^ "Nimrud Obelisk, Athenaeum, 1251, 1384-85
^ Assyrian Eponym Canon, George Smith, 1875, page 190, "There is another supposed Hebrew king in the annals of Shalmaneser, b.c. 842, Extracts VIII. and X., called "Jehu son of Omri," who is generally identified with "Jehu son of Nimshi," the king of Israel. The country ruled by Jehu, son of Omri, is not stated in the inscriptions; and it appears unlikely that Jehu, king of Israel, who exterminated the family of Omri, should call himself son of that king. Without advancing any theory for the identification of the monarch mentioned in the Assyrian inscriptions, I would urge that the identity of the Jehu of the Bible with the Jehu of the inscriptions is not proved, and that these notices are not enough to force us to alter all our Bible dates."
^ Millard, Alan (1997) Discoveries from Bible Times, Oxford, Lion, p121


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Black Obelisk.



British Museum page on the Black Obelisk
Photo; Article
Photo; Article
Jehu Panel; Article









v
t
e


The British Museum






Building



Great Court
King's Library
Round Reading Room











Departments
and objects





Africa, Oceania &amp; Americas




Akan Drum
Aubin Codex
Benin Bronzes
Briggs Enigma
Double-headed serpent
Hoa Hakananai'a
Throne of Weapons
Kayung totem pole
Yaxchilan Lintel 24









Ancient Egypt and Sudan




Colossal head of Amenhotep III
Gebelein predynastic mummies
Hunters Palette
Rhind Mathematical Papyrus
Rosetta Stone
Sphinx of Taharqo
Younger Memnon









Asia




Admonitions Scroll
Bimaran casket
Kanishka casket
Mathura lion capital
Percival David Foundation of Chinese Art
Seated Buddha from Gandhara
Statue of Tara
The Great Wave off Kanagawa









Greece and Rome




Bassae Frieze
Elgin Marbles
Esquiline Treasure
Farnese Diadumenos
Harpy Tomb
Jennings Dog
Lion of Knidos
Minoan Bull-leaper
Nereid Monument
Portland Vase
Warren Cup









Middle East




Black Obelisk of Shalmaneser III
Burney Relief
Cylinder of Nabonidus
Cyrus Cylinder
Flood tablet (Gilgamesh)
Library of Ashurbanipal
Oxus Treasure
Taylor Prism
Lachish relief
Babylonian Chronicles
Kurkh Monoliths









Prehistory and Europe




Franks Casket
Holy Thorn Reliquary
Hoxne Hoard
Lewis chessmen
Lindow Man
Mildenhall Treasure
Ringlemere Cup
Royal Gold Cup
Sutton Hoo
Swimming Reindeer
Vindolanda Tablets









Prints and Drawings




Dürer's Rhinoceros
Epifania
I Modi
Isabella Brant
The Ancient of Days
The Disasters of War
The Tale of the Flopsy Bunnies
Triumphal Arch









Other




Coins and Medals
Conservation, Documentation and Science
Libraries and Archives
Portable Antiquities and Treasure
A History of the World in 100 Objects











Other



British Museum Act 1902
British Museum Act 1963
Directors
Films shot at the British Museum
Friends
Royal Commission on the British Museum
Trustees
Secretum











 Category
 Commons















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Black_Obelisk_of_Shalmaneser_III&amp;oldid=691048747"					
				Categories: Assyrian art and architectureAncient obelisksVictory stelesMiddle Eastern objects in the British Museum1st-millennium BC steles9th-century BC stelesSculpture of the Ancient Near EastNimrudHidden categories: Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata				
							
		
		
			