


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Botswana art
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								  (Redirected from Art of Botswana)
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				

Part of a series on the


Culture of Botswana





History


People


Languages


Cuisine


Religion


Art




Music and performing arts


Music






Sport




Symbols


Flag
Coat of arms









 Botswana  portal







v
t
e





Botswana's art is varied. Essentially it falls into two categories: that of the !Kung peoples (also known as the San or the Bushmen tribes) and that of the Nguni-derived peoples such as the Batswana. The former is of greater antiquity in origin, and includes decoration of many of the devices and equipment the&#160;!Kung needed for desert existence. Items such as ostrich shells, clay water filters, animal skins, arrows, bows and pots often received added decoration by way of incised or relief decoration, imprinted pottery decoration, beading and carving. These tribes also carved art objects that had no other function, most often of animals. A more ancient art is that of cave painting, for which the&#160;!Kung are justifiably famous: right across the South-East African region their ancestors left dynamic paintings on cave walls, executed in unknown and highly resilient pigments that have lasted millennia. Depictions of animals, hunts, ceremonies and dances are common.
The Nguni peoples' art is more similar to Nguni-derived peoples' art in the rest of South-Eastern Africa. Sophisticated carvings of stone and wood (usually of animals or people), sculptures and ceramics of clay; 'township' art made of discarded or utilitarian urban objects such as bottle tops and wire; drums, beading, rattles, musical instruments such as the mbira and string instruments, carved walking sticks, knobkerries and many other art forms. One art that is particularly developed in Botswana is the preparation and marketing of hides and furs that have been stitched together, often combined in decorative panels using the different fur types and colours from different animals. These can have a definite use as well, being derived originally from the 'kaross' or desert blanket suited to the very cold conditions of the Kalahari at night and in winter. Woollen and crocheted blankets in local patterns are also popular. Basket weaving is also carried out to a high level of skill and variation to produce baskets from Botswana.
There is a great deal of overlap between the two groups' artwork: for example the wire, ironwork and beads used in&#160;!Kung items would have been obtained by trade from Nguni peoples, who themselves would have obtained some of their raw art material such as skins and animal horns from the&#160;!Kung.
In the past, missionaries to the region may have asked newly converted tribes to destroy their artwork, considering it to be idolatrous. This was certainly common in other conquered cultures. Many African cultures respect their totemic animals and other symbols by depicting them in artwork. These days the art industry thrives in the production of items for tourist consumption. The Okavango swamp, parts of the Kalahari desert tourist trail and various game reserves all support active local art industries. The major towns also have tourist galleries. Some artists, including white Botswana residents, paint two dimensional pictures of wildlife for the same market, which also includes various items such as T-shirts, hunting knives, shoes and hats. Leather-work is also popular, as are items made from legally culled animals such as elephant hair bracelets.
References[edit]





This article does not cite any references (sources). Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (May 2010)











v
t
e


Art of Africa






Sovereign states



Algeria
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of the Congo
Djibouti
Egypt
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gabon
The Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Ivory Coast (Côte d'Ivoire)
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
São Tomé and Príncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
South Sudan
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Tunisia
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe









States with limited
recognition




Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic
Somaliland









Dependencies and
other territories





Mayotte&#160;/ Réunion&#160;(France)
Saint Helena&#160;/ Ascension Island&#160;/ Tristan da Cunha&#160;(United Kingdom)
















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Botswana_art&amp;oldid=626922805"					
				Categories: Art by regionBotswana cultureHidden categories: Articles lacking sources from May 2010All articles lacking sources				
							
		
		
			