


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Brazilian art
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								  (Redirected from Art of Brazil)
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				



Aleijadinho: Angel of the Passion, ca. 1799. Congonhas do Campo


The creation of art in the geographic area now known as Brazil begins with the earliest records of its human habitation. The original inhabitants of the land, pre-Columbian Indian peoples, produced various forms of art; specific cultures like the Marajoara left sophisticated painted pottery. This area was colonized by Portugal in the 16th century and given the modern name of Brazil. Brazilian art is most commonly used as an umbrella term for art created in this region post Portuguese colonization.



Contents


1 Pre-Columbian traditions
2 Baroque
3 19th century: Neoclassicism, Romanticism, Realism
4 20th century: Modern and Contemporary
5 Contemporary Art and Photography
6 See also
7 References



Pre-Columbian traditions[edit]
Main article: Indigenous peoples in Brazil
The oldest known art in Brazil is the cave paintings in Serra da Capivara National Park in the state of Piauí,[1] dating back to c. 13,000 BC. More recent examples have been found in Minas Gerais and Goiás, showing geometric patterns and animal forms.[2]
One of the most sophisticated kinds of Pre-Columbian artifact found in Brazil is the sophisticated Marajoara pottery (c. 800–1400 AD), from cultures flourishing on Marajó Island and around the region of Santarém, decorated with painting and complex human and animal reliefs. Statuettes and cult objects, such as the small carved-stone amulets called muiraquitãs, also belong to these cultures.[3] The Mina and Periperi cultures, from Maranhão and Bahia, produced interesting though simpler pottery and statuettes.
In the beginning of the 21st century, the ancient Indian traditions of body painting, pottery, cult statuettes, and feather art are still being cultivated by the remaining Indian peoples.








Cave paintings, Serra da Capivara National Park.









Shark-shaped carved stone, Sambaqui culture, Museu da Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul.









Burial urn, Marajoara culture. American Museum of Natural History.









Santarém culture. Museu Paraense Emílio Goeldi.













Bororo Indian with feather headdress and body painting.









Tikuna ceremonial dresses. Memorial dos Povos Indígenas.









Tiriyó-kaxuyana beadwork. Memorial dos Povos Indígenas.









Enawene-nawe body-art.





Baroque[edit]
Main article: Baroque in Brazil
The first Western artists active in Brazil were Roman Catholic priests who came from Portugal to “civilize” the Indians. Jesuits assumed an important role in this process, with their many missionary establishments called "Reductions" teaching religion through art in the form of sacred plays, music, statuary, and painting. José de Anchieta was the first important playwright; Agostinho de Jesus and Agostinho da Piedade produced the first known sculptures; Belchior Paulo, João Felipe Bettendorff, Ricardo do Pilar, and a few others did the first paintings; while Francisco de Vaccas and Pedro da Fonseca started organizing the musical life of the infant colony. Basílio da Gama and Gregório de Mattos were the first secular poets. All of them worked under the influence of the Baroque, the dominant style in Brazil until the early 19th century.[4][5]
Through the 17th and 18th centuries Baroque art flourished with increasing richness and craftsmanship, mainly in Bahia and Pernambuco along the coast and in some inland regions, reaching the highest levels of originality in Minas Gerais, where a gold rush nurtured a rich and cultured local society. In Minas lived the greatest artists of Brazilian Baroque: painter Manuel da Costa Ataíde and sculptor-architect Aleijadinho. Minas was also the birthplace of a proto-Neoclassical school of music and literature, with composers Lobo de Mesquita and Francisco Gomes da Rocha, and poets Tomás Antônio Gonzaga and Cláudio Manuel da Costa.[5][6]








José Joaquim da Rocha: Painted ceiling of St. Dominicus Church, Salvador









Ricardo do Pilar: Man of sorrows, c. 1690









São Francisco Church, Salvador









João Nepomuceno Correia e Castro: Immaculate Conception. Museu da Inconfidência













School of Bahia: Christ the Savior.









Ataíde: Our Lady surrounded by musician angels, Church of Saint Francis of Assisi, Ouro Preto









Aleijadinho and Francisco de Lima Cerqueira: Church of Saint Francis of Assisi, Ouro Preto









Aleijadinho: Christ praying, Bom Jesus de Matosinhos Sanctuary





19th century: Neoclassicism, Romanticism, Realism[edit]
See also: Academic art in Brazil
One single event in the 19th century sowed the seeds for a complete renewal in Brazilian visual arts: the arrival of the French Artistic Mission in 1816, which strongly reinforced the Neoclassical style, previously seen in Brazil only in timid attempts. Joachim Lebreton, its leader, proposed the creation of an Academy of Fine Arts, later restructured as the Imperial Academy of Fine Arts. The Academy was the most important center for the visual arts through nearly the whole of the 19th century. It imposed a new concept of artistic education and was the basis for a revolution in Brazilian painting, sculpture, architecture, graphic arts, and crafts.[7] A few decades later, under the personal patronage of Emperor Pedro II, who was engaged in an ambitious national project of modernization, the Academy reached its golden age, fostering the emergence of the first generation of Romantic painters. Victor Meirelles and Pedro Américo, among others, produced lasting visual symbols of national identity. It must be said that in Brazil Romanticism in painting took a peculiar shape, not showing the overwhelming dramaticism, fantasy, violence, or interest in death and the bizarre commonly seen in the European version, and because of its academic and palatial nature all excesses were eschewed.[8][9][10]




Pedro Américo: Independence or Death!, 1888. Museu Paulista


Meanwhile, literature too evolved towards a romantic-nationalist school with the works of Casimiro de Abreu and Manuel Antônio de Almeida. Around 1850, a transition began, centered upon Álvares de Azevedo, who was influenced by the poetry of Lord Byron. This second generation of Romantics was obsessed with morbidness and death, and soon after, social commentary could be found in literature, both features not seen in the visual arts. Antônio Castro Alves wrote of the horrors of slavery, and the persecuted Indians were rescued through art by poets and novelists like Antônio Gonçalves Dias and José de Alencar. These trends combined in one of the most important accomplishments of the Romantic era in Brazil: the establishment of a Brazilian national identity based on Indian ancestry and the rich natural environment of the country.[11]
In music, the 19th century produced only two composers of outstanding talent: neoclassical sacred composer José Maurício Nunes Garcia, for a while music director to the court, and later, Romantic operist Carlos Gomes, the first Brazilian musician to win international acclaim.[12]
In the late 19th century, Brazilian art became acquainted with Realism. Descriptions of nature and of the people of Brazil's varied regions as well as psychological romances proliferated with João Simões Lopes Neto, Aluísio Azevedo, Euclides da Cunha, and, above all, Machado de Assis, while Almeida Junior, Pedro Weingärtner, Oscar Pereira da Silva, and other Realist painters depicted folk types and the distinctive colors and light of Brazilian landscape.








Simplício de Sá: Portrait of Peter I, ca. 1830. Imperial Museum









São Cristóvão, Rio de Janeiro









Theatro da Paz, Belém do Pará









Victor Meirelles: The first Mass in Brazil, 1861. Museu Nacional de Belas Artes













Rodolpho Bernardelli: Christ and the adulterous woman, 1881









Almeida Junior: Model's rest, 1882. Museu Nacional de Belas Artes









Nicola Facchinetti: Rodrigo de Freitas lagoon, ca. 1884









Belmiro de Almeida: Effects of sunlight, 1893





20th century: Modern and Contemporary[edit]
The beginning of the 20th century saw a struggle between old schools and modernist trends. The Week of Modern Art festival, held in São Paulo in 1922, was received with fiery criticism by conservative sectors of the society, but it was a landmark in the history of Brazilian art. It included plastic arts exhibitions, lectures, concerts, and the reading of poems. Due to the radicalism (for the times) of some of their poems and music, the artists were vigorously booed and pelted by the audience, and the press and art critics in general were strong in their condemnation. However, those artists are now seen as the founders of Modern art in Brazil. Modernist literature and theory of art were represented by Oswald de Andrade, Sérgio Milliet, Menotti del Picchia, and Mário de Andrade, whose revolutionary novel Macunaíma (1928) is one of the founding texts of Brazilian Modernism. Painting was represented by Anita Malfatti, Tarsila do Amaral, Emiliano Di Cavalcanti, Vicente do Rego Monteiro; sculpture by Victor Brecheret; and music by Heitor Villa-Lobos, the leader of a new musical nationalism, among many others.[13]




Oscar Niemeyer: Cathedral of Brasília. The statues are works by Alfredo Ceschiatti


The Week not only introduced to a wider public modern, experimental tendencies derived from European Expressionism, Cubism, and Surrealism, but also wanted to make use of national folklore as a basis for an art more relevant to the Brazilian reality, with an enhanced social awareness. However, the radicalism of those first Modernists couldn't last for long in a society used to traditional fashions, and the original core members had separated by 1929, pursuing individual paths. What Brazilian art then became was a mix of some important achievements of the Moderns, meaning freedom from the strict academic agenda, with more conventional traits, giving birth in the following generation to a moderate Modernism, best exemplified by painter Cândido Portinari, who was something like the official painter of the Brazilian government in mid-century.[14]




Oscar Niemeyer: Copan Building


Within the group of Brazilian artists, Chico Niedzielski's artwork has been spread all over the country. His work is known to be inspired by Sacred Geometry, breaking the tendency to focus on Brazilian themes and searching for a more universal and atemporal form of Brazilian art. The erosion of radical Modernism in the visual arts in the early 20th century was not reflected in Brazilian literature. Clarice Lispector wrote existentialist novels and developed a highly personal style, filled with stream-of-consciousness and epiphanies. João Guimarães Rosa changed the face of Brazilian literature with his experimental language, and playwright Nelson Rodrigues dealt with crime, prejudice, passion, and sexual pathologies. In the 1950s, painting and sculpture regained strength through Abstractionism, and architecture began also to display advanced features, influenced by Le Corbusier. Its greatest achievement was the urban core of Brasília, designed by urbanist Lúcio Costa and architect Oscar Niemeyer, now a World Heritage Site.[15] Contemporary art in Brazil evolved from Modernism and assimilated later trends, focusing mainly in the early 21st century on city life and all its aspects and displaying a huge diversity of styles in tune with the growing internationalistic tendencies.

Contemporary Art and Photography[edit]
Brazilian contemporary art and photography is one of the most creative in Latin America, growing an international prominence each year with exhibitions and publications. Names like Miguel Rio Branco, Vik Muniz, Sebastião Salgado, Guy Veloso, and others, get strong. Some artists as: Hélio Oiticica, Lygia Clark, Cildo Meireles among others, has also featured on the international stage.









Vik Muniz:"Action Photo, After Hans Namuth", 1997









Guy Veloso: The Penitents, 2001 [16]









Hélio Oiticica:Labirintos Públicos













Ismael Nery: Nude woman crouching









Cândido Portinari: Study for Discovery of the Land mural at the United States Library of Congress.









Glênio Bianchetti: Bone game, 1955. Rio Grande do Sul Museum of Art









Milton Kurtz: Quasi contacto, 1989. Rio Grande do Sul Museum of Art













Victor Brecheret: Tomb of Olívia Guedes Penteado, São Paulo









Theorem, by Bruno Giorgi









Sculptures by Franz Krajcberg









Vasco Prado: Model resting, 1999. Rio Grande do Sul Museum of Art













Theatro Municipal, Rio de Janeiro. Eclectic









Joseph Franz Seraph Lutzenberger: Palácio do Comércio, Porto Alegre. Déco









Lina Bo Bardi: São Paulo Museum of Art. Modern









Ruy Ohtake: Brasilia Shopping. Contemporary





See also[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Art of Brazil.




Part of a series on the


Culture of Brazil





History


People


Languages


Cuisine


Religion


Art


Literature




Music and performing arts


Music








Media


Television
Cinema






Sport




Monuments


World Heritage Sites








Symbols


Flag
Coat of arms








 Brazil  portal







v
t
e






Latin American art
Brazilian painting
Brazilian sculpture
Brazilian literature
Brazilian architecture
Brazilian music
Brazilian photography

References[edit]


^ Almanaque Abril 2007. São Paulo: Editora Abril, 2007, p. 234.
^ Martins, Simone B. &amp; Imbroisi, Margaret H. História da Arte, 1988
^ Correa, Conceição Gentil. Estatuetas de cerâmica na cultura Santarém. Belém: Museu Paraense Emílio Goeldi, 1965.
^ KARNAL, Leandro. Teatro da Fé: Formas de Representação Religiosa no Brasil e no México do Século XVI. São Paulo, Editora Hucitec, 1998. [1]
^ a b The Brazilian Baroque. Encyclopaedia Itaú Cultural
^ MARIZ, Vasco. História da Música no Brasil: A música no tempo do Brasil Colônia. Rio de Janeiro: Nova Fronteira, 2005. pp. 33-46
^ CONDURU, Roberto. Araras Gregas. In: 19&amp;20 - A revista eletrônica de DezenoveVinte. Volume III, n. 2, abril de 2008 [2]
^ BISCARDI, Afrânio &amp; ROCHA, Frederico Almeida. O Mecenato Artístico de D. Pedro II e o Projeto Imperial. In: 19&amp;20 - A revista eletrônica de DezenoveVinte. Volume I, n. 1, maio de 2006 [3]
^ CARDOSO, Rafael. A Academia Imperial de Belas Artes e o Ensino Técnico. In: 19&amp;20 - A revista eletrônica de DezenoveVinte. Volume III, n. 1, janeiro de 2008 [4]
^ FERNANDES, Cybele V. F. A construção simbólica da nação: A pintura e a escultura nas Exposições Gerais da Academia Imperial das Belas Artes. In: 19&amp;20 - A revista eletrônica de DezenoveVinte. Volume II, n. 4, outubro de 2007 [5]
^ O Indianismo como Projeto de Nacionalidade. Secretaria Municipal de Educação - Prefeitura da Cidade do Rio de Janeiro [6]
^ A Música na Corte de D. João VI e D. Pedro I; Antonio Carlos Gomes. In MARIZ, Vasco. História da Música no Brasil. Rio de Janeiro: Nova Fronteira, 2005.pp 52-61; 76-95
^ Semana da Arte Moderna. Pitoresco Website
^ Modernism in Brazil. Encyclopedia Itaú Cultural
^ Niemeyer, Oscar. Encyclopedia Itaú Cultural
^ Guy Veloso. "The Penitents: Rituals of blood to the fascination of the world’s end project”, 2002-2015










v
t
e


South American art






Sovereign states



Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Ecuador
Guyana
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Suriname
Trinidad and Tobago
Uruguay
Venezuela









Dependencies and
other territories




Aruba
Bonaire
Curaçao
Falkland Islands
French Guiana
South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands
















v
t
e


Brazil&#160;






History



Indigenous peoples
Portuguese Colony (1500–1815)
United Kingdom (1815–1822)
Empire (1822–1889)
Old Republic (1889–1930)
Vargas Era (1930–1946)
Second Republic (1946–1964)
Military rule (1964–1985)
New Republic (post 1985)








Geography







Amazon Basin
Climate
Coastline
Conservation
Environment
Environmental issues
Extreme points
Islands
Largest cities
Mountains
Protected areas
Regions
Rivers
Water resources
Wildlife











Politics







Administrative divisions
Constitution
Elections
Foreign relations
Government
Human rights
Legal system
Law
Law enforcement
Military
National Congress
Political parties
President











Economy







Agriculture
Car industry
Central Bank
Economic history
Energy
Exports
Industry
Mining
Real (currency)
Science and technology
Stock index
Telecommunications
Tourism
Transport











Society







Corruption
Crime
Demographics
Education
Health
Immigration
Languages
People
Religion
Social issues
States by HDI
Unemployment
Water supply and sanitation
Welfare
Youth








Culture



Arts
Carnaval
Cinema
Cuisine
Literature
Malandragem
Music
Newspapers
Painting
Public holidays
Sculpture
Sports
Television















Outline
Index



Category
Portal
WikiProject















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Brazilian_art&amp;oldid=688037383"					
				Categories: Brazilian artArt by nationalityHidden categories: Commons category with local link same as on WikidataRegion topic template using suffix				
							
		
		
			