


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Cabinetry
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								  (Redirected from Cabinet making)
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				



Cabinet


A cabinet is a box-shaped piece of furniture with doors or drawers for storing miscellaneous items. Some cabinets stand alone while others are built into a wall or are attached to it like a medicine cabinet. Cabinets are typically made of wood or, now increasingly, of synthetic materials. Commercial grade cabinets, which differ in the materials used, are called casework.
Cabinets usually have one or more doors on the front, which are mounted with door hardware, and occasionally a lock. Many cabinets have doors and drawers or only drawers. Short cabinets often have a finished surface on top that can be used for display, or as a working surface, such as the countertops found in kitchens.
A cabinet intended for clothing storage is usually called a wardrobe or an armoire, or (in some countries) a closet if built in.



Contents


1 History
2 Schools of design

2.1 Scandinavian
2.2 French Provincial
2.3 Early American Colonial
2.4 Rustic
2.5 Mission Style
2.6 Oriental
2.7 Shaker


3 Types of cabinetry
4 Cabinet components

4.1 Bases
4.2 Adjustable feet
4.3 Compartments
4.4 Cabinet insert hardware
4.5 Tops


5 See also
6 References
7 External links



History[edit]





This section does not cite any references (sources). Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2014)






Tortoise-shell cabinet of Polish king John III Sobieski, looted by the Germans from the Wilanów Palace during World War II[1]


Before the advent of industrial design, cabinet makers were responsible for the conception and the production of any piece of furniture. In the last half of the 18th century, cabinet makers, such as Thomas Sheraton, Thomas Chippendale, Shaver and Wormley Bros. Cabinet Constructors, and George Hepplewhite, also published books of furniture forms. These books were compendiums of their designs and those of other cabinet makers.
With the industrial revolution and the application of steam power to cabinet making tools, mass production techniques were gradually applied to nearly all aspects of cabinet making, and the traditional cabinet shop ceased to be the main source of furniture, domestic or commercial. In parallel to this evolution there came a growing demand by the rising middle class in most industrialised countries for finely made furniture. This eventually resulted in a growth in the total number of traditional cabinet makers.
Before 1650, fine furniture was a rarity in Western Europe and North America. Generally, people did not need it and for the most part could not afford it. They made do with simple but serviceable pieces.
The arts and craft movement which started in the United Kingdom in the middle of the 19th century spurred a market for traditional cabinet making, and other craft goods. It rapidly spread to the United States and to all the countries in the British Empire. This movement exemplified the reaction to the eclectic historicism of the Victorian era and to the 'soulless' machine-made production which was starting to become widespread.
After World War II woodworking became a popular hobby among the middle classes. The more serious and skilled amateurs in this field now turn out pieces of furniture which rival the work of professional cabinet makers. Together, their work now represents but a small percentage of furniture production in any industrial country, but their numbers are vastly greater than those of their counterparts in the 18th century and before.
Schools of design[edit]




Crafted by Hughes Sambin (1570-1600), double cabinet features the combination of architectural elements and relief carving that is characteristic of French furniture of the period.


Scandinavian[edit]
This style of design is typified by clean horizontal and vertical lines. Compared to other designs there is a distinct absence of ornamentation. While Scandinavian design is easy to identify, it is much more about the materials than the design.
French Provincial[edit]
This style of design is very ornate. French Provincial objects are often stained or painted, leaving the wood concealed. Corners and bevels are often decorated with gold leaf or given some other kind of gilding. Flat surfaces often have artwork such as landscapes painted directly on them. The wood used in French provincial varied, but was often originally beech.[2]
Early American Colonial[edit]
This design emphasises both form and materials. Early American chairs and tables are often constructed with turned spindles and chair backs often constructed using steaming to bend the wood. Wood choices tend to be deciduous hardwoods with a particular emphasis on the wood of edible or fruit-bearing trees such as cherry or walnut.[3]
Rustic[edit]





This section does not cite any references (sources). Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2014)


The rustic style of design sometimes called "log furniture" or "log cabin" is the least finished. Design is very utilitarian yet seeks to feature not only the materials used but in, as much as possible, how they existed in their natural state. For example, a table top may have what is considered a "live edge" that allows you to see the original contours of the tree that it came from. It also often uses whole logs or branches including the bark of the tree. Rustic furniture is often made from pine, cedar, fir and spruce. Also see Adirondack Architecture.
Mission Style[edit]
Mission Design is characterized by straight, thick horizontal and vertical lines and flat panels. The most common material used in Mission furniture is oak. For early mission cabinetmakers, the material of choice was white oak, which they often darkened through a process known as "fuming".[4] Hardware is often visible on the outside of the pieces and made of black iron. It is a style that became popular in the early 20th century; popularized by designers in the Arts and Crafts and Art Nouveaux movements.
Oriental[edit]





This section does not cite any references (sources). Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2014)


Also known as Asian Design, this style of furniture is characterized by its use of materials such as bamboo and rattan. Red is a frequent color choice along with landscape art and Chinese or other Asian language characters on the pieces.
Shaker[edit]





This section does not cite any references (sources). Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2014)


Shaker furniture design is focused on function and symmetry. Because it is so influenced by an egalitarian religious community and tradition it is rooted in the needs of the community versus the creative expression of the designer. Like Early American and Colonial design, Shaker craftsmen often chose fruit woods for their designs. Pieces reflect a very efficient use of materials.
Types of cabinetry[edit]




A frameless cabinet



A cabinet with a face frame



The fundamental focus of the cabinet maker is the production of cabinetry. Although the cabinet maker may also be required to produce items that would not be recognized as cabinets, the same skills and techniques apply.
A cabinet may be built-in or free-standing. A built-in cabinet is usually custom made for a particular situation and it is fixed into position, on a floor, against a wall, or framed in an opening. For example, modern kitchens are examples of built-in cabinetry. Free-standing cabinets are more commonly available as off-the-shelf items and can be moved from place to place if required. Cabinets may be wall hung or suspended from the ceiling.
Cabinets may have a face frame or may be of frameless construction (also known as European or euro-style). Face frame cabinets have a supporting frame attached to the front of the cabinet box. This face frame is usually 1½ inches in width. Mounted on the cabinet frame is the cabinet door. In contrast, frameless cabinet have no such supporting front face frame, the cabinet doors attach directly to the sides of the cabinet box. The box’s side, bottom and top panels are usually 5/8 to 3/4&#160;inches thick, with the door overlaying all but 1/16&#160;inch of the box edge.[5] Modern cabinetry is often frameless and is typically constructed from man-made sheet materials, such as plywood, chipboard or MDF. The visible surfaces of these materials are usually clad in a timber veneer, plastic laminate, or other material. They may also be painted.
Cabinet components[edit]
Bases[edit]




Enclosed cabinet base with a kick space



Scrolled base



Bracket feet



Cabinets which rest on the floor are supported by some base. This base could be a fully enclosed base (i.e. a plinth), a scrolled based, bracket feet or it could be a set of legs.
Adjustable feet[edit]





This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2014)


A type of adjustable leg has been adopted from the European cabinet system which offers several advantages. First off, in making base cabinets for kitchens, the cabinet sides would be cut to 34½ inches, yielding four cabinet side blanks per 4 foot by 8 foot sheet. Using the adjustable feet, the side blanks are cut to 30&#160;inches, thus yielding six cabinet side per sheet.
These feet can be secured to the bottom of the cabinet by having the leg base screwed onto the cabinet bottom. They can also be attached by means of a hole drilled through the cabinet bottom at specific locations. The legs are then attached to the cabinet bottom by a slotted, hollow machine screw. The height of the cabinet can be adjusted from inside the cabinet, simply by inserting a screwdriver into the slot and turning to raise or lower the cabinet. The holes in the cabinet are capped by plastic inserts, making the appearance more acceptable for residential cabinets. Using these feet, the cabinets need not be shimmed or scribed to the floor for leveling. The toe kick board is attached to the cabinet by means of a clip, which is either screwed onto the back side of the kick board, or a barbed plastic clip is inserted into a saw kerf, also made on the back side of the kick board. This toe kick board can be made to fit each base cabinet, or made to fit a run of cabinets.[6]
Kitchen cabinets, or any cabinet generally at which a person may stand, usually have a fully enclosed base in which the front edge has been set back 75&#160;mm or so to provide room for toes, known as the kick space. A scrolled base is similar to the fully enclosed base but it has areas of the base material removed, often with a decorative pattern, leaving feet on which the cabinet stands. Bracket feet are separate feet, usually attached in each corner and occasionally for larger pieces in the middle of the cabinet.
Compartments[edit]





This section does not cite any references (sources). Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2014)


A cabinet usually has at least one compartment. Compartments may be open, as in open shelving; they may be enclosed by one or more doors; or they may contain one or more drawers. Some cabinets contain secret compartments, access to which is generally not obvious.
Modern cabinets employ many more complicated means (relative to a simple shelf) of making browsing lower cabinets more efficient and comfortable. One example is the lazy susan, a shelf which rotates around a central axis, allowing items stored at the back of the cabinet to be brought to the front by rotating the shelf. These are usually used in corner cabinets, which are larger and deeper and have a greater "dead space" at the back than other cabinets.
Cabinet insert hardware[edit]





This section does not cite any references (sources). Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2014)


An alternative to the lazy susan, particularly in base cabinets, is the blind corner cabinet pull out unit. These pull out and turn, making the attached shelving unit slide into the open area of the cabinet door, thus making the shelves accessible to the user. These units make usable what was once dead space.
Other insert hardware includes such items as mixer shelves that pull out of a base cabinet and spring into a locked position at counter height. This hardware makes lifting these somewhat heavy mixers and mechanically helping with the process of positioning the unit for use. More and more components are being designed to enable specialized hardware to be used in standard cabinet carcasses.
Tops[edit]
Most cabinets incorporate a top of some sort. In many cases, the top is merely to enclose the compartments within and serves no other purpose—as in a wall hung cupboard for example. In other cabinets, the top also serves as a work surface—a kitchen countertop for example.
See also[edit]

List of furniture designers
List of furniture types
Woodworking
Amish furniture
Ébéniste (French for "cabinet-maker")

References[edit]

Specific citations



^ Monika Kuhnke (2000). "Cenny dar dla zwycięzcy spod Wiednia". icons.pl (in Polish). valuable, priceless, lost.&#160; Missing or empty |url= (help); |access-date= requires |url= (help)
^ French Furniture - Andre Saglio. Google Books. Retrieved 2014-03-19.&#160;
^ "Early American furniture - Encyclopedia Britannica". Britannica.com. Retrieved 2014-03-19.&#160;
^ The Stickley Brothers: The Quest for an American Voice - Michael E. Clark, Jill Thomas-Clark. Google Books. Retrieved 2014-03-19.&#160;
^ "Refinishing and Upgrading Kitchen Cabinets". CabinetsQandA.com. 2010. Retrieved 2014-03-19.&#160;
^ "Base Cabinet Construction Sketch". ProWoodworkingTips.com. Retrieved 2014-03-19.&#160;



General references



Lee Jesberger (2007). Pro Woodworking Tips.com.
Ernest Joyce (1970). Encyclopedia of Furniture Making. Revised and expanded by Alan Peters (1987). Sterling Publishing. ISBN 0-8069-6440-5 (Original edition), ISBN 0-8069-7142-8 (Paperback)
John L. Feirer (1988). Cabinetmaking and Millwork, Fifth Edition. Glencoe Publishing Company. ISBN 0-02-675950-0


External links[edit]

Kenny, Peter M.; Safford, Frances Gruber; Vincent, Gilbert T. "American kasten&#160;: the Dutch-style cupboards of New York and New Jersey, 1650-1800" (PDF). Metropolitan Museum of Art Libraries.&#160;









v
t
e


Decorative arts and handicrafts






Textile



Banner-making
Canvas work
Cross-stitch
Crocheting
Embroidery
Felting
Friendship bracelet
Knitting
Lace-making
Lucet
Macrame
Millinery
Needlepoint
Needlework
Patchwork
Quilting
Ribbon embroidery
Rug hooking
Rug making
Sewing
Shoemaking
Spinning (textiles)
String art
Tapestry
Tatting
Tie-dye
Weaving








Paper



Altered book
Bookbinding
Calligraphy
Cardmaking
Cast paper
Collage

Decoupage
Photomontage


Embossing
Iris folding
Marbling
Origami

Kirigami
Moneygami


Papercutting
Paper toys
Papercraft
Papermaking
Papier-mâché
Pop-up book
Quilling
Scrapbooking
Stamping
Wallpaper








Wood



Bentwood
Cabinetry
Carpentry
Chip carving
Ébéniste
Fretwork
Intarsia
Marquetry
Wood burning
Wood carving
Woodturning








Ceramic



Azulejo
Bone china
Earthenware
Porcelain
Pottery
Stoneware
Terracotta








Glass



Cameo glass
Glassware
Stained glass








Metal



Engraving
Jewellery
Goldsmith
Silversmith








Other



Assemblage
Beadwork
Bone carving
Doll making
Dollhouse
Egg decorating
Engraved gems
Hardstone carving
Lathart
Lapidary
Leatherworking
Miniatures
Micromosaic
Mosaic
Pietra dura
Pressed flower craft
Scrimshaw
Straw marquetry
Wall decal
















v
t
e


Woodworking






Overviews



History
Glossary
Wood (lumber)
Wood art








Forms



Boat building
Bow and arrow
Bush carpentry
Cabinetry
Caning
Carpentry
Chainsaw carving
Chip carving
Clogs
Ébéniste
Fretwork
Intarsia
Japanese carpentry
Log building
Marquetry
Millwork
Parquetry
Pyrography
Relief carving
Root carving
Sawdust
Segmented turning
Shipbuilding
Spindle turning
Timber framing
Whittling
Wood carving
Woodturning
Wood flour








Woods




Soft



Cedar (Calocedrus, Cedrus)
Cypress
Douglas fir
Fir
Juniper
Larch
Pine
Spruce
Yew








Hard



Ash
Alder
Aspen
Balsa
Beech
Birch
Cherry
Chestnut
Ebony
Elm
Hazel
Lignum vitae
Linden (lime, basswood)
Mahogany
Maple
Oak
Padauk
Plum
Poplar
Teak
Totara
Walnut
Willow











Tools







Abrasives
Axe
Adze
Chisel
Clamp
Drawknife
Drill
Float
Mallet
Milling machine
Mitre box
Moulding plane
Plane
Rasp
Router
Sandpaper
Timber-framing
Vise
Winding sticks
Wood scribe
Workbench








Saws



Backsaw
Bandsaw
Bow
Bucksaw
Chainsaw
Circular
Compass
Coping
Crosscut
Frame
Fretsaw
Jigsaw
Keyhole
Miter
Rip
Scroll
Veneer
Whipsaw











Geometry




Joints



Birdsmouth
Bridle
Butt
Butterfly
Coping
Crown of thorns
Dados
Dovetail
Finger
Groove
Halved
Hammer-headed tenon
Knee
Lap
Mason's mitre
Miter
Mortise and tenon
Rabbet/Rebate
Scarf
Splice
Tongue and groove








Profiles



Bead
Bevel
Chamfer
Molding
Ogee
Ogive











Treatments



French polish
Heat bending
Paint
Paint stripper
Steam bending
Thermal
Varnish
Wood drying
Wood preservation
Wood stain








Organizations



American Association of Woodturners
Architectural Woodwork Institute
British Woodworking Federation
Building and Wood Workers' International
Caricature Carvers of America
International Federation of Building and Wood Workers
National Wood Carvers Association
Society of Wood Engravers
Timber Framers Guild








Conversion



Chainsaw mill
Hewing
Sawmill
Whipsaw
Wood splitting








Techniques



Frame and panel
Frameless construction











 Category
 WikiProject
 Commons















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cabinetry&amp;oldid=685616339"					
				Categories: Furniture-makingWoodworkingCraftsCabinets (furniture)Hidden categories: Pages using web citations with no URLPages using citations with accessdate and no URLCS1 Polish-language sources (pl)Articles needing additional references from March 2014All articles needing additional references				
							
		
		
			