


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Cave of Altamira
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				






This article may be expanded with text translated from the corresponding article in Spanish.  (May 2014) Click [show] for important translation instructions.&#160;


View a machine-translated version of the Spanish article.
Google's machine translation is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.
Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.
After translating, {{Translated|es|Cueva de Altamira}} must be added to the talk page to ensure copyright compliance.
For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation.







UNESCO World Heritage Site

Cave of Altamira and Paleolithic Cave Art of Northern Spain


Name as inscribed on the World Heritage List





Type
Cultural


Criteria
i, iii


Reference
310


UNESCO region
Europe and North America


Inscription history


Inscription
1985 (9th Session)


Extensions
2008













Location of Cave of Altamira in Spain.







The Cave of Altamira is a cave in Spain famous for its Upper Paleolithic cave paintings featuring drawings and polychrome rock paintings of wild mammals and human hands. It was the first cave, (but second rock painting twelve years after Archibold Carlleyle discovered in India in 1867-68) in which prehistoric cave paintings were discovered. When the discovery was first made public in 1880, it led to a bitter public controversy between experts which continued into the early 20th century, since many did not believe prehistoric man had the intellectual capacity to produce any kind of artistic expression. The acknowledgment of the authenticity of the paintings, which finally came in 1902, changed the perception of prehistoric human beings.
It is located near the town of Santillana del Mar in Cantabria, Spain, 30&#160;km west of the city of Santander. The cave with its paintings has been declared a World Heritage Site by UNESCO.



Contents


1 Description
2 Discovery, excavation, skepticisms
3 Visitors and replicas
4 Cultural impact
5 See also
6 References
7 Bibliography
8 External links



Description[edit]
The cave is approximately 300 meters long[1] and consists of a series of twisting passages and chambers. The main passage varies from two to six meters in height. The cave was formed through collapses following early Karst phenomena in the calcerous rock of Mount Vispieres.
Archaeological excavations in the cave floor found rich deposits of artifacts from the Upper Solutrean (c.&#160;18,500 years ago) and Lower Magdalenian (between c.&#160;16,500 and 14,000 years ago). Both periods belong to the Paleolithic or Old Stone Age. In the millennia between these two occupations, the cave was evidently inhabited only by wild animals. Human occupants of the site were well-positioned to take advantage of the rich wildlife that grazed in the valleys of the surrounding mountains as well as the marine life available in nearby coastal areas. Around 13,000 years ago a rockfall sealed the cave's entrance, preserving its contents until its eventual discovery, which occurred after a nearby tree fell and disturbed the fallen rocks.
Human occupation was limited to the cave mouth, although paintings were created throughout the length of the cave. The artists used charcoal and ochre or haematite to create the images, often diluting these pigments to produce variations in intensity and creating an impression of chiaroscuro. They also exploited the natural contours in the cave walls to give their subjects a three-dimensional effect. The Polychrome Ceiling is the most impressive feature of the cave, depicting a herd of extinct steppe bison (Bison priscus[2]) in different poses, two horses, a large doe, and possibly a wild boar.




Great hall of policromes of Altamira, published by M. Sanz de Sautuola in 1880.


Dated to the Magdalenian occupation, these paintings include abstract shapes in addition to animal subjects. Solutrean paintings include images of horses and goats, as well as handprints that were created when artists placed their hands on the cave wall and blew pigment over them to leave a negative image. Numerous other caves in northern Spain contain Paleolithic art, but none is as complex or well-populated as Altamira.
Discovery, excavation, skepticisms[edit]




Bison in the great hall of polychromes


In 1879, amateur archaeologist Marcelino Sanz de Sautuola was led by his eight-year-old daughter María to discover the cave's drawings.[3] The cave was excavated by Sautuola and archaeologist Juan Vilanova y Piera from the University of Madrid, resulting in a much acclaimed publication in 1880 which interpreted the paintings as Paleolithic in origin. The French specialists, led by Gabriel de Mortillet and Emile Cartailhac, were particularly adamant in rejecting the hypothesis of Sautuola and Piera, and their findings were loudly ridiculed at the 1880 Prehistorical Congress in Lisbon. Due to the supreme artistic quality, and the exceptional state of conservation of the paintings, Sautuola was even accused of forgery. A fellow countryman maintained that the paintings had been produced by a contemporary artist, on Sautuola's orders.




Association of the animals in the cave of Altamira, by Leroi-Gourhan.


It was not until 1902, when several other findings of prehistoric paintings had served to render the hypothesis of the extreme antiquity of the Altamira paintings less offensive, that the scientific society retracted their opposition to the Spaniards. That year, Emile Cartailhac emphatically admitted his mistake in the famous article, "Mea culpa d'un sceptique", published in the journal L'Anthropologie. Sautuola, having died 14 years earlier, did not live to enjoy his rehabilitation.
Further excavation work on the cave was done by Hermilio Alcalde del Río between 1902-04, the German Hugo Obermaier between 1924-25 and finally by Joaquín González Echegaray in 1981.
Scientists continue to evaluate the age of the cave art at Altamira. In 2008, researchers using uranium-thorium dating found that the paintings were completed over a period of up to 20,000 years rather than during a comparatively brief period.[4] In 2012, further uranium-thorium dating research was published supporting an older age for portions of the art, including one claviform image at 35,600 years old.[5]
Visitors and replicas[edit]




Reproduction of cave of Altamira in "Deutsches Museum", Munich.


During the 1960s and 1970s, the paintings were being damaged by the carbon dioxide in the breath of the large number of visitors. Altamira was completely closed to the public in 1977, and reopened to limited access in 1982. Very few visitors were allowed in per day, resulting in a three-year waiting list. A replica cave and museum were built nearby and completed in 2001 by Manuel Franquelo and Sven Nebel, reproducing the cave and its art. The replica allows a more comfortable view of the polychrome paintings of the main hall of the cave, as well as a selection of minor works. It also includes some sculptures of human faces that are not visitable in the real cave.[3]
As well as the adjacent National Museum and Research Center of Altamira there are reproductions in the National Archaeological Museum of Spain (Madrid), in the Deutsches Museum in Munich (completed 1964) and in Japan (completed 1993).
During 2010 there were plans to reopen access to the cave towards the end of that year.[6] In December 2010, however, the Spanish Ministry of Culture decided that the cave would remain closed to the public.[7] This decision was based on advice from a group of experts who had found that the conservation conditions inside the cave had become much more stable since the closure.
Cultural impact[edit]




A modern interpretation of a bison from the Altamira cave ceiling, one of the cave's most famous paintings.


Some of the polychrome paintings at Altamira Cave are well known in Spanish popular culture. The logo used by the autonomous government of Cantabria to promote tourism to the region is based on one of the bisons in this cave. Bisonte (Spanish for "bison"), a Spanish cigarette brand of the 20th century, also used a Paleolithic style bison figure along with its logo.
The Spanish comic character and series Altamiro de la Cueva, created in 1965, are a consequence of the fame of Altamira Cave. The comic series depicts the adventures of a group of prehistoric cavemen, shown as modern people, but dressed in pieces of fur, a bit like the Flintstones.
The song "The Caves of Altamira" appears on the 1976 album The Royal Scam by jazz-rock band Steely Dan, later covered by soul group Perri.
The song "Cuevas de Altamira" (Caves of Altamira) appears on the 1978 album "Cuevas de Altamira" by the symphonic progressive rock-folk group Ibio from Cantabria.
The iconic bison image has been used for the cover of the poetry collection Songs for the Devil and Death by Scottish author Hal Duncan.[8]
The protagonist in Satyajit Ray's Agantuk was inspired by the charging Bison painting to leave his home and study tribals.
In the Golden Sun game, there is a cave known as: Altmiller Cave, probably based on the Caves of Altamira.
See also[edit]

Art of the Upper Paleolithic
List of Stone Age art
Paleolithic Cave Art of Northern Spain
Caves in Cantabria
12 Treasures of Spain

References[edit]


^ Ian Chilvers, ed. (2004). "Altamira". The Concise Oxford Dictionary of Art (3rd ed.). [Oxford]: Oxford University Press. p.&#160;18. ISBN&#160;0-19-860476-9.&#160; |access-date= requires |url= (help)
^ Verkaar, E. L. C. (19 March 2004). "Maternal and Paternal Lineages in Cross-Breeding Bovine Species. Has Wisent a Hybrid Origin?". Molecular Biology and Evolution 21 (7): 1165–1170. doi:10.1093/molbev/msh064. PMID&#160;14739241. Retrieved 31 December 2012.&#160;
^ a b Travel Advisory; A Modern Copy Of Ancient Masters, The New York Times, 4 November 2001
^ Gray, Richard (5 October 2008). "Prehistoric cave paintings took up to 20,000 years to complete". The Daily Telegraph.&#160;
^ de Bruxelles, Simon (June 15, 2012). "Prehistoric cave art began 10,000 years earlier". The Times. Retrieved 31 December 2012.&#160;
^ Spain to reopen access to prehistoric cave paintings &lt; Spanish news | Expatica Spain
^ Visita la Cueva de Altamira
^ Songs for the Devil and Death | Circle Six


Bibliography[edit]

Curtis, Gregory. The Cave Painters: Probing the Mysteries of the World's First Artists. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 2006 (hardcover, ISBN 1-4000-4348-4)).
Guthrie, R. Dale. The Nature of Prehistoric Art. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2006 (hardcover, ISBN 0-226-31126-0).
McNeill, William&#160;H. "Secrets of the Cave Paintings", The New York Review of Books, Vol.&#160;53, No.&#160;16, October&#160;19, 2006.
Pike, A. W. G.; Hoffmann, D. L.; Garcia-Diez, M.; Pettitt, P. B.; Alcolea, J.; De Balbin, R.; Gonzalez-Sainz, C.; de las Heras, C.; Lasheras, J. A.; Montes, R.; Zilhao, J. (14 June 2012). "U-Series Dating of Paleolithic Art in 11 Caves in Spain". Science 336 (6087): 1409–1413. doi:10.1126/science.1219957.&#160;

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Altamira (cave).



Altamira Cave National Museum In Spanish and English
The Spanish Cave of Altamira opens - with politics Bradshaw Foundation Article
"Les peintures préhistoriques de la grotte d’Altamira", Cartailhac and Breuil founding article (1903), online and analyzed onBibNum [click 'à télécharger' for English version]

Coordinates: 43°22′57″N 4°6′58″W﻿ / ﻿43.38250°N 4.11611°W﻿ / 43.38250; -4.11611








v
t
e


World Heritage Sites in Spain







For official site names, see each article or the List of World Heritage Sites in Spain.






North West



Caves of Altamira and Paleolithic Cave Art of Northern Spain1
Monuments of Oviedo and the Kingdom of the Asturias
Roman Walls of Lugo
Route of Santiago de Compostela1
Santiago de Compostela
Tower of Hercules













North East



Caves of Altamira and Paleolithic Cave Art of Northern Spain1
Mudéjar Architecture of Aragon
Pyrénées - Mont Perdu2
Rock art of the Iberian Mediterranean Basin1
Route of Santiago de Compostela1
San Millán Yuso and Suso Monasteries
Vizcaya Bridge








Community of Madrid



Aranjuez Cultural Landscape
El Escorial
University and Historic Precinct of Alcalá de Henares








Centre



Archaeological Ensemble of Mérida
Archaeological Site of Atapuerca
Ávila with its Extra-mural Churches
Burgos Cathedral
Cáceres
Cuenca
Heritage of Mercury. Almadén and Idrija3
Las Médulas
Rock art of the Iberian Mediterranean Basin1
Route of Santiago de Compostela1
Salamanca
Santa María de Guadalupe
Segovia and its Aqueduct
Toledo
Prehistoric Rock-Art Sites in the Côa Valley and Siega Verde4








East



Archaeological Ensemble of Tarraco, Tarragona
Catalan Romanesque Churches of the Vall de Boí
Ibiza (Biodiversity and Culture)
Palau de la Música Catalana and Hospital de Sant Pau, Barcelona
Palmeral of Elche
Poblet Monastery
Rock art of the Iberian Mediterranean Basin1
Serra de Tramuntana
Silk Exchange in Valencia
Works of Antoni Gaudí








South



Alhambra, Generalife and Albayzín, Granada
Cathedral, Alcázar and Archivo de Indias, Seville
Historic Centre of Córdoba
Doñana
Renaissance Monuments of Úbeda and Baeza
Rock art of the Iberian Mediterranean Basin1








Canary Islands



Garajonay
San Cristóbal de La Laguna
Teide National Park











1 Shared with other region/s
2 Shared with France
3 Shared with Slovenia
4 Shared with Portugal
















v
t
e


Prehistoric technology









Prehistory

timeline
outline
Stone Age
subdivisions
New Stone Age
synoptic table


Technology

history














&#160;
Tools










Farming



Neolithic Revolution

founder crops
New World crops


Ard&#160;/ plough
Celt
Digging stick
Domestication
Goad
Irrigation
Secondary products
Sickle
Terracing








Food processing



Fire
Basket
Cooking

Earth oven


Granaries
Grinding slab
Ground stone
Hearth

Aşıklı Höyük
Qesem Cave


Manos
Metate
Mortar and pestle
Pottery
Quern-stone
Storage pit








Hunting







Arrow
Boomerang

throwing stick


Bow and arrow

history


Nets
Spear

Spear-thrower
baton
harpoon
woomera
Schöningen Spears










Projectile points



Arrowhead
Bare Island
Cascade
Clovis
Cresswell
Cumberland
Eden
Folsom
Lamoka
Manis Site
Plano
Transverse arrowhead











Toolmaking



Earliest toolmaking

Oldowan
Acheulean
Mousterian


Clovis culture
Cupstone
Fire hardening
Gravettian culture
Hafting
Hand axe

Grooves


Langdale axe industry
Levallois technique
Lithic core
Lithic reduction

analysis
debitage
flake


Lithic technology
Magdalenian culture
Metallurgy
Microblade technology
Mining
Prepared-core technique
Solutrean industry
Striking platform
Tool stone
Uniface
Yubetsu technique








Other tools



Adze
Awl

bone


Axe
Bannerstone
Blade

prismatic


Bone tool
Bow drill
Burin
Canoe

Oar
Pesse canoe


Chopper

tool


Cleaver
Denticulate tool
Fire plough
Fire-saw
Hammerstone
Knife
Microlith
Quern-stone
Racloir
Rope
Scraper

side


Stone tool
Tally stick
Weapons
Wheel

illustration




















&#160;
Architecture










Ceremonial



Göbekli Tepe
Kiva
Standing stones

megalith
row
Stonehenge


Pyramid








Dwellings



Neolithic architecture
British megalith architecture
Nordic megalith architecture
Burdei
Cave
Cliff dwelling
Dugout
Hut

Quiggly hole


Jacal
Longhouse
Mud brick

Mehrgarh


Neolithic long house
Pit-house
Pueblitos
Pueblo
Rock shelter

Blombos Cave
Abri de la Madeleine
Sibudu Cave


Stone roof
Roundhouse
Stilt house

Alp pile dwellings


Wattle and daub








Water management



Check dam
Cistern
Flush toilet
Reservoir
Water well








Other architecture



Archaeological features
Broch
Burnt mound

fulacht fiadh


Causewayed enclosure

Tor enclosure


Circular enclosure

Goseck


Cursus
Henge

Thornborough


Oldest buildings
Megalithic architectural elements
Midden
Timber circle
Timber trackway

Sweet Track




















&#160;
Arts and culture










Material goods



Baskets
Beadwork
Beds
Chalcolithic
Clothing/textiles

timeline


Cosmetics
Glue
Hides

shoes
Ötzi


Jewelry

amber use


Mirrors
Pottery

Cardium
Grooved ware
Linear
Jōmon
Unstan ware


Sewing needle
Weaving
Wine

Winery
wine press










Prehistoric art



Art of the Upper Paleolithic
Art of the Middle Paleolithic

Blombos Cave


List of Stone Age art
Bird stone
Bradshaw rock paintings
Cairn
Carved Stone Balls
Cave paintings

painting
pigment


Cup and ring mark
Geoglyph
Golden hats
Guardian stones
Megalithic art
Petroform
Petroglyph
Petrosomatoglyph
Pictogram
Rock art

Stone carving


Sculpture
Statue menhir
Stone circle

list
British Isles and Brittany


Venus figurines








Burial



Burial mounds

Bowl barrow
Round barrow


Mound Builders culture

U.S. sites


Chamber tomb

Severn-Cotswold


Cist

Dartmoor kistvaens


Clava cairn
Court tomb
Cremation
Dolmen

Great dolmen


Funeral pyre
Gallery grave

transepted
wedge-shaped


Grave goods
Jar burial
Long barrow

unchambered
Grønsalen


Megalithic tomb
Mummy
Passage grave
Rectangular dolmen
Ring cairn
Simple dolmen
Stone box grave
Tor cairn
Tumulus
Unchambered long cairn








Other cultural



Astronomy

sites
lunar calendar


Behavioral modernity
Origin of language
Prehistoric medicine

trepanning


Evolutionary musicology

music archaeology


Prehistoric music

Alligator drum
flutes
Divje Babe flute
gudi


Prehistoric numerals
Origin of religion

Paleolithic religion
Prehistoric religion
Spiritual drug use


Prehistoric warfare
Symbols

symbolism























					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cave_of_Altamira&amp;oldid=691447903"					
				Categories: 1879 archaeological discoveriesLimestone cavesCaves of CantabriaCantabrian symbolsPrehistoric sites in SpainArchaeological sites in SpainWorld Heritage Sites in SpainStone Age EuropeArt of the Upper PaleolithicCaves containing pictograms in SpainHidden categories: Pages using citations with accessdate and no URLArticles to be expanded from May 2014All articles to be expandedCulture articles needing translation from Spanish WikipediaCommons category with local link same as on WikidataCoordinates on Wikidata				
							
		
		
			