


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Christian art
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				



Supper at Emmaus, 1601, by Caravaggio. Oil on canvas, 139 x 195 cm. National Gallery, London.


Christian art is sacred art which uses themes and imagery from Christianity. Most Christian groups use or have used art to some extent, although some have had strong objections to some forms of religious image, and there have been major periods of iconoclasm within Christianity.
Images of Jesus and narrative scenes from the Life of Christ are the most common subjects, and scenes from the Old Testament play a part in the art of most denominations. Images of the Virgin Mary and saints are much rarer in Protestant art than that of Roman Catholicism and Eastern Orthodoxy.
Christianity makes far wider use of images than related religions, in which figurative representations are forbidden, such as Islam and Judaism. However, there is also a considerable history of aniconism in Christianity from various periods.



Contents


1 History

1.1 Beginnings
1.2 Middle Ages
1.3 Renaissance and Early Modern period
1.4 Modern period
1.5 Popular devotional art


2 Subjects
3 See also
4 Notes
5 References
6 Further reading
7 External links



History[edit]
Beginnings[edit]
Main article: Early Christian art and architecture




Virgin and Child. Wall painting from the early catacombs, Rome, 4th century.


Early Christian art survives from dates near the origins of Christianity. The oldest surviving Christian paintings are from the site at Megiddo, dated to around the year 70, and the oldest Christian sculptures are from sarcophagi, dating to the beginning of the 2nd century. The largest groups of Early Christian paintings come from the tombs in the Catacombs of Rome, and show the evolution of the depiction of Jesus, a process not complete until the 6th century, since when the conventional appearance of Jesus in art has remained remarkably consistent.
Until the adoption of Christianity by Constantine Christian art derived its style and much of its iconography from popular Roman art, but from this point grand Christian buildings built under imperial patronage brought a need for Christian versions of Roman elite and official art, of which mosaics in churches in Rome are the most prominent surviving examples. Christian art was caught up in, but did not originate, the shift in style from the classical tradition inherited from Ancient Greek art to a less realist and otherworldly hieratic style, the start of gothic art.
Middle Ages[edit]
Main article: Medieval art




12th century Byzantine mosaics of the Hagia Sophia showing the image of Christ Pantocrator.


Much of the art surviving from Europe after the fall of the Western Roman Empire is Christian art, although this in large part because the continuity of church ownership has preserved church art better than secular works. While the Western Roman Empire's political structure essentially collapsed after the fall of Rome, its religious hierarchy, what is today the modern-day Roman Catholic Church commissioned and funded production of religious art imagery.
The Orthodox Church of Constantinople, which enjoyed greater stability within the surviving Eastern Empire was key in commissioning imagery there and glorifying Christianity. As a stable Western European society emerged during the Middle Ages, the Catholic Church led the way in terms of art, using its resources to commission paintings and sculptures.
During the development of Christian art in the Byzantine Empire (see Byzantine art), a more abstract aesthetic replaced the naturalism previously established in Hellenistic art. This new style was hieratic, meaning its primary purpose was to convey religious meaning rather than accurately render objects and people. Realistic perspective, proportions, light and color were ignored in favor of geometric simplification of forms, reverse perspective and standardized conventions to portray individuals and events. The controversy over the use of graven images, the interpretation of the Second Commandment, and the crisis of Byzantine Iconoclasm led to a standardization of religious imagery within the Eastern Orthodoxy.
Renaissance and Early Modern period[edit]




Leonardo da Vinci's Last Supper (1498).


The fall of Constantinople in 1453 brought an end to the highest quality Byzantine art, produced in the Imperial workshops there. Orthodox art, known as icons regardless of the medium, has otherwise continued with relatively little change in subject and style up to the present day, with Russia gradually becoming the leading centre of production.
In the West, the Renaissance saw an increase in monumental secular works, but until the Protestant Reformation Christian art continued to be commissioned in great quantities by churches, clergy and by the aristocracy. The Reformation had a huge effect on Christian art, rapidly bringing the production of public Christian art to a virtual halt in Protestant countries, and causing the destruction of most of the art that already existed.
Artists were commissioned more secular genres like portraits, landscape paintings and because of the revival of Neoplatonism, subjects from classical mythology. In Catholic countries, production continued, and increased during the Counter-Reformation, but Catholic art was brought under much tighter control by the church hierarchy than had been the case before. From the 18th century the number of religious works produced by leading artists declined sharply, though important commissions were still placed, and some artists continued to produce large bodies of religious art on their own initiative.
Modern period[edit]




Crucifixion (Corpus Hypercubus) by Salvador Dali.


As a secular, non-sectarian, universal notion of art arose in 19th century Western Europe, ancient and Medieval Christian art began to be collected for art appreciation rather than worship, while contemporary Christian art was considered marginal. Occasionally, secular artists treated Christian themes (Bouguereau, Manet) — but only rarely was a Christian artist included in the historical canon (such as Rouault or Stanley Spencer). However many modern artists such as Eric Gill, Marc Chagall, Henri Matisse, Jacob Epstein, Elizabeth Frink and Graham Sutherland have produced well-known works of art for churches.[1] Salvador Dali is an artist who had also produced notable and popular artworks with Christian themes.[2] Artists such as Makoto Fujimura have had significant influence both in sacred and secular arts. Other notable artists include Larry D. Alexander and John August Swanson. Some writers, such as Gregory Wolfe, see this as part of a rebirth of Christian humanism.[3]
Popular devotional art[edit]
Since the advent of printing, the sale of reproductions of pious works has been a major element of popular Christian culture. In the nineteenth century, this included genre painters such as Mihály Munkácsy. The invention of color lithography led to broad circulation of holy cards. In the modern era, companies specializing in modern commercial Christian artists such as Thomas Blackshear and Thomas Kinkade, although widely regarded in the fine art world as kitsch,[4] have been very successful.
Subjects[edit]


Part of a series on


Christianity










Jesus
Christ






Jesus in Christianity
Virgin birth
Ministry
Crucifixion
Resurrection












Bible
Foundations






Old Testament
New Testament
Gospel
Canon
Books
Church
Creed
New Covenant









Theology



God
Trinity

Father
Son
Holy Spirit






Apologetics
Baptism
Catholicism
Christology
History of theology
Mission
Salvation












History
Tradition






Mary
Apostles
Peter
Paul
Fathers
Early Christianity
Constantine
Councils
Augustine
East–West Schism
Crusades
Aquinas
Reformation
Luther









Related topics



Art
Holidays&#160;(list)
Criticism
Ecumenism
Liturgy
Music
Other religions
Prayer
Sermon
Symbolism












Denominations
Groups






Western




Adventist
Anabaptist
Anglican
Baptist
Calvinist
Catholic
Charismatic
Evangelical
Lutheran
Methodist
Pentecostal
Protestant




Eastern




Eastern Orthodox
Eastern Catholic
Oriental Orthodox
Assyrian




Nontrinitarian




Jehovah's Witness
Latter Day Saint
Oneness Pentecostal









&#160;Christianity portal





v
t
e





Subjects often seen in Christian art include the following. See Life of Christ and Life of the Virgin for fuller lists of narrative scenes included in cycles:




Adoration of the Magi
Adoration of the shepherds
Angels
Annunciation
Arrest of Jesus
Ascension of Jesus
Assumption of the Virgin Mary in Art or Dormition of the Virgin
Baptism of Jesus
Christ in Majesty
Coronation of the Virgin
Crucifix
Descent from the Cross
Holy family




Madonna
Madonna and Child
Maestà
Nativity of Jesus
Noli me tangere
Pietà
Resurrection appearances of Jesus
Sanhedrin Trial of Jesus
Stations of the Cross
The Last Judgment
The Last Supper
Tree of Jesse




See also[edit]




A rare sample of medieval Orthodox sculpture from Russia.



Andachtsbilder
Archangel Michael in Christian art
Art in Roman Catholicism
Buddhist art
Christian icons
Christian music
Christian poetry
Christian symbolism

Saint symbolism


Crucifixion in the arts
God the Father in Western art
Holy Spirit in Christian art
Trinity in Christian art
Iconography
Illuminated manuscript
Islamic art
Islamic influences on Christian art
Resurrection of Jesus in Christian art
Sacri Monti of Piedmont and Lombardy
Theological aesthetics

Notes[edit]


^ Beth Williamson, Christian Art: A Very Short Introduction, Oxford University Press (2004), page 110.
^ "Dali and Religion" (PDF). National Gallery of Victoria, Australia.&#160;
^ Wolfe, Gregory (2011). Beauty Will Save the World: Recovering the Human in an Ideological Age. Intercollegiate Studies Institute. p.&#160;278. ISBN&#160;978-1-933859-88-0.&#160;
^ Cynthia A. Freeland, But Is It Art?: An Introduction to Art Theory, Oxford University Press (2001), page 95


References[edit]

Grabar, André (1968). Christian iconography, a study of its origins. Princeton University Press. ISBN&#160;0-691-01830-8.&#160;
Régamey, Pie-Raymond (1952). Art sacré au XXe siècle? Éditions du Cerf.

Further reading[edit]

Evans, Helen C. &amp; Wixom, William D. (1997). The glory of Byzantium: art and culture of the Middle Byzantine era, A.D. 843-1261. New York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art. ISBN&#160;9780810965072.&#160; External link in |title= (help)
Hein, David. “Christianity and the Arts.” The Living Church, May 4, 2014, 8–11.

External links[edit]

Princeton's Index of Christian Art






Authority control



GND: 4010109-5















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Christian_art&amp;oldid=690272088"					
				Categories: Christian artReligious artHidden categories: CS1 errors: external linksWikipedia articles with GND identifiers				
							
		
		
			