


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Cinquecento
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				For other uses, see Cinquecento (disambiguation).
For the Fiat car, see Fiat Cinquecento.





This article does not cite any references (sources). Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2009)


Cinquecento (Italian pronunciation:&#160;[ˌtʃiŋkweˈtʃɛnto], 'five hundred'; short for millecinquecento '1500') was the Italian Renaissance of the 16th century, including the current styles of art, music, literature, and architecture.



Contents


1 Art
2 Music
3 Literature
4 Architecture
5 See also
6 References
7 External links



Art[edit]
Main articles: High Renaissance and Mannerism
At the turn of the 16th century, especially in Northern Italy, artists began to use new techniques in the manipulation of light and darkness, such as the tone contrast evident in many of Titian's portraits and the development of sfumato and chiaroscuro by Leonardo da Vinci and Giorgione. The period also saw the first secular (non-religious) themes. Debate has ensued as to the secularism of the Renaissance emphasized by early 20th-century writers like Jacob Burkhardt due to the presence of these - actually few - mythological paintings. Botticelli was one of the main painters whose secular work comes down to us today, though he was deeply religious (a follower of Savonarola) and painted plenty of traditional religious paintings as well.
The period known as the High Renaissance represents the culmination of the goals of the earlier period, namely the accurate representation of figures in space rendered with credible motion and in an appropriately decorous style. The most famous painters from this time period are Leonardo da Vinci, Raphael, and Michelangelo Buonarroti. Their images are among the most widely known works of art in the world. Leonardo's The Last Supper, Raphael's The School of Athens and Michelangelo's Sistine Chapel ceiling are the textbook examples of this period.
High Renaissance painting evolved into Mannerism (c. 1520-80), especially in Florence. Mannerist artists, who consciously rebelled against the principles of High Renaissance, tend to represent elongated figures in illogical spaces. Contemporaries criticized this period as seeming artificial. Modern scholarship has recognized the capacity of Mannerist art to convey strong (often religious) emotion where the High Renaissance failed to do so. Some of the main artists of this period are Pontormo, Rosso Fiorentino, Parmigianino and Giulio Romano.
Music[edit]

See also: Renaissance music

The music of Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina is probably the most archetypical Cinquecento music. He simplified some of the complexities of the music of the time, and advocated a more homophonic style. He was partially reacting to the strictures of the Council of Trent, which discouraged excessively complex polyphony as inhibiting understanding the text. He was the foremost member of the Roman School, a group of composers of predominantly church music, in Rome, spanning the late Renaissance into early Baroque eras. Many of the composers had a direct connection to the Vatican and the papal chapel, though they worked at several churches; stylistically they are often contrasted with the Venetian School of composers, a concurrent movement which was much more progressive.
In Venice, from about 1534 until around 1600, an impressive polychoral style developed, which gave Europe some of the grandest, most sonorous music composed up until that time, with multiple choirs of singers, brass and strings in different spatial locations in the Basilica San Marco di Venezia (see Venetian School). These multiple revolutions spread over Europe in the next several decades, beginning in Germany and then moving to Spain, France and England somewhat later, demarcating the beginning of what we now know as the Baroque musical era.
In the late 16th century, as the Renaissance era closes, an extremely manneristic style develops. In secular music, especially in the madrigal, there was a trend towards complexity and even extreme chromaticism (as exemplified in madrigals of Luzzaschi, Marenzio, and Gesualdo). The term "mannerism" derives from art history.
Literature[edit]
The most famous works of the Italian Renaissance, by Dante, Boccaccio, and Petrarch, were written in the 14th century, but continued to exert influence. Ludovico Ariosto (Orlando furioso), Baldassare Castiglione (The Book of the Courtier) and Niccolò Machiavelli (The Prince) were eminent writers of the Cinquecento.
Architecture[edit]

See also: Renaissance architecture

It was the result of the revival of classic architecture known as Renaissance, but the change had commenced already a century earlier, in the works of Ghiberti and Donatello in sculpture, and of Brunelleschi and Alberti in architecture.
See also[edit]

Trecento-the 14th century in Italian culture
Quattrocento- the 15th century in Italian culture
Seicento- the 17th century in Italian culture
Cento (disambiguation), with links to other centuries' styles

References[edit]

External links[edit]



Look up cinquecento in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.










v
t
e


Italy&#160;articles






History




Chronology



Prehistory
Etruscan Civilization
Magna Graecia
Ancient Rome

Kingdom
Republic
Empire


Middle Ages
Lombards
Holy Roman Empire
Normans
Maritime republics
Renaissance
Italian Wars
Foreign domination
Unification
Monarchy and the World Wars
Republic








By topic



Citizenship
Currency
Economy
Fashion
Genetic
Historic states
Military
Music
Postal
Railways











Geography







Northern
Central
Southern
Fauna
Flora
Volcanology
Alps
Apennines
Beaches
Canals
Caves
Islands
Lakes
Mountains
National parks
Rivers
Valleys
Volcanoes











Politics







Constitution
Elections
Referendums
Foreign relations
Judiciary
Law enforcement
Military
Parliament

Chamber of Deputies
Senate


Political parties
President
Prime Minister
Council of Ministers
Regions
Provinces
Metropolitan cities
Municipalities
Cities











Economy







Economic history

Milan
Naples
Rome
Turin


Regions by GDP
Automotive industry
Banking

Central Bank


Companies
Energy
Government debt
Science and technology
Stock exchange
Taxation
Telecommunications

Internet


Tourism
Trade unions
Transportation
Welfare











Society







Abortion
Adoption
Billionaires
Capital punishment
Corruption
Crime
Demographics
Education

Secondary
Higher
Universities


Fathers' rights movement
Feminism
Gambling
Health
Healthcare
Immigration
LGBT rights
Nobility
Prostitution
Racism
Religion
Smoking
Social class
Terrorism
Women








Culture



Duecento
Trecento
Quattrocento
Cinquecento
Seicento
Settecento


Architecture
Art
Cinema
Cuisine

Wine


Design
Fashion
Festivals
Folklore
Italophilia
Languages and dialects
Literature
Monuments
Mythology
Music

Classical
Folk
Opera
Popular


National symbols

Anthem
Emblem
Flag


People
Philosophy
Public holidays
Sculpture
Sport
Television
Traditions
World Heritage Sites















Outline
Index



Book
Category
Portal
WikiProject















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cinquecento&amp;oldid=678128595"					
				Categories: Italian RenaissanceHidden categories: Articles lacking sources from December 2009All articles lacking sources				
							
		
		
			