


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Commercial art
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				For other uses, see Commercial art (disambiguation).








This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page.








This article needs attention from an expert in Arts. Please add a reason or a talk parameter to this template to explain the issue with the article. WikiProject Arts (or its Portal) may be able to help recruit an expert. (November 2008)







This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2014)












An 1898 poster by Jan Van Beers.


Commercial art is the art of creative services, referring to art created for commercial purposes, primarily advertising. Commercial art traditionally includes designing books, advertisements of different products, signs, posters, and other displays to promote sale or acceptance of products, services, or ideas.
Skills of commercial art[edit]
Most commercial artists have the ability to organize information and knowledge of fine arts, visualization and media. Communication is often vital in this field. Usually, the art department is relatively small, consisting of art directors, perhaps an assistant director, and a small staff of design and product workers. Commercial artists work a variety of situations doing many things in the artistic world such as advertisement, illustration and animation. Commercial artists should have skills in free-hand drawing and painting, experience using graphic design and editing software, and a basic knowledge of advertising principles. Commercial Art is usually made for mass exposure and distribution. Commercial art creates a way to show people the product or service by using an image that may catch one's eye. This is one way businesses are promoting and advertising their products and services.
[1] Commercial art applies artistic principles to a variety of fields. Commercial artists design advertisements, logos, billboards, brochures, book covers, product packaging and other similar artwork. Their work is often used to sell, promote, explain, narrate and inform.
[2] Commercial artists can specialize in graphic design and illustration, among other areas. Illustrators create images for use in books, magazines and stationery. Graphic designers create artwork and layouts for books, newspapers, magazines, television, product packaging and the Internet. Graphic design professionals often work in advertising, marketing or related fields.
Genres[edit]
Commercial art can include many genres of art and categories of art technique, including:

Commercial character design
Illustration
Graphic design
Industrial design
Motion graphic design
Photography
Television commercials
Music videos
Animation
Computer art
Fashion designer
Interior design

References[edit]


^ http://education-portal.com/commercial_art.html
^ http://education-portal.com/commercial_art.html






This communication design-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.


v
t
e












					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Commercial_art&amp;oldid=662375752"					
				Categories: Art genresCommunication designGraphic designDesign stubsCommunication stubsHidden categories: Articles needing expert attention with no reason or talk parameterArticles needing expert attention from November 2008All articles needing expert attentionArts articles needing expert attentionArticles needing additional references from October 2014All articles needing additional referencesAll stub articles				
							
		
		
			