


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Cultural heritage
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				




This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2015)






Roman ruins with a prophet, by Giovanni Pannini, 1751. The artistic cultural heritage of the Roman Empire served as a foundation for later Western culture, particularly via the Renaissance and Neoclassicism (as exemplified here).


Cultural heritage is the legacy of physical artifacts and intangible attributes of a group or society that are inherited from past generations, maintained in the present and bestowed for the benefit of future generations. Cultural heritage includes tangible culture (such as buildings, monuments, landscapes, books, works of art, and artifacts), intangible culture (such as folklore, traditions, language, and knowledge), and natural heritage (including culturally significant landscapes, and biodiversity).
The deliberate act of keeping cultural heritage from the present for the future is known as preservation (American English) or conservation (British English), though these terms may have more specific or technical meaning in the same contexts in the other dialect.



Contents


1 The ethics and rationale of cultural preservation
2 Types of heritage

2.1 Cultural property
2.2 Intangible culture
2.3 Natural heritage


3 World heritage movement
4 National and regional heritage movements
5 Issues in cultural heritage
6 See also
7 References
8 Further reading
9 External links



The ethics and rationale of cultural preservation[edit]
Objects are a part of the study of human history because they provide a concrete basis for ideas, and can validate them. Their preservation demonstrates a recognition of the necessity of the past and of the things that tell its story.[1] In The Past is a Foreign Country, David Lowenthal observes that preserved objects also validate memories. While digital acquisition techniques can provide a technological solution that is able to acquire the shape and the appearance of artifacts with an unprecedented precision[2] in human history, the actuality of the object, as opposed to a reproduction, draws people in and gives them a literal way of touching the past. This unfortunately poses a danger as places and things are damaged by the hands of tourists, the light required to display them, and other risks of making an object known and available. The reality of this risk reinforces the fact that all artifacts are in a constant state of chemical transformation, so that what is considered to be preserved is actually changing – it is never as it once was.[3] Similarly changing is the value each generation may place on the past and on the artifacts that link it to the past.


Play media


Kautilya Society in Varanasi - When heritage protection becomes a fight for legality and participation  → "They harass me because I demand civil society participation to public policies and I contrast the misuse of privileges"


Classical civilizations, and especially the Indian, have attributed supreme importance to the preservation of tradition. Its central idea was that social institutions, scientific knowledge and technological applications need to use a "heritage" as a "resource".[4] Using contemporary language, we could say that ancient Indians considered, as social resources, both economic assets (like natural resources and their exploitation structure) and factors promoting social integration (like institutions for the preservation of knowledge and for the maintenance of civil order).[5] Ethics considered that what had been inherited should not be consumed, but should be handed over, possibly enriched, to successive generations. This was a moral imperative for all, except in the final life stage of sannyasa.
What one generation considers "cultural heritage" may be rejected by the next generation, only to be revived by a subsequent generation.
Types of heritage[edit]





This section and the following sections of this article is in a list format that may be better presented using prose. You can help by converting this section and the following sections of this article to prose, if appropriate. Editing help is available. (February 2015)






Classical Ruins by Hubert Robert, 1798. Elements of tangible culture depicted include the ruins of the obelisk (foreground) and the pyramids (background).


Cultural property[edit]
See also: Material culture
Cultural property includes the physical, or "tangible" cultural heritage, such as artworks. These are generally split into two groups of movable and immovable heritage. Immovable heritage includes buildings (which themselves may include installed art such as organs, stained glass windows, and frescos), large industrial installations or other historic places and monuments. Moveable heritage includes books, documents, moveable artworks, machines, clothing, and other artifacts, that are considered worthy of preservation for the future. These include objects significant to the archaeology, architecture, science or technology of a specified culture.
Aspects and disciplines of the preservation and conservation of tangible culture include:

Museology
Archival science
Conservation (cultural heritage)

Art conservation
Archaeological conservation
Architectural conservation
Film preservation
Phonograph record preservation


Digital preservation

Intangible culture[edit]




The Grandfather tells a story, by Albert Anker, ca. 1884.


Main article: Intangible cultural heritage
"Intangible cultural heritage" consists of non-physical aspects of a particular culture, more often maintained by social customs during a specific period in history. The concept includes the ways and means of behavior in a society, and the often formal rules for operating in a particular cultural climate. These include social values and traditions, customs and practices, aesthetic and spiritual beliefs, artistic expression, language and other aspects of human activity. The significance of physical artifacts can be interpreted[by whom?] against the backdrop of socioeconomic, political, ethnic, religious and philosophical values of a particular group of people. Naturally, intangible cultural heritage is more difficult to preserve than physical objects.[citation needed]
Aspects of the preservation and conservation of cultural intangibles include:

folklore
oral history
language preservation

Natural heritage[edit]
See also: Conservation movement
"Natural heritage" is also an important part of a society's heritage, encompassing the countryside and natural environment, including flora and fauna, scientifically known as biodiversity, as well as geological elements (including mineralogical, geomorphological, paleontological, etc.), scientifically known as geodiversity. These kind of heritage sites often serve as an important component in a country's tourist industry, attracting many visitors from abroad as well as locally. Heritage can also include cultural landscapes (natural features that may have cultural attributes).
Aspects of the preservation and conservation of natural heritage include:

Rare breeds conservation
Heirloom plants

World heritage movement[edit]




Plaque stating the designation of Carthage as a World Heritage Site.


Significant was the Convention Concerning the Protection of World Cultural and Natural Heritage that was adopted by the General Conference of UNESCO in 1972. As of 2011, there are 936 World Heritage Sites: 725 cultural, 183 natural, and 28 mixed properties, in 153 countries. Each of these sites is considered important to the international community.
The underwater cultural heritage is protected by the UNESCO Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage. This convention is a legal instrument helping states parties to improve the protection of their underwater cultural heritage.[6]
In additional, UNESCO has begun designating masterpieces of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity. The Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights sitting as part of the United Nations Economic and Social Council with article 15 of its Covenant had sought to instill the principles under which cultural heritage is protected as part of a basic human right.
Key international documents and bodies include:

Athens Charter, 1931
Roerich Pact, 1935
Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict, 1954, (with a definition of cultural heritage item adopted by some national law)
Venice Charter, 1964
Barcelona Charter, 2002 (regarding maritime vessel preservation)
ICOMOS
International Committee of the Blue Shield Managing natural and manmade disasters.
International Institute for Conservation

National and regional heritage movements[edit]


Play media


 Rediscovery of the Muisca Indigenous Heritage
 El redescubrimiento de la tradición idigena




Play media


Youth and Heritage in Syria
 Passing on traditional values


Much of heritage preservation work is done at the national, regional, or local levels of society. Various national and regional regimes include:

Australia:


Burra Charter
Heritage Overlay in Victoria, Australia


Canada


Heritage conservation in Canada


Chile


National Monuments Council (Chile)


China


State Administration of Cultural Heritage
Heritage conservation in Hong Kong


Egypt


Supreme Council of Antiquities


Ghana


Ghana’s material cultural heritage


India


Indian Heritage Cities Network, Mysore
Heritage structures in Hyderabad


Japan


Cultural Properties of Japan


Kenya


Monuments


Macedonia


Institute for Protection of Cultural Monuments


Namibia


National Heritage Council of Namibia
National Monuments Council


New Zealand


New Zealand Historic Places Trust


Pakistan


Pakistan Pakistan Monument


South Africa


South African Heritage Resources Agency
Provincial heritage resources authorities
Amafa aKwaZulu-Natali
Heritage Western Cape
Northern Cape Heritage Resources Authority
National Monuments Council
Historical Monuments Commission


United Kingdom


Conservation in the United Kingdom
English Heritage
English Heritage Archive
National Trust


United States of America


National Register of Historic Places


Zimbabwe


National Monuments of Zimbabwe

Issues in cultural heritage[edit]




Emblem used to clearly identify cultural property under protection of the Hague Convention of 1954, regarding cultural property during armed conflicts.


Broad philosophical, technical, and political issues and dimensions of cultural heritage include:

Cultural heritage repatriation
Cultural heritage management
Cultural property law
Heritage tourism
Virtual heritage

See also[edit]

Values (heritage)
Antiquarian
Collecting
Heritage film
International Council on Monuments and Sites

Digital methods in preservation

DigiCULT
ERPANET
Intellectual property issues in cultural heritage (IPinCH)
MICHAEL (webportal)

References[edit]


^ Tanselle, G. Thomas (1998), Literature and Artifacts, Charlottesville, VA: Bibliographical Society of the University of Virginia, ISBN&#160;1-883631-06-8, OCLC&#160;39223648&#160;
^ Paolo Cignoni, Roberto Scopigno (June 2008), "Sampled 3D models for CH applications: A viable and enabling new medium or just a technological exercise?" (PDF), ACM Journal on Computing and Cultural Heritage 1 (1): 1, doi:10.1145/1367080.1367082.&#160;
^ Lowenthal, David (1985), The Past is a Foreign Country, New York: Cambridge University Press, ISBN&#160;0-521-22415-2, OCLC&#160;12052097&#160;
^ Proposing Varanasi for the World Heritage List of UNESCO (PDF), Varanasi Development Authority&#160;.
^ Singh, Rana P.B., Vrinda Dar and S. Pravin, Rationales for including Varanasi as heritage city in the UNESCO World Heritage List, National Geographic Journal of India (varanasi) 2001, 47:177-200&#160;.
^ [This convention is a legal instrument helping states parties to improve the protection of their underwater cultural heritage]


Further reading[edit]

Michael Falser. Cultural Heritage as Civilizing Mission. From Decay to Recovery. Heidelberg, New York: Springer (2015), ISBN 978-3-319-13638-7.
Michael Falser, Monica Juneja (eds.). 'Archaeologizing' Heritage? Transcultural Entanglements between Local Social Practices and Global Virtual Realities. Heidelberg, New York: Springer (2013), ISBN 978-3-642-35870-8.
Barbara T. Hoffman, Art and cultural heritage: law, policy, and practice, Cambridge University Press, 2006
Leila A. Amineddoleh, "Protecting Cultural Heritage by Strictly Scrutinizing Museum Acquisitions," Fordham Intellectual Property, Media &amp; Entertainment Law Journal, Vol. 24, No. 3. Available at: http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2467100
Paolo Davide Farah, Riccardo Tremolada, Desirability of Commodification of Intangible Cultural Heritage: The Unsatisfying Role of IPRs, in TRANSNATIONAL DISPUTE MANAGEMENT, Special Issues “The New Frontiers of Cultural Law: Intangible Heritage Disputes”, Volume 11, Issue 2, March 2014, ISSN 1875-4120 Available at: http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2472339
Paolo Davide Farah, Riccardo Tremolada, Intellectual Property Rights, Human Rights and Intangible Cultural Heritage, Journal of Intellectual Property Law, Issue 2, Part I, June 2014, ISSN: 0035-614X, Giuffre, pp.&#160;21–47. Available at: http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2472388
Dallen J. Timothy and Gyan P. Nyaupane, Cultural heritage and tourism in the developing world&#160;: a regional perspective, Taylor &amp; Francis, 2009
Peter Probst, "Osogbo and the Art of Heritage: Monuments, Deities, and Money", Indiana University Press, 2011
Constantine Sandis (ed.), Cultural Heritage Ethics: Between Theory and Practice, Open Book Publishers, 2014

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Cultural heritage.



Cultural heritage policy - history and resources Getty Museum - list of major international cultural heritage documents, charters, and treaties
UNESCO World Heritage Centre – Official website of the United Nations cultural heritage body
International Council on Monuments and Sites
International Council of Museums
International Centre for the Study of the Preservation and Restoration of Cultural Property
Inventory of Heritage Organisations in Europe (English, French, German and Dutch language)
International Institute for Conservation of Historic and Artistic Works
Cultural routes and landscapes, a common heritage of Europe (English and French language)
EPOCH – European Research Network on Excellence in Processing Open Cultural Heritage
Cultural heritage search engine
Peace Palace Library - Research Guide
National Council for Preservation Education










v
t
e


Culture







Outline






Sciences



Anthropology
Cultural astronomy
Cultural ecology
Cultural entomology
Cultural neuroscience
Cultural studies
Culturology
Culture theory
Neuroculture








Subfields



Cultural anthropology
Cultural economics
Cultural geography
Cultural history
Cultural psychology
Intercultural relations
Philosophy of culture
Popular culture studies
Semiotics of culture
Sociology of culture
Theology of culture


Sound culture
Visual culture








Types



Constructed culture
Dominant culture
Folk culture
High culture
Low culture
Official culture
Political culture

Civic


Popular culture

Urban


Primitive culture
Subculture

Alternative culture
list


Super culture
Vernacular culture
Culture by location








Aspects



Acculturation
Cultural appropriation
Cultural artifact
Cultural baggage
Cultural behavior
Cultural capital
Cultural communication
Cultural conflict
Cultural cringe
Cultural deprivation
Cultural dissonance
Cultural framework
Cultural heritage
Cultural icon
Cultural identity
Cultural industry
Cultural invention
Cultural landscape
Cultural learning
Cultural memory
Cultural pluralism
Cultural practice
Cultural property
Cultural area
Cultural reproduction
Cultural system
Cultural universal
Enculturation
High- and low-context cultures
Interculturality
Material culture
Non-material culture
Participatory culture
Trans-cultural diffusion
Transculturation








Politics



Colonial mentality
Consumer capitalism
Cultural assimilation
Cultural attaché
Cultural backwardness
Cultural Bolshevism
Cultural conservatism
Cultural diplomacy
Cultural environmentalism
Cultural exception
Cultural feminism
Cultural genocide
Cultural globalization
Cultural hegemony
Cultural imperialism
Cultural intelligence
Cultural liberalism
Cultural nationalism
Cultural pessimism
Cultural policy
Cultural Revolution
Cultural rights
Cultural safety
Cultural Zionism
Culture change
Culture minister
Culture of fear
Culture war
Interculturalism
Monoculturalism
Multiculturalism








Related



Animal culture
Bennett scale
Bullying culture
Coffee culture
Conformity
Cross-cultural
Cultural bias
Cultural center
Cultural competence
Cultural critic
Cultural diversity
Cultural encoding
Cultural evolutionism
Cultural institution
Cultural lag
Cultural literacy
Cultural mosaic
Cultural movement
Cultural relativism
Cultural tourism
Cultural turn
Cultural sensibility
Culture gap
Culture hero
Culture industry
Culture shock
Children's culture
Death and culture
Emotions and culture
Intercultural competence
Media culture
Oppositional culture
Organizational culture
Permission culture
Print culture
Rape culture
Remix culture
Safety culture
Security culture
Tea culture
Transformation of culture
Urban culture











Portal
Category
changes
















Culture portal













Authority control



NDL: 01188337















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cultural_heritage&amp;oldid=688355783"					
				Categories: Cultural heritageMuseologyCultural studiesConservation and restorationHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from February 2015All articles needing additional referencesArticles needing cleanup from February 2015All pages needing cleanupArticles with sections that need to be turned into prose from February 2015Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from October 2014All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from October 2014Commons category with local link same as on WikidataArticles containing video clips				
							
		
		
			