


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Curator
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				A curator (from Latin: curare meaning "take care") is a manager or overseer. Traditionally, a curator or keeper of a cultural heritage institution (i.e., gallery, museum, library or archive) is a content specialist responsible for an institution's collections and involved with the interpretation of heritage material. The object of a traditional curator's concern necessarily involves tangible objects of some sort, whether it is artwork, collectibles, historic items or scientific collections. More recently, new kinds of curators are emerging: curators of digital data objects and biocurators.



Contents


1 Curator responsibilities
2 Education and training
3 Technology and society
4 See also
5 References
6 Further reading
7 External links



Curator responsibilities[edit]
In smaller organizations, a curator may have sole responsibility for acquisitions and even collections care. The curator will make decisions regarding what objects to take, oversee their potential and documentation, conduct research based on the collection and history, provide proper packaging of art for transportation, and shares that research with the public and community through exhibitions and publications. In very small volunteer-based museums, such as local historical societies, a curator may be the only paid staff member.
In larger institutions, the curator's primary function is as a subject specialist, with the expectation that he or she will conduct original research on objects and guide the organization in its collecting. Such institutions can have multiple curators, each assigned to a specific collecting area (e.g., Curator of Ancient Art, Curator of Prints and Drawings, etc.) and often operating under the direction of a head curator. In such organizations, the physical care of the collection may be overseen by museum collections managers or museum conservators, and documentation and administrative matters (such as insurance and loans) are handled by a museum registrar.
In the United Kingdom, the term curator is also applied to government employees who monitor the quality of contract archaeological work under Planning Policy Guidance 16: Archaeology and Planning (PPG 16) and are considered to manage the cultural resource of a region. In the museum setting, a curator in the United Kingdom may also be called a "keeper".
In Scotland, the term "curator" is also used to mean the guardian of a child.[citation needed]
In the United States, a curator’s job is multifaceted, and dependent on their particular institution and its mission. However, in recent years the role of a curator has evolved alongside the changing role of museums. As museums in the United States have become increasingly more digitized, curators find themselves constructing narratives in both the material and digital worlds. Historian Elaine Gurian has called for museums in which “visitors could comfortably search for answers to their own questions regardless of the importance placed on such questions by others.”[1] This would change the role of curator from teacher to “facilitator and assistor.”[2] In this sense the role of curator in the United States is precarious as digital and interactive exhibits often allow the public to become their own curator, and choose their own information.
More recently, advances in new technologies have led to a further widening of the role of curator. This has been focused in major art institutions internationally and has become an object of academic study and research.
In contemporary art, the title curator is given to a person who selects and often interprets works of art. In addition to selecting works, the curator often is responsible for writing labels, catalog essays, and other supporting content for the exhibition. Such curators may be permanent staff members, be "guest curators" from an affiliated organization or university, or be "freelance curators" working on a consultant basis. The late twentieth century saw an explosion of artists organizing exhibitions. The artist-curator has a long tradition of influence. Notable among these was Sir Joshua Reynolds, founder of the Royal Academy, London.
In some American organizations, the term curator is also used to designate the head of any given division of a cultural organization. This has led to the proliferation of titles such as "Curator of Education" and "Curator of Exhibitions". The term "literary curator" has been used to describe persons who work in the field of poetry, such as former 92nd Street Y poetry director Karl Kirchwey.[3] This trend has increasingly been mirrored in the United Kingdom in such institutions as Ikon, Birmingham, UK and Baltic, Gateshead, UK.
In Australia and New Zealand, the term is also applied to a person who prepares a sports ground for use (especially a cricket ground)[4] This job is equivalent to that of groundsman in some other cricketing nations.
In France, the term curator is translated as conservateur. There are two kinds of curators, Heritage curators (conservateurs du patrimoine) with five specialities (archeology, archives, museums, historical monuments, natural science museums), and Librarian curators (conservateurs des bibliothèques). These curators are in public service, selected by competitive exam, the use of the title curator by private workers remains unofficial.
Education and training[edit]
Curators generally hold a higher academic degree in their subject, typically a Doctor of Philosophy or a master's degree in subjects such as history, history of art, archaeology, anthropology, or classics.[5][6][7] Curators are also expected to have contributed to their academic field, for example, by delivering public talks, publishing articles or presenting at specialist academic conferences.[5] It is important that curators have knowledge of the current collecting market for their area of expertise, and are aware of current ethical practices and laws that may impact their organisation's collecting.[8][9]
Recently, the increased complexity of many museums and cultural organisations has prompted the emergence of professional programs in fields such as public history, museum studies, arts management, and curating/curatorial practice.[10] In 1992, the Royal College of Art established an MA course co-funded by the Royal College of Art and the Arts Council of Great Britain, the first in Britain to specialise in curating with a particular focus on contemporary art. The course is now funded by Arts Council England, and in 2001 the course title was amended to Curating Contemporary Art to more accurately reflect the content and primary focus of the programme.[11] Similarly, a number of contemporary art institutions launched curatorial study courses as an alternative to traditional academic programs. Established in 1987, the École du Magasin is a curatorial training program based at the art center Le MAGASIN in Grenoble, France. Similarly, the Whitney Museum of American Art, through its Independent study program, hosts a curatorial program as one of its three study areas, and de Appel arts centre hosts its curatorial programme since 1994. Other institutions that run programs in curating include Norwich University of the Arts; The Courtauld Institute of Art, London, UK, Kingston University; Goldsmiths College, University of London; Birkbeck, University of London; Chelsea College of Art and Design; University of the Arts London; California College of the Arts; University of Southern California; Bard College; The School of Visual Arts; the École du Louvre; University of Rennes 2—Upper Brittany; Ontario College of Art and Design and The University of Melbourne. (See →External links for further information on courses.)
Technology and society[edit]
In the same way that a museum curator may acquire objects of relevance or an art curator may select or interpret a work of art, the injection of technology and impact of social media into every aspect of our society has seen the emergence of technology curators; someone who is able to disentangle the science and logic of a particular technology and apply it to real world situations and society, whether for social change or commercial advantage. The first UK Wired Conference had a test lab, where an independent curator selected technology that showcased radical technology advancements and their impact on society, such as the ability to design and "print" real world objects using 3D printers (such as a fully working violin) or the ability to model and represent accurate interactive medical and molecular models in Stereoscopic 3D.[12] MOVE,[13][14] a Confestival started in 2010, celebrated the disruption of the perception of what a tech conference should be, using a radically more interactive format that drew on a variety of influences outside of the traditional world of technology, including religion, micro-banking for developing countries and interactive art installations/workshops such as the Future Cube[15] and a giant interactive video projection.[16]
See also[edit]

Collection
Content curation
Curatorial platform
Digital curation
Docent

References[edit]


^ Clough, Wayne (2013). Best of Both Worlds: Museums, Libraries and Achieves in the Digital Age (PDF). The Smithsonian Institution. p.&#160;30.&#160;
^ Clough, Wayne (2013). Best of Both Worlds: Museums Libraries and Archives in a Digital World (PDF). The Smithsonian Institution. p.&#160;30.&#160;
^ Alix Friedman (June 13, 2000). "POETRY CENTER DIRECTOR KARL KIRCHWEY LEAVES 92nd STREET Y". 92nd Street Y. Retrieved 2010-10-15. The 92nd Street Y announces the departure of Karl Kirchwey, longtime director of the 92nd Street Y Unterberg Poetry Center. Mr. Kirchwey will become Director of Creative Writing and Senior Lecturer in the Arts at Bryn Mawr College starting next fall. The Poetry Center is a program of the 92nd Street Y Tisch Center for the Arts, the Y's arts presenting division.&#160;
^ "The Cordon - Cricket Blogs - ESPN Cricinfo". Cricinfo.&#160;
^ a b Carly Chynoweth, How do I become a museum curator? 22 December 2006, Times Online
^ Valarie Kinkade, Day in the life: curator. American Alliance of Museums
^ Stephanie A. Harper, How to become a museum curator. 6 July 2009, Edubook
^ A code of ethics for curators. 2009, American Alliance of Museums Curators Committee
^ Combatting Illicit Trade: Due diligence guidelines for museums, libraries and archives on collecting and borrowing cultural material. October 2005, Department for Culture, Media and Sport
^ Niru Ratnam, Hang it all. 9 March 2003, The Observer
^ Curating contemporary art. Royal College of Art
^ http://www.wiredevent.co.uk/wired/agenda
^ "MLOVE". mlove.com.&#160;
^ "MLOVE Confestival Disrupts the Perception of What a Tech Conference Should Be: Inspiring, Innovative and Thought Provoking". PRWeb. July 8, 2010.&#160;
^ "Inside a Future Cube at MLOVE". YouTube. Retrieved Jun 27, 2010.&#160;
^ "Projektil MLOVE Lighting Show". YouTube. Retrieved Jun 27, 2010.&#160;


Further reading[edit]

Burcaw, G. (1997) Introduction to Museum Work, 3rd edition. Lanham, MD: Altamira Press. ISBN 978-0-7619-8926-4
Ferguson, B., Greenburg, R. and Nairne, S. (1996) Thinking About Exhibitions ISBN 0-415-11590-6.
Glaser, J. and A. Zenetou. (1996) Museums: A Place to Work. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-12724-0
Lord, G. and B. Lord. (1997) The Manual of Museum Management. Lanham, MD: Altamira Press. ISBN 0-7591-0249-X
Kuoni, Carin. (2001) Words Of Wisdom: A Curator's Vade Mecum on Contemporary Art. New York: Independent Curators International (ICI). ISBN 0-916365-60-3
Marincola, P. (2002) Curating Now: Imaginative Practice/Public Responsibility ISBN 0-9708346-0-8
Obrist, H. (2008) A Brief History of Curating ISBN 3-905829-55-X.
Rugg, J. and Segdwick, M (2007) Issues in Curating. Intellect. ISBN 978-1-84150-162-8
Richter, D. and Drabble, B (2007) Curating Critique. Revolver. ISBN 978-3-86588-451-0
Spalding, F. (1998) The Tate: A History. Tate Publishing. ISBN 1-85437-231-9.
Sullivan, L. and Childs, S. (2003) Curating Archaeological Collections ISBN 0-7591-0024-1.
Thea, C. (2009) On Curating: Interviews with Ten International Curators ISBN 1-935202-00-6.
Graham, B. and Cook S. (2010) Rethinking Curating. Cambridge: MIT Press. ISBN 0-262-01388-6

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Curators.





Look up curator in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



'Hang it all', article on contemporary curating and the rise of curating degrees, the Observer newspaper, Sunday 9 March 2003.
'Career Curating' article on curating contemporary design, the Guardian newspaper, Saturday 14 July 2001.
Curating.info
CRUMB - Curatorial Resource for Upstart Media Bliss
International Curators Program / Antwerp
The Exhibitionists — geared towards children, an interactive guide to how an exhibition is put together
Tate staff preparations for the Turner Prize 2008 (blog), Tate, UK
UMsystem.edu - University of Missouri Board of Curators
Interview with Agustín Pérez-Rubio, current director and former chief curator of the MUSAC
Center for Curatorial Studies at Bard College Graduate Program
http://www.nua.ac.uk/macuration/
Critical Curatorial Cybermedia - Research based Masters Programme, Geneva University of Art and Design, Geneva, Switzerland
Curating Contemporary Art Graduate Program, Royal College of Art, London, UK
de Appel Curatorial Programme, de Appel arts centre, Amsterdam, Netherlands
École du Magasin Curatorial Training Program, Le MAGASIN, Grenoble, France
Exhibition Design &amp; Management, Department for Image Science, Danube University, Krems, Austria
MA Curatorial Practice, California College of the Arts, San Francisco, California, US
MA Curatorship, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia
MA Art and Curatorial Practices in the Public Sphere, USC Roski School of Fine Arts, Los Angeles, California
Master of Art Curatorial Studies – Theory – History – Criticism, Frankfurt, Germany
Whitney Independent study program










v
t
e


Visual arts and the art world






Artwork



Conceptual art
Cultural artifact
Fine art
Plastic arts
Public art








Roles



Artist
Critic
Curator
Conservator-restorer
Dealer











Places
Events






Art auction
Art exhibition
Art gallery&#160;/ museum&#160;(contemporary)
Arts centre
Arts festival
Artist cooperative
Artist-in-residence program
Artist-run initiative
Artist-run space
Biennale
Commission
Virtual museum








History of art



Art history (academic study)
Criticism








Related topics



The arts
Economics of art&#160;/ arts and literature&#160;/ culture
Conservation-restoration
Cultural policy
Sociology of art








Lists



Artistic media
Contemporary artists
Painters
Photographers
Sculptors
















v
t
e


Conservation and Restoration of Cultural Heritage






Specialties



Antiques restoration
Architectural conservation
Art conservation
Archaeological conservation
Book and paper conservation
Conservation science (cultural heritage)
Heritage science
Digital preservation
Film preservation
Frame conservation
Furniture conservation
Historic garden conservation
Horological conservation
Media preservation
Metals conservation
New media art preservation
Object conservation
Optical media preservation
Paintings conservation
Preventive conservation
Stained glass conservation
Textile conservation








Collections care



Collections care
Collections maintenance (museum)
Collections management (museum)
Collections policy
Documentation of cultural property
Emergency response (museum)
Found in collection
Inherent vice
Museum integrated pest management
Preservation survey








Techniques



Anastylosis
Conservation and restoration of archaeological sites
Conservation and restoration of books, manuscripts, documents and ephemera
Conservation and restoration of ceramic objects
Conservation and restoration of copper-based objects
Conservation and restoration of ivory objects
Conservation and restoration of ferrous objects
Conservation and restoration of glass objects
Conservation and restoration of metals
Conservation and restoration of musical instruments
Conservation and restoration of outdoor bronze artworks
Conservation and restoration of outdoor artworks
Conservation and restoration of photographs
Conservation and restoration of silver objects
Conservation and restoration of shipwreck artifacts
Conservation and restoration of textiles
Conservation and restoration of time-based media art
Conservation and restoration of Tibetan thangkas
Conservation and restoration of vinyl disc records
Conservation and restoration of wooden furniture
Cradling (art restoration)
Detachment of wall paintings
Desmet method
Historic paint analysis
Mass deacidification
Mold prevention
Paper splitting
Preservation metadata
Preservation of illuminated manuscripts
Transfer of panel paintings








Collections roles



Art handler
Collection manager
Conservation scientist
Conservator-restorer
Conservation technician
Curator
Mount maker
Objects Conservator
Paintings conservator
Photograph conservator
Registrar (museum)
Textile conservator








Professional organizations



American Institute for Conservation of Historic and Artistic Works
Association of North American Graduate Programs in the Conservation of Cultural Property
International Institute for Conservation
Guild of Bookworkers
Midwest Regional Conservation Guild
Western Association for Art Conservation
Washington Conservation Guild













Authority control



GND: 4688848-2















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Curator&amp;oldid=690830666"					
				Categories: CuratorsArt curatorsArt exhibitionsArchaeology of the United KingdomEducation and training occupationsMuseum occupationsVisual arts occupationsHidden categories: Articles containing Latin-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from February 2014Commons category with local link same as on WikidataWikipedia articles with GND identifiers				
							
		
		
			