


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Der Blaue Reiter
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				



Wassily Kandinsky, cover of Der Blaue Reiter almanac, c.1912


Der Blaue Reiter (The Blue Rider) was a group of artists united in rejection of the Neue Künstlervereinigung München in Munich, Germany. The group was founded by a number of Russian emigrants, including Wassily Kandinsky, Alexej von Jawlensky, Marianne von Werefkin, and native German artists, such as Franz Marc, August Macke and Gabriele Münter. They considered that the principles of the Neue Künstlervereinigung München, a group Kandinsky had founded in 1909, had become too strict and traditional.
Der Blaue Reiter was a movement lasting from 1911 to 1914, fundamental to Expressionism, along with Die Brücke which was founded in 1905.



Contents


1 History
2 Almanac
3 Exhibitions
4 Members
5 Notes
6 References
7 External links



History[edit]




Franz Marc, Blue Horse I, 1911


Wassily Kandinsky, Franz Marc, August Macke, Alexej von Jawlensky, Marianne von Werefkin, Gabriele Münter, Lyonel Feininger, Albert Bloch and others formed the group in response to the rejection of Kandinsky's painting Last Judgment from an exhibition. Der Blaue Reiter lacked an artistic manifesto, but it was centered around Kandinsky and Marc. Paul Klee was also involved.




Wassily Kandinsky, Der Blaue Reiter, 1903


The name of the movement is the title of a painting that Kandinsky created in 1903, but it is unclear whether it is the origin of the name of the movement, as Professor Klaus Lankheit learned that the title of the painting had been overwritten.[1] Kandinsky wrote 20 years later that the name is derived from Marc's enthusiasm for horses and Kandinsky's love of riders, combined with a shared love of the colour blue.[1] For Kandinsky, blue is the colour of spirituality: the darker the blue, the more it awakens human desire for the eternal (see his 1911 book On the Spiritual in Art).
Within the group, artistic approaches and aims varied from artist to artist; however, the artists shared a common desire to express spiritual truths through their art. They believed in the promotion of modern art; the connection between visual art and music; the spiritual and symbolic associations of colour; and a spontaneous, intuitive approach to painting. Members were interested in European medieval art and primitivism, as well as the contemporary, non-figurative art scene in France. As a result of their encounters with cubist, fauvist and Rayonist ideas, they moved towards abstraction.
Der Blaue Reiter organized exhibitions in 1911 and 1912 that toured Germany. They also published an almanac featuring contemporary, primitive and folk art, along with children's paintings. In 1913 they exhibited in the first German Herbstsalon.
The group was disrupted by the outbreak of the First World War in 1914. Franz Marc and August Macke were killed in combat. Wassily Kandinsky, Marianne von Werefkin and Alexej von Jawlensky were forced to move back to Russia because of their Russian citizenship. There were also differences in opinion within the group. As a result, Der Blaue Reiter was short-lived, lasting for only three years from 1911 to 1914.
Supported by their dealer Galka Scheyer, Kandinsky, Feininger, Klee and Alexej von Jawlensky formed Die Blaue Vier (the Blue Four) group in 1923. Together they exhibited and lectured together in the United States from 1924 on.
An extensive collection of paintings by Der Blaue Reiter is exhibited in the Städtische Galerie in the Lenbachhaus in Munich.
Almanac[edit]
Conceived in June 1911, Der Blaue Reiter Almanach (The Blue Rider Almanac) was published in early 1912, by Piper, Munich, in an edition of 1100 copies; on 11 May, Franz Marc received a first print. The volume was edited by Kandinsky and Marc; its costs were underwritten by the industrialist and art collector Bernhard Koehler, a relative of Macke. It contained reproductions of more than 140 artworks, and 14 major articles. A second volume was planned, but the start of World War I prevented it. Instead, a second edition of the original was printed in 1914, again by Piper.[2]
The contents of the Almanac included:

Marc's essay "Spiritual Treasures," illustrated with children's drawings, German woodcuts, Chinese paintings, and Pablo Picasso's Woman with Mandolin at the Piano[3]
an article by French critic Roger Allard on Cubism
Arnold Schoenberg's article "The Relationship to the Text", and a facsimile of his song "Herzgewächse"
facsimiles of song settings by Alban Berg and Anton Webern
Thomas de Hartmann's essay "Anarchy in Music"
an article about Alexander Scriabin's Prometheus: The Poem of Fire
an article by Erwin von Busse on Robert Delaunay, illustrated with a print of his The Window on the City
Macke's essay "Masks"
Kandinsky's essay "On the Question of Form"
Kandinsky's "On Stage Composition"
Kandinsky's The Yellow Sound.

The art reproduced in the Almanac marked a dramatic turn away from a Eurocentric and conventional orientation. The selection was dominated by primitive, folk, and children's art, with pieces from the South Pacific and Africa, Japanese drawings, medieval German woodcuts and sculpture, Egyptian puppets, Russian folk art, and Bavarian religious art painted on glass. The five works by Van Gogh, Cézanne, and Gauguin were outnumbered by seven from Henri Rousseau and thirteen from child artists.[4]
Exhibitions[edit]




100th anniversary postage stamp, Germany (2012)



First exhibition

December 18, 1911, the "First exhibition of the editorial board of Der Blaue Reiter" (Erste Ausstellung der Redaktion Der Blaue Reiter) opened at the Heinrich Thannhauser's Moderne Galerie in Munich, running through the first days of 1912. 43 works by 14 artists were shown: paintings by Henri Rousseau, Albert Bloch, David Burliuk, Wladimir Burliuk, Heinrich Campendonk, Robert Delaunay, Elisabeth Epstein, Eugen von Kahler, Wassily Kandinsky, August Macke, Franz Marc, Gabriele Münter, Jean Bloé Niestlé and Arnold Schönberg, and an illustrated catalogue edited.[5]
From January 1912 through July 1914, the exhibition toured Europe with venues in Cologne, Berlin, Bremen, Hagen, Frankfurt, Hamburg, Budapest, Oslo, Helsinki, Trondheim and Göteborg.[6]

Second exhibition

February 12 through April 2, 1912, the "Second exhibition of the editorial board of Der Blaue Reiter" showed works in "Black &amp; White" (Zweite Ausstellung der Redaktion Der Blaue Reiter, Schwarz-Weiß) at the "New Art" Gallery of Hans Goltz (Neue Kunst Hans Goltz) in Munich.[7]

Other shows

The artists of Der Blaue Reiter also participated in:

1912 Cologne, Sonderbund westdeutscher Kunstfreunde und Künstler
1913 Berlin, Erster Deutscher Herbstsalon organised by Herwarth Walden and his gallery Der Sturm

Members[edit]




Franz Marc, The Tower of Blue Horses 1913, (missing since 1945)



Albert Bloch
David Burliuk
Heinrich Campendonk
Clotilde von Derp
Lyonel Feininger
Natalia Goncharova
Alexej von Jawlensky
Wassily Kandinsky
Paul Klee
August Macke
Franz Marc
Gabriele Münter
Arnold Schoenberg
Marianne von Werefkin
Alfred Kubin

Notes[edit]


^ a b Vezin, 1992, p. 124
^ Katharina Erling: Der Almanach Der Blaue Reiter, in: Hopfengart (2000), pp. 188-239
^ Peter Nicholls, Modernisms: A Literary Guide, Berkeley, CA, University of California Press, 1995; p. 141.
^ George Heard Hamilton, Painting and Sculpture in Europe, 1880–1940, New Haven, CT, Yale University Press, 1993; pp. 215-16.
^ Catalogue, reproduced in Hoberg &amp; Friedel (1999), pp. 364-365.
^ Ortrud Westheider et alt.: Die Tournee der ersten Ausstellung des Blauen Reiters, in: Christine Hopfengart (2000), pp. 49-82
^ Catalogue?


References[edit]

John E. Bowlt, Rose-Carol Washton Long. The Life of Vasilii Kandinsky in Russian art&#160;: a study of "On the spiritual in art" by Wassily Kandinsky. Pub l. Newtonville, Mass. USA. 1980. ISBN 0-89250-131-6 ISBN 0-89250-132-4
Wassily Kandinsky, M. T. Sadler (Translator) Concerning the Spiritual in Art. Dover Publ. (Paperback). 80 pp.&#160;ISBN 0-486-23411-8. or: Lightning Source Inc. Publ. (Paperback). ISBN 1-4191-1377-1
Shearer West (1996). The Bullfinch Guide to Art. UK: Bloomsbury Publishing. ISBN&#160;0-8212-2137-X.&#160;
Hoberg, Annegret, &amp; Friedel, Helmut (ed.): Der Blaue Reiter und das Neue Bild, 1909-1912, Prestel, München, London &amp; New York 1999 ISBN 3-7913-2065-3
Hopfengart, Christine: Der Blaue Reiter, DuMont, Cologne 2000 ISBN 3-7701-5310-3
Vezin, Annette; Vezin, Luc (1992). Kandinsky and the Blue Rider. Terrail. ISBN&#160;978-2-87939-043-7.&#160;

External links[edit]



Wikiquote has quotations related to: Der Blaue Reiter



 Media related to Der Blaue Reiter at Wikimedia Commons









v
t
e


Der Blaue Reiter






Leaders



Wassily Kandinsky
Franz Marc








Artists



Albert Bloch
David Burliuk
Heinrich Campendonk
Lyonel Feininger
Natalia Goncharova
Alexej von Jawlensky
Paul Klee
August Macke
Gabriele Münter
Arnold Schoenberg











See also Die Brücke
Expressionism
















v
t
e


Post-Impressionism






19th-century
movements



Neo-impressionism
Divisionism
Pointillism
Cloisonnism
Les Nabis
Synthetism
Symbolism
Art Nouveau








Artists



Cuno Amiet
Charles Angrand
Émile Bernard
Pierre Bonnard
Marius Borgeaud
Paul Cézanne
Henri-Edmond Cross
Maurice Denis
Georges Dufrénoy
Paul Gauguin
Hippolyte Petitjean
Paul Ranson
Odilon Redon
Henri Rousseau
René Schützenberger
Paul Sérusier
Georges Seurat
Paul Signac
Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec
Charles Laval
Georges Lemmen
Maximilien Luce
Paul Ranson
Vincent van Gogh
Théo van Rysselberghe
Félix Vallotton
Édouard Vuillard








20th-century
movements



Fauvism
Die Brücke
Der Blaue Reiter
Expressionism
Cubism








Artists



Georges Braque
Charles Camoin
André Derain
Raoul Dufy
Henri Matisse
Albert Gleizes
Ernst Ludwig Kirchner
Karl Schmidt-Rottluff
Wassily Kandinsky
Sonia Lewitska
Franz Marc
Jean Metzinger
Henry Ottmann
Francis Picabia
Pablo Picasso
Robert Antoine Pinchon
Henriette Tirman
Jean Marchand
Othon Friesz








Exhibitions



Artistes Indépendants
Les XX
Volpini Exhibition
Le Barc de Boutteville
La Libre Esthétique
Ambroise Vollard
Salon d'Automne
Salon des Indépendants
Salon des Cent
Salon des Tuileries








Critics



Félix Fénéon
Albert Aurier








See also



Impressionism
Modernism
Modern art
Secessionism
















v
t
e


Art movements






Medieval



Byzantine
Merovingian
Carolingian
Ottonian
Romanesque
Gothic (International Gothic)








Renaissance



Early Netherlandish
High Renaissance
Mannerism








17th century



Baroque
Caravaggisti
Classicism
Dutch Golden Age








18th century



Rococo
Neoclassicism
Romanticism








19th century



Nazarene
Realism / Realism
Historicism
Biedermeier
Gründerzeit
Barbizon school
Pre-Raphaelites
Academic
Aestheticism
Decadent
Macchiaioli
Art Nouveau
Peredvizhniki
Impressionism
Post-Impressionism
Neo-impressionism
Divisionism
Pointillism
Cloisonnism
Les Nabis
Synthetism
Kalighat painting
Symbolism
Hudson River School








20th century



Bengal School of Art
Amazonian pop art
Cubism
Orphism
Purism
Synchromism
Expressionism
Scuola Romana
Abstract expressionism
Kinetic art
Neue Künstlervereinigung München
Der Blaue Reiter
Die Brücke
New Objectivity
Dada
Fauvism
Neo-Fauvism
Precisionism
Bauhaus
De Stijl
Art Deco
Op art
Vienna School of Fantastic Realism
Pop art
Photorealism
Futurism
Metaphysical art
Rayonism
Vorticism
Suprematism
Surrealism
Color Field
Minimalism
Minimalism (visual arts)
Nouveau réalisme
Social realism
Lyrical abstraction
Tachisme
COBRA
Action painting
International Typographic Style
Fluxus
Lettrism
Letterist International
Situationist International
Conceptual art
Installation art
Land art
Performance art
Endurance art
Systems art
Video art
Neo-expressionism
Neo-Dada
Outsider art
Lowbrow
New media art
Young British Artists








21st century



Art intervention
Hyperrealism
Neo-futurism
Stuckism International
Remodernism
Sound art
Superstroke
Superflat
Relational art
Video game art








Related articles



List of art movements
Modern art
Modernism
Late modernism
Postmodern art
Avant-garde













Authority control



VIAF: 219408214
SUDOC: 083793704















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Der_Blaue_Reiter&amp;oldid=687733423"					
				Categories: German artist groups and collectivesExpressionismHistory of MunichCulture in Munich1911 establishments in Germany1914 disestablishments in GermanyHidden categories: Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiers				
							
		
		
			