


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Die Brücke
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				For other uses, see Die Brücke (disambiguation).




Fritz Bleyl poster for the first Die Brücke show in 1906






Die Brücke manifesto 1906


Die Brücke (The Bridge) was a group of German expressionist artists formed in Dresden in 1905, after which the Brücke Museum in Berlin was named. Founding members were Fritz Bleyl, Erich Heckel, Ernst Ludwig Kirchner and Karl Schmidt-Rottluff. Later members were Emil Nolde, Max Pechstein and Otto Mueller. The seminal group had a major impact on the evolution of modern art in the 20th century and the creation of expressionism.[1]
Die Brücke is sometimes compared to the Fauves. Both movements shared interests in primitivist art. Both shared an interest in the expressing of extreme emotion through high-keyed color that was very often non-naturalistic. Both movements employed a drawing technique that was crude, and both groups shared an antipathy to complete abstraction. The Die Brücke artists' emotionally agitated paintings of city streets and sexually charged events transpiring in country settings make their French counterparts, the Fauves, seem tame by comparison.[2]



Contents


1 History
2 Legacy
3 Notes and references
4 External links



History[edit]
The founding members of Die Brücke in 1905 were four Jugendstil architecture students: Fritz Bleyl (1880–1966), Erich Heckel (1883–1970), Ernst Ludwig Kirchner (1880–1938) and Karl Schmidt-Rottluff (1884–1976). They met through the Königliche Technische Hochschule (technical university) of Dresden, where Kirchner and Bleyl began studying in 1901 and became close friends in their first term.[3] They discussed art together and also studied nature,[3] having a radical outlook in common.[4] Kirchner continued studies in Munich 1903–1904, returning to Dresden in 1905 to complete his degree.[5] The institution provided a wide range of studies in addition to architecture, such as freehand drawing, perspective drawing and the historical study of art.[6] The name "Die Brücke" was intended to "symbolize the link, or bridge, they would form with art of the future".[7]
Die Brücke aimed to eschew the prevalent traditional academic style and find a new mode of artistic expression, which would form a bridge (hence the name) between the past and the present.[4] They responded both to past artists such as Albrecht Dürer, Matthias Grünewald and Lucas Cranach the Elder, as well as contemporary international avant-garde movements.[4] The group published a Broadside (printing) called Programme in 1906, where Kirchner wrote:

We call all young people together, and as young people, who carry the future in us, we want to wrest freedom for our actions and our lives from the older, comfortably established forces.[7]

As part of the affirmation of their national heritage, they revived older media, particularly woodcut prints.[4] The group developed a common style based on vivid color, emotional tension, violent imagery, and an influence from primitivism. After first concentrating exclusively on urban subject matter, the group ventured into southern Germany on expeditions arranged by Mueller and produced more nudes and arcadian images. They invented the printmaking technique of linocut, although they at first described them as traditional woodcuts, which they also made.[8]
The group members initially "isolated" themselves in a working-class neighborhood of Dresden, aiming thereby to reject their own bourgeois backgrounds. Erich Heckel was able to obtain an empty butcher's shop on the Berlinerstrasse in Friedrichstadt for their use as a studio.[9] Bleyl described the studio as:

that of a real bohemian, full of paintings lying all over the place, drawings, books and artist’s materials — much more like an artist’s romantic lodgings than the home of a well-organised architecture student.[4]





Painting of the group members by Ernst Ludwig Kirchner 1926/7


Kirchner's became a venue which overthrew social conventions to allow casual love-making and frequent nudity.[4] Group life-drawing sessions took place using models from the social circle, rather than professionals, and choosing quarter-hour poses to encourage spontaneity.[4] Bleyl described one such model, Isabella, a fifteen-year-old girl from the neighbourhood, as "a very lively, beautifully built, joyous individual, without any deformation caused by the silly fashion of the corset and completely suitable to our artistic demands, especially in the blossoming condition of her girlish buds."[10]
The group composed a manifesto (mostly Kirchner's work), which was carved on wood and asserted a new generation, "who want freedom in our work and in our lives, independence from older, established forces."[4]




Otto Mueller, 1912


In September and October 1906, the first group exhibition was held, focused on the female nude, in the showroom of K.F.M. Seifert and Co. in Dresden.[10]
Emil Nolde (1867–1956) and Max Pechstein (1881–1955) joined the group in 1906. Bleyl married in 1907, and, with a concern to support his family, left the group.[3] Otto Mueller (1874–1930) joined in 1910.
Between 1907 and 1911, Brücke members stayed during the summer at the Moritzburg lakes and on the island of Fehmarn.[5] In 1911, Kirchner moved to Berlin, where he founded a private art school, MIUM-Institut, in collaboration with Max Pechstein with the aim of promulgating "Moderner Unterricht im Malen" (modern teaching of painting). This was not a success and closed the following year.[5]
In 1913, Kirchner wrote Chronik der Brücke (Brücke chronicle), which led to the ending of the group.[5]
Legacy[edit]
A successor group formed in 1919, the Dresdner Sezession, including painter Conrad Felixmüller.
Die Brücke was one of two groups of German painters fundamental to Expressionism, the other being Der Blaue Reiter group ("The Blue Rider"), formed in Munich in 1911.
Notes and references[edit]


^ "The Artists' Association 'Brücke'", Brücke Museum. Retrieved 7 September 2007.
^ Artspoke, Robert Atkins, 1993, ISBN 978-1-55859-388-6
^ a b c "Fritz Bleyl (1880-1966)", Brücke Museum. Retrieved 7 September 2007.
^ a b c d e f g h "Kirchner - Expressionism and the city", Royal Academy, 2003. Retrieved 7 September 2007.
^ a b c d "Ernst Ludwig Kirchner", Brucke Museum. Retrieved 8 September 2007.
^ "The Student Years of the Brücke and their Teachers", ingentaconnect.com (abstract of book by Peter Lasko), from Art History, Volume 20, Number 1, March 1997 , pp. 61-99. Retrieved 7 September 2007.
^ a b Dempsey, Amy (2010). Styles, Schools and Movements: The Essential Encyclopaedic Guide to Modern Art. Thames &amp; Hudson. p.&#160;74. ISBN&#160;978-0-500-28844-3.&#160;
^ "Artists by Movement - Die Brücke", artcyclopedia.com. Retrieved 5 September 2007.
^ Peter Selz, German Expressionist Painting, Berkeley: University of California Press, 1957, p. 78
^ a b Simmons, Sherwin. "Ernst Kirchner's Streetwalkers: Art, Luxury, and Immorality in Berlin, 1913-16", The Art Bulletin, March 2000, from findarticles.com. Retrieved 7 September 2007.


External links[edit]

 Media related to Die Brücke at Wikimedia Commons
Brücke-Museum Website
Die Brücke prints at MoMa
"Hottentots in tails" A turbulent history by Christian Saehrendt









v
t
e


Die Brücke






Founders



Fritz Bleyl
Erich Heckel
Ernst Ludwig Kirchner
Karl Schmidt-Rottluff








Others



Emil Nolde
Max Pechstein
Otto Mueller
Kees van Dongen











See also Der Blaue Reiter
Expressionism
















v
t
e


Post-Impressionism






19th-century
movements



Neo-impressionism
Divisionism
Pointillism
Cloisonnism
Les Nabis
Synthetism
Symbolism
Art Nouveau








Artists



Cuno Amiet
Charles Angrand
Émile Bernard
Pierre Bonnard
Marius Borgeaud
Paul Cézanne
Henri-Edmond Cross
Maurice Denis
Georges Dufrénoy
Paul Gauguin
Hippolyte Petitjean
Paul Ranson
Odilon Redon
Henri Rousseau
René Schützenberger
Paul Sérusier
Georges Seurat
Paul Signac
Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec
Charles Laval
Georges Lemmen
Maximilien Luce
Paul Ranson
Vincent van Gogh
Théo van Rysselberghe
Félix Vallotton
Édouard Vuillard








20th-century
movements



Fauvism
Die Brücke
Der Blaue Reiter
Expressionism
Cubism








Artists



Georges Braque
Charles Camoin
André Derain
Raoul Dufy
Henri Matisse
Albert Gleizes
Ernst Ludwig Kirchner
Karl Schmidt-Rottluff
Wassily Kandinsky
Sonia Lewitska
Franz Marc
Jean Metzinger
Henry Ottmann
Francis Picabia
Pablo Picasso
Robert Antoine Pinchon
Henriette Tirman
Jean Marchand
Othon Friesz








Exhibitions



Artistes Indépendants
Les XX
Volpini Exhibition
Le Barc de Boutteville
La Libre Esthétique
Ambroise Vollard
Salon d'Automne
Salon des Indépendants
Salon des Cent
Salon des Tuileries








Critics



Félix Fénéon
Albert Aurier








See also



Impressionism
Modernism
Modern art
Secessionism
















v
t
e


Art movements






Medieval



Byzantine
Merovingian
Carolingian
Ottonian
Romanesque
Gothic (International Gothic)








Renaissance



Early Netherlandish
High Renaissance
Mannerism








17th century



Baroque
Caravaggisti
Classicism
Dutch Golden Age








18th century



Rococo
Neoclassicism
Romanticism








19th century



Nazarene
Realism / Realism
Historicism
Biedermeier
Gründerzeit
Barbizon school
Pre-Raphaelites
Academic
Aestheticism
Decadent
Macchiaioli
Art Nouveau
Peredvizhniki
Impressionism
Post-Impressionism
Neo-impressionism
Divisionism
Pointillism
Cloisonnism
Les Nabis
Synthetism
Kalighat painting
Symbolism
Hudson River School








20th century



Bengal School of Art
Amazonian pop art
Cubism
Orphism
Purism
Synchromism
Expressionism
Scuola Romana
Abstract expressionism
Kinetic art
Neue Künstlervereinigung München
Der Blaue Reiter
Die Brücke
New Objectivity
Dada
Fauvism
Neo-Fauvism
Precisionism
Bauhaus
De Stijl
Art Deco
Op art
Vienna School of Fantastic Realism
Pop art
Photorealism
Futurism
Metaphysical art
Rayonism
Vorticism
Suprematism
Surrealism
Color Field
Minimalism
Minimalism (visual arts)
Nouveau réalisme
Social realism
Lyrical abstraction
Tachisme
COBRA
Action painting
International Typographic Style
Fluxus
Lettrism
Letterist International
Situationist International
Conceptual art
Installation art
Land art
Performance art
Endurance art
Systems art
Video art
Neo-expressionism
Neo-Dada
Outsider art
Lowbrow
New media art
Young British Artists








21st century



Art intervention
Hyperrealism
Neo-futurism
Stuckism International
Remodernism
Sound art
Superstroke
Superflat
Relational art
Video game art








Related articles



List of art movements
Modern art
Modernism
Late modernism
Postmodern art
Avant-garde













Authority control



WorldCat
VIAF: 168342376
LCCN: n80128691
GND: 63342-2
SUDOC: 027221628
NKC: kn20050602005















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Die_Brücke&amp;oldid=682073370"					
				Categories: German artist groups and collectivesExpressionism1913 disestablishments in GermanyArts organizations established in 1905Organizations disestablished in 1913Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers				
							
		
		
			