


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Dolmen
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				For other uses, see Dolmen (disambiguation).





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2014)






A dolmen on Ganghwado, South Korea



A dolmen erected by Neolithic people in Marayur, India



Dolmen of Oleiros, Galicia



Poulnabrone dolmen in the Burren, County Clare, Ireland



Kilclooney dolmen near Ardara, County Donegal, Ireland



A dolmen, also known as a cromlech, portal tomb, portal grave or quoit, is a type of single-chamber megalithic tomb, usually consisting of two or more megaliths supporting a large flat horizontal capstone ("table"), although there are also more complex variants. Most date from the early Neolithic (4000-3000 BCE). Dolmens were typically covered with earth or smaller stones to form a tumulus. In many instances, that covering has weathered away, leaving only the stone "skeleton" of the burial mound intact.
It remains unclear when, why, and by whom the earliest dolmens were made. The oldest known dolmens are in Western Europe, where they were set in place around 7000 years ago. Archaeologists still do not know who erected these dolmens, which makes it difficult to know why they did it. They are generally all regarded as tombs or burial chambers, despite the absence of clear evidence for this. Human remains, sometimes accompanied by artifacts, have been found in or close to the dolmens which could be scientifically dated using Radiocarbon dating. However, it has been impossible to prove that these remains date from the time when the stones were originally set in place.[1]



Contents


1 Etymology
2 Types
3 Dolmen sites

3.1 Asia

3.1.1 Korea
3.1.2 India

3.1.2.1 Karnataka
3.1.2.2 Tamil Nadu


3.1.3 Eurasia (North Western Caucasus) Circassia
3.1.4 Middle East


3.2 Africa

3.2.1 Horn of Africa
3.2.2 North Africa


3.3 Europe


4 See also
5 References

5.1 Bibliography


6 Further reading
7 External links



Etymology[edit]
The word dolmen has a confused history. The word entered archaeology when Théophile Corret de la Tour d'Auvergne used it to describe megalithic tombs in his Origines gauloises using the spelling dolmin (the current spelling was introduced about a decade later and had become standard in French by about 1885).[2][3] The OED does not mention "dolmin" in English and gives its first citation for "dolmen" from a book on Brittany in 1859, describing the word as "The French term, used by some English authors, for a cromlech ...". The name was supposedly derived from a Breton language term meaning "stone table" but doubt has been cast on this, and the OED describes its origin as "Modern French". A book on Cornish antiquities from 1754 said that the current term in the Cornish language for a cromlech was tolmen ("hole of stone") and the OED says that "There is reason to think that this was the term inexactly reproduced by Latour d'Auvergne [sic] as dolmen, and misapplied by him and succeeding French archaeologists to the cromlech".[4] Nonetheless it has now replaced cromlech as the usual English term in archaeology, when the more technical and descriptive alternatives are not used.
Dolmens are known by a variety of names in other languages, including Irish: dolmain, Galician and Portuguese: anta, German: Hünengrab/Hünenbett, Abkhaz: Adamra, Adyghe Ispun, dysse (Danish and Norwegian), dös (Swedish), Korean: 고인돌 goindol, and Hebrew: גַלעֵד‎. Granja is used in Portugal, Galicia, Spain. The rarer forms anta and ganda also appear. In the Basque Country, they are attributed to the jentilak, a race of giants.
The etymology of the German: Hünenbett, Hünengrab and Dutch: Hunebed all evoke the image of giants building the structures. Of other Celtic languages, Welsh: cromlech was borrowed into English and quoit is commonly used in English in Cornwall.
Types[edit]

Great dolmen
Passage grave
Polygonal dolmen
Rectangular, enlarged or extended dolmen
Simple dolmen

Dolmen sites[edit]




T-shaped Hunebed D27 in Borger-Odoorn, Netherlands



Dólmen da Aboboreira, Baião, Portugal



The dolmen Er-Roc'h-Feutet in Carnac, Brittany, France



Crucuno dolmen in Plouharnel, Brittany, France



Lancken-Granitz dolmen, Germany



Asia[edit]
Korea[edit]
The largest concentration of dolmen in the world is found on the Korean peninsula. With an estimated 35,000 dolmen, Korea alone accounts for nearly 40% of the world’s total.
The largest distribution of these is on the west coast area of South Korea, an area that would eventually become host to the Mahan confederacy and be united under the rule of the ancient kingdom of Baekje at one time.
Three specific UNESCO World Heritage sites at Gochang, Hwasun and Ganghwa ( Hwasun – 34°58′39″N 126°55′54″E﻿ / ﻿34.9775414°N 126.931551°E﻿ / 34.9775414; 126.931551) by themselves account for over 1,000 dolmen.[5]
The Korean word for dolmen is goindol (hangul: 고인돌 ) "supported stone". Serious studies of the Korean megalithic monuments were not undertaken until relatively recently, well after much research had already been conducted on dolmen in other regions of the world. After 1945, new research is being conducted by Korean scholars.
Korean dolmen exhibit a morphology distinct from the Atlantic European dolmen.[6]
In 1981 a curator of Seoul's National Museum of Korea, Gon'gil Ji, classified Korean dolmen into two general types: northern and southern. The boundary between them falls at the Bukhan River although examples of both types are found on either side. Northern style dolmens stand above ground with a four sided chamber and a megalithic roof (also referred to as "table type"), while southern style dolmens are normally built into the ground and contain a stone chest or pit covered by a rock slab.[6]
Korean dolmen can also be divided into three main types: the table type, the go-table type and the unsupported capstone type. The dolmen in Ganghwa is a northern-type, table-shaped dolmen and is the biggest stone of this kind in South Korea, measuring 2.6 by 7.1 by 5.5 metres. There are many sub-types and different styles.[7] Southern type dolmen are associated with burials but the reason for building northern style dolmen is uncertain.[8]
Due to the vast numbers and great variation in styles, no absolute chronology of Korean dolmen has yet been established. It is generally accepted that the Korean megalithic culture emerged from the late Neolithic age, during which agriculture developed on the peninsula, and flourished throughout the Bronze Age. Thus, it is estimated that the Korean dolmen were built in the first millennium BC.
How and why Korea has produced so many dolmen are still poorly understood. There is no current conclusive theory on the origin of Korea's megalithic culture, and so it is difficult to determine the true cultural character of Korean dolmen. A few northern style dolmens are found in Manchuria and the Shandong Peninsula. Off the peninsula, similar specimens can be found in smaller numbers, but they are often considerably larger than the Korean dolmen.[9] It is a mystery why this culture flourished so extensively only on the Korean peninsula and its vicinity in Northeast Asia.







Gochang Dolmen, a table-style dolmen









Hongseong Dolmen, a dissection-style dolmen




India[edit]




Dolmen circles, Sulimalthe, Somwarpet






Dolmens of Marayoor in Kerala, India






Megalithic Dolmen at Dannanapeta in Andhra Pradesh, India







This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2015)


There are also dolmens in Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala and Tamil Nadu in South India.
Karnataka[edit]
In Karnataka more than 50 Dolmens are identified on top of Pandavara Betta about 7&#160;km away from Somwarpet towards Shaniwar Sante in Madikeri (Coorg) District.
Tamil Nadu[edit]
In Tamil Nadu more than 100 Dolmens are identified in the Moral Pari near Mallachandram [10] located 19&#160;km from Krishnagiri district, Tamil Nadu.
Eurasia (North Western Caucasus) Circassia[edit]




Dolmen in the Zhane river valley, Russia


See also: Dolmens of North Caucasus and Dolmens of Russia
Over 3,000 dolmens and other structures can be found in the North-Western Caucasus region in Russia, where more and more dolmens are discovered in the mountains each year. These Dolmens are related to the Maykop culture. This great city of Dolmens was built along the shores of the Black Sea from Maykop down to Sochi. The inhabitants were metal workers. The Dolmens were vaults or safes of stone, with a narrow circular entrance that could be tapped with a round screw of stone. Supposedly the dolmens were used to hide and protect metal objects: gold, silver, bronze, jewels and some other treasure. Trade of these objects was done with Persia, Assyria, Egypt and Crete.The Dolmen City was pillaged and sacked by Scythian invaders in the early first millennium BC. The metal workers were enslaved.
Middle East[edit]
Dolmens are also found in Israel, Syria and Jordan. Numerous large dolmens can be viewed in the Israeli National park at Gamla.[11][12]
There are many examples of flint dolmens in the historical villages of Johfiyeh and Natifah in northern Jordan. The greatest number of dolmens are around Madaba, like the ones at Al Faiha village, 10&#160;km to the west of Madaba city see Madaba dolmens on YouTube. Two dolmens are in Hisbone, and the most have been found at Zarqa Ma'in at Al-Murayghat, which are being destroyed by gravel quarries see where have all the dolmens gone? on YouTube .








Flint Dolmen in Johfiyeh, Jordan









Flint Dolmen in Johfiyeh, Jordan





Africa[edit]
Horn of Africa[edit]
In northern Somalia, the town of Aw Barkhadle, named in honour of the 13th century scholar and saint Yusuf bin Ahmad al-Kawneyn (Aw Barkhadle), is surrounded by a number of ancient structures. Among these are dolmens, burial mounds, menhirs (standing stones), and stelae.[13]
North Africa[edit]




Dolmen at Roknia, an ancient necropolis in the Guelma region of northeast Algeria; the site includes more than 7000 dolmens spread over an area of 2&#160;km


In northern Tunisia, Dougga is an important ancient site, which contains a necropolis with dolmens. The settlement also features a sanctuary dedicated to Ba'al Hammon, neo-Punic stelae, the mausoleum, architectural fragments, and a temple dedicated to Masinissa, the remains of which were found during archaeological excavations.
Europe[edit]
See also: Dolmens of Western Pomerania
Megalithic tombs are found from the Baltic Sea and North Sea coasts south to Spain and Portugal. Hunebedden are chamber tombs similar to dolmens and date to the middle Neolithic (Funnelbeaker culture, 4th millennium BC). They consist of a kerb surrounding an oval mound, which covered a rectangular chamber of stones with the entrance on one of the long sides. Some have a more complex layout and include an entrance passage giving them a T-shape. It has been suggested that this means they are related to the passage graves found in Denmark and elsewhere.




This is known as a keyhole entrance[14]


Dolmen sites fringe the Irish Sea and are found in south-east Ireland, Wales, Devon and Cornwall. In Ireland, however, more dolmens are found on the west coast, particularly in the Burren—and Connemara, which includes some of the better-known examples, such as Poulnabrone dolmen. Examples, such as the Annadorn dolmen, have also been found in northern Ireland, where they may have co-existed with the court cairn tombs.
Many examples appear on the Channel Islands of Jersey and Guernsey, such as La Pouquelaye de Faldouet, La Sergenté, and La Hougue des Géonnais. The term Houge derives from the Old Norse word haugr, meaning a mound or barrow. The most famous of these sites is La Hougue Bie, a 6,000-year-old neolithic site that sits inside a large mound; later a chapel was built on the top of the mound.[15]
Amongst the vast Neolithic collections of the Carnac stones in Brittany, France, several dozen dolmens are found. And all around the country, several dolmens still stand, such as the ones of Passebonneau and des Gorces near Saint-Benoît-du-Sault.
Various menhirs and dolmens are located around the Mediterranean islands of Malta and Gozo. Pottery uncovered in these structures allowed the attribution of the monuments to the Tarxien cemetery culture of the Early Bronze Age.[16] This later culture is not to be confused with the Neolithic inhabitants of Malta, who built the Tarxien Temples circa 3100 BC.
In France, important megalithic zones are situated in Brittany, Vendée, Quercy and in the south of France (Languedoc, Rouergue and Corsica). More than 10,000 dolmens and menhirs cover a large part of the country (west and south). Importants menhirs alignments in Brittany (Carnac's alignments count more than 1,000 menhirs)
In Spain dolmens can be found in Galicia (such as Axeitos, pictured below), Basque Country and Navarre (like the Sorgin Etxea) and the basque name for theme is Trikuharri or Jentiletxe, Catalonia (like Cova d'en Daina or Creu d'en Cobertella), Andalusia (like the Cueva de Menga) and Extremadura (like "Dolmen de Lácara").
Dolmens can be found across Portugal, from simple ones [17] to the more complex examples of megalithic architecture, such as the Almendres Cromlech or the Anta Grande do Zambujeiro.
In Mecklenburg and Pomerania/Pomorze in (Germany) and (Poland), Drenthe (Netherlands), large numbers of these graves were disturbed when harbours, towns, and cities were built. The boulders were used in construction and road building. Others, such as the Harhoog, in Sylt, were moved to new locations. There are still many thousands left today in Europe.




Dolmen of Avola, Sicily






Dolmen of Monte Bubbonia, Sicily


In Italy dolmens can be found in Apulia, Sardinia and in Sicily. In this latter region there are small dolmens located in Mura Pregne (Palermo), Sciacca (Agrigento), Monte Bubbonia (Caltanissetta), Butera (Caltanissetta), Cava dei Servi (Ragusa), Cava Lazzaro (Siracusa), Avola (Siracusa).[18]




Dolmen of Cava dei Servi, Sicily


In the area named Cava dei Servi was found an atypical dolmen, away from the trilithic characteristic shape; it's a semi oval monument formed by four rectangular slabs fixed into the ground. Another three slabs are on top, leaning in such a way they reduce the surface and form a false dome; two large parallelepiped boulders complete the construction. This type of prehistoric architecture is present in a vast area of the Mediterranean (Spain, Sardinia, Apulia, Malta) and in the Cava dei Servi monument, is evidence of use as a tomb.[19]
In Turkey, there are some dolmens in the Regions of Lalapasa and Suloglu in the Province of Edirne and the Regions of KOfcaz, Kirklareli and Demirkoy in the Province of Kirklareli, in the Eastern Thrace. They have been studied by Prof. Dr. Engin Beksaç, since 2004. And also, some of so-called monuments are in the different regions of Anatolia, in Turkey.
There are interesting dolmens in the regions related to the Sakar and Rhodope and Strandzha Mountains in Bulgaria.
The largest dolmen in Europe is the Brownshill Dolmen in County Carlow, Ireland. Its capstone weighs about 150 tonnes.[20]
Lanyon Quoit is a dolmen in Cornwall, 2 miles southeast of Morvah. It stands next to the road leading from Madron to Morvah. The capstone rested at 7 feet high with dimensions of 9 feet by 17.5 feet weighing 13.5 tons.
See also[edit]




Brittany portal



Celts portal





Gochang, Hwasun and Ganghwa Dolmen Sites
Irish megalithic tombs
List of megalithic sites
Megalithic art
Neolithic Europe
Nordic megalith architecture
Taula


References[edit]


^ Lewis, S. (2009) Guide to the Menhirs and other Megaliths of Central Brittany, Nezert Books, ISBN 978–952–270–595–2
^ Bakker, Jan Albert (2009). Megalithic Research in the Netherlands, 1547–1911. Sidestone Press. p.&#160;36. ISBN&#160;978-9088900341.&#160;
^ Corret de la Tour d'Auvergne, Origines gauloises. Celles des plus anciens peuples de l'Europe puisées dans leur vraie source ou recherche sur la langue, l'origine et les antiquités des Celto-bretons de l'Armorique, pour servir à l'histoire ancienne et moderne de ce peuple et à celle des Français, p. PR1, at Google Books, 1796–97.
^ OED "Dolmen", 1st edition, 1897
^ UNESCO World Heritage List. "Gochang, Hwasun and Ganghwa Dolmen Sites." http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/977
^ a b Joussaume, Roger Dolmens for the Dead Batsford Ltd (Jan 1988) ISBN 978-0-7134-5369-0 p. 141–142
^ Megalithic Cultures in Asia, Kim Byung-mo, 1982, Hanyang University Press
^ Holcombe 2011, p.&#160;79.
^ Joussaume, Roger Dolmens for the Dead Batsford Ltd (Jan 1988) ISBN 978-0-7134-5369-0 p. 280
^ "Krishnagiri District Website". Krishnagiri.tn.nic.in. Retrieved 2013-03-15.&#160;
^ http://www.megalithic.co.uk/article.php?sid=30954
^ Oldest archaeological org in Israel: http://www.hadashot-esi.org.il/report_detail_eng.aspx?id=1164&amp;mag_id=115
^ Briggs, Phillip (2012). Somaliland. Bradt Travel Guides. p.&#160;98. ISBN&#160;1841623717.&#160;
^ Questioning Knockeen - Local educational website - The keyhole entrance in the image is the same one that is pictured on the website. The Wikipedia image is many years more recent than the educational website image.
^ "The Scandinavian Contribution in Normandy". Viking.no. Retrieved 2013-03-15.&#160;
^ Journal of European Archaeology (JEA), 5 (1997); Emilia Pásztor and Curt Roslund: Orientation of Maltese dolmens.
^ Česky. "Dolmen – Wikimedia Commons". Commons.wikimedia.org. Retrieved 2013-03-15.&#160;
^ Salvatore Piccolo, Ancient Stones, op. cit.
^ Salvatore Piccolo, ibidem, pages 13 onwards.
^ Weir, A (1980). Early Ireland. A Field Guide. Belfast: Blackstaff Press. p.&#160;101.&#160;


Bibliography[edit]

Holcombe, Charles (2011). A History of East Asia: From the Origins of Civilization to the Twenty-First Century. Cambridge University Press. ISBN&#160;978-0-521-51595-5.&#160;
Piccolo, Salvatore (2013). Ancient Stones: The Prehistoric Dolmens of Sicily. Thornham/Norfolk: Brazen Head Publishing. ISBN&#160;978-0-956-51062-4.&#160;

Further reading[edit]

Trifonov, V., 2006. Russia's megaliths: unearthing the lost prehistoric tombs of Caucasian warlords in the Zhane valley. St.Petersburg: The Institute for Study of Material Culture History, Russian Academy of Sciences. Available from [1]
Kudin, M., 2001. Dolmeni i ritual. Dolmen Path – Russian Megaliths. Available from [2]
Knight, Peter. Ancient Stones of Dorset, 1996.

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Dolmen.





Look up dolmen in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



World heritage site of dolmen in Korea
The Megalithic Portal and Megalith Map
Dolmen Museum in Italian and English
Goindol: Dolmen of Korea
Research Centre of Dolmens in Northeast Asia
Poulnabrone Dolmen in the Burren, County Clare, Ireland
Dolmen (Goindol) sites in Korea&#160;PDF on UNESCO's World Heritage List.
Jersey Heritage Trust
Dolmen Pictures by Robert Triest.









v
t
e


European megaliths






Armenia



Metsamor
Zorats Karer








Azerbaijan



Gobustan Rocks








England



Arbor Low
Avebury
Barbrook One
Birkrigg
Boscawen-Un
Boskednan
Brown Willy Cairns
The Bull Ring
Burnmoor stone circles
Castlerigg
Craddock Moor
Devil's Arrows
Doll Tor
Drizzlecombe
Duloe
Fernacre
Gardom's Edge
Goodaver
Grey Wethers
Hoarstones
Hordron Edge
Hurlers
Leper Stone
Long Meg and Her Daughters
Mên-an-Tol
The Merry Maidens
Mitchell's Fold
Nine Ladies
Nine Stones, Altarnun
Pipers
Rollright
Rudston Monolith
Scorhill
Stannon
Stanton Drew
Stonehenge
Stripple
Swinside
Trippet








France



Barnenez
Tumulus of Bougon
Caixa de Rotllan
Carnac
Menhir de Champ-Dolent
Dolmen de Bagneux
Broken Menhir of Er Grah
Filitosa
Gallardet Dolmen
Gavrinis
Harrespil
Kerzerho
Locmariaquer megaliths
Mane Braz
Paddaghju
Peyre-Brune
Tremeca
Verziau of Gargantua








Germany



Megaliths in Mecklenburg-Vorpommern
Lancken-Granitz dolmens








Ireland



Ardgroom
Beltany stone circle
Bohonagh
Brownshill Dolmen
Brú na Bóinne
Carrigagulla
Carrowmore
Castlestrange stone
Creevykeel Court Tomb
Drombeg
Gaulstown Portal Tomb
Glantane East
Grange stone circle
High cross
Knocknakilla
Meehambee Dolmen
Piper's Stones
Poulnabrone dolmen
Reask
Templebryan Stone Circle
Turoe stone
Uragh Stone Circle








Jersey



Jersey Dolmens
La Hougue Bie








Malta



Ġgantija
Ħaġar Qim
Ħal-Saflieni
Megalithic Temples of Malta
Mnajdra
Ta' Ħaġrat Temples
Skorba
Tarxien








Netherlands



Hunebed








Northern Ireland



Aughlish
Ballynoe
Beaghmore
Corick
Drumskinny
Legananny
Giant's Ring








Poland



Brąchnówko
Grzybnica
Odry
Węsiory








Portugal



Almendres Cromlech
Anta Grande do Zambujeiro
Cunha Baixa Dolmen








Russia



Dolmens of North Caucasus
Thunder Stone
Megaliths in the Urals
Russian Geoglyph








Scandinavia



Picture stones
Runestones
Stone circles
Stone ships








Scotland



Balquhain
Callanish

I
II
III
IV
VIII
X


Carlin
Cat Stane
Clach an Trushal
Colmeallie
Drybridge
Easter Aquhorthies
Lochmaben Stone
Pictish
Ring of Brodgar
Sheldon
Stenness
Steinacleit
Strichen
Yonder Bognie








Ukraine



Boundary stones








Wales



Barclodiad y Gawres
Bedd Arthur
Bedd Taliesin
Bodowyr
Bryn Cader Faner
Bryn Celli Ddu
Bryn Gwyn stones
Capel Garmon
Carreg Coetan Arthur
Carreg Samson
Coetan Arthur
Foel Chwern
Llanfechell
Lligwy Burial Chamber
Maen Llia
Maen Madoc
Meini Hirion
Moel Tŷ Uchaf
Parc Cwm long cairn
Pentre Ifan
St Lythans burial chamber
Tinkinswood
Tŷ Newydd Burial Chamber
Whetstones








General articles



Standing stone
Dolmen
Henge
Menhir
Stone circle
Stone row
Concentric stone circle
Recumbent stone circle
Chambered cairn
Harrespil
Photographs of stone circles
Middle Eastern megaliths
















v
t
e


Neolithic Europe (including the Chalcolithic)







↑ Mesolithic Europe ↑






Horizons



Cardial Ware
Corded Ware culture
First Temperate Neolithic
Linear Pottery culture (LBK)








Cultures



Baden
Beaker
Boian
Cernavodă
Cerny
Chasséen
Cortaillod
Coțofeni
Cucuteni-Trypillian
Decea Mureşului
Dudești
Funnelbeaker
Gaudo
Globular Amphora
Gorneşti
Gumelnița–Karanovo
Hamangia
Horgen
Karanovo
Körös
Lengyel
Narva
Petreşti
Pit–Comb Ware
Pitted Ware
Pfyn
Rössen
Seine-Oise-Marne
Sesklo
Starčevo-Kőrös-Criş
Tisza
Tiszapolgár
Varna
Vinča
Vučedol
Wartberg
Windmill Hill








Monumental
architecture



Bank barrow
Causewayed enclosure
Cursus
Dolmen
Dolmen entrance
Great dolmen
Guardian stones
Henge
Long barrow
Megalith
Menhir
Passage grave
Polygonal dolmen
Rectangular dolmen
Rondel
Round barrow
Simple dolmen
Standing stone
Statue menhir
Stone circle
Stone cist
Stone row
Timber circle
Tor enclosure
Unchambered long barrow








Technology



Grooved ware
Lithic industries
Metallurgy
Neolithic long house
Unstan ware








Concepts



Danubian culture
Secondary products revolution
Old Europe
Proto-Indo-Europeans









↓ Bronze Age Europe ↓














v
t
e


Prehistoric technology









Prehistory

timeline
outline
Stone Age
subdivisions
New Stone Age
synoptic table


Technology

history














&#160;
Tools










Farming



Neolithic Revolution

founder crops
New World crops


Ard&#160;/ plough
Celt
Digging stick
Domestication
Goad
Irrigation
Secondary products
Sickle
Terracing








Food processing



Fire
Basket
Cooking

Earth oven


Granaries
Grinding slab
Ground stone
Hearth

Aşıklı Höyük
Qesem Cave


Manos
Metate
Mortar and pestle
Pottery
Quern-stone
Storage pit








Hunting







Arrow
Boomerang

throwing stick


Bow and arrow

history


Nets
Spear

Spear-thrower
baton
harpoon
woomera
Schöningen Spears










Projectile points



Arrowhead
Bare Island
Cascade
Clovis
Cresswell
Cumberland
Eden
Folsom
Lamoka
Manis Site
Plano
Transverse arrowhead











Toolmaking



Earliest toolmaking

Oldowan
Acheulean
Mousterian


Clovis culture
Cupstone
Fire hardening
Gravettian culture
Hafting
Hand axe

Grooves


Langdale axe industry
Levallois technique
Lithic core
Lithic reduction

analysis
debitage
flake


Lithic technology
Magdalenian culture
Metallurgy
Microblade technology
Mining
Prepared-core technique
Solutrean industry
Striking platform
Tool stone
Uniface
Yubetsu technique








Other tools



Adze
Awl

bone


Axe
Bannerstone
Blade

prismatic


Bone tool
Bow drill
Burin
Canoe

Oar
Pesse canoe


Chopper

tool


Cleaver
Denticulate tool
Fire plough
Fire-saw
Hammerstone
Knife
Microlith
Quern-stone
Racloir
Rope
Scraper

side


Stone tool
Tally stick
Weapons
Wheel

illustration




















&#160;
Architecture










Ceremonial



Göbekli Tepe
Kiva
Standing stones

megalith
row
Stonehenge


Pyramid








Dwellings



Neolithic architecture
British megalith architecture
Nordic megalith architecture
Burdei
Cave
Cliff dwelling
Dugout
Hut

Quiggly hole


Jacal
Longhouse
Mud brick

Mehrgarh


Neolithic long house
Pit-house
Pueblitos
Pueblo
Rock shelter

Blombos Cave
Abri de la Madeleine
Sibudu Cave


Stone roof
Roundhouse
Stilt house

Alp pile dwellings


Wattle and daub








Water management



Check dam
Cistern
Flush toilet
Reservoir
Water well








Other architecture



Archaeological features
Broch
Burnt mound

fulacht fiadh


Causewayed enclosure

Tor enclosure


Circular enclosure

Goseck


Cursus
Henge

Thornborough


Oldest buildings
Megalithic architectural elements
Midden
Timber circle
Timber trackway

Sweet Track




















&#160;
Arts and culture










Material goods



Baskets
Beadwork
Beds
Chalcolithic
Clothing/textiles

timeline


Cosmetics
Glue
Hides

shoes
Ötzi


Jewelry

amber use


Mirrors
Pottery

Cardium
Grooved ware
Linear
Jōmon
Unstan ware


Sewing needle
Weaving
Wine

Winery
wine press










Prehistoric art



Art of the Upper Paleolithic
Art of the Middle Paleolithic

Blombos Cave


List of Stone Age art
Bird stone
Bradshaw rock paintings
Cairn
Carved Stone Balls
Cave paintings

painting
pigment


Cup and ring mark
Geoglyph
Golden hats
Guardian stones
Megalithic art
Petroform
Petroglyph
Petrosomatoglyph
Pictogram
Rock art

Stone carving


Sculpture
Statue menhir
Stone circle

list
British Isles and Brittany


Venus figurines








Burial



Burial mounds

Bowl barrow
Round barrow


Mound Builders culture

U.S. sites


Chamber tomb

Severn-Cotswold


Cist

Dartmoor kistvaens


Clava cairn
Court tomb
Cremation
Dolmen

Great dolmen


Funeral pyre
Gallery grave

transepted
wedge-shaped


Grave goods
Jar burial
Long barrow

unchambered
Grønsalen


Megalithic tomb
Mummy
Passage grave
Rectangular dolmen
Ring cairn
Simple dolmen
Stone box grave
Tor cairn
Tumulus
Unchambered long cairn








Other cultural



Astronomy

sites
lunar calendar


Behavioral modernity
Origin of language
Prehistoric medicine

trepanning


Evolutionary musicology

music archaeology


Prehistoric music

Alligator drum
flutes
Divje Babe flute
gudi


Prehistoric numerals
Origin of religion

Paleolithic religion
Prehistoric religion
Spiritual drug use


Prehistoric warfare
Symbols

symbolism























					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dolmen&amp;oldid=688442148"					
				Categories: DolmensBurial monuments and structuresMegalithic monumentsMonument typesStone monuments and memorialsStonesDeath customsMegalithic monuments in the Middle EastStone Age EuropeHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from August 2014All articles needing additional referencesArticles containing Irish-language textArticles containing Portuguese-language textArticles containing German-language textArticles containing Abkhaz-language textArticles containing Korean-language textArticles containing Hebrew-language textArticles containing Dutch-language textArticles containing Welsh-language textArticles needing additional references from January 2015				
							
		
		
			