


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Etruscan art
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				



Fresco of an Etruscan musician with a barbiton, Tomb of the Triclinium, Tarquinia


Etruscan art was the form of figurative art produced by the Etruscan civilization in central Italy between the 9th and 2nd centuries BC. Particularly strong in this tradition were figurative sculpture in terracotta (particularly life-size on sarcophagi or temples) and cast bronze, wall-painting and metalworking (especially engraved bronze mirrors and situlae).



Contents


1 History
2 Timeline
3 Art and religion
4 Etruscan sculpture
5 Etruscan funerary art
6 Etruscan painting
7 Gallery
8 See also
9 Notes
10 References
11 External links



History[edit]




Cista Depicting a Dionysian Revel and Perseus with Medusa's Head[1] The Walters Art Museum.


The origins of the Etruscans, and consequently of their artistic style, dates back to the people who inhabited or were expelled from Asia Minor during the Bronze Age and Iron Age (See the Villanovan culture). Due to the proximity and/or commercial contact to Etruria, other ancient cultures influenced Etruscan art, such as Greece, Phoenicia, Egypt, Assyria and the Middle East. The apparent simple character in the Hellenistic era conceals an innovative,and unique style whose pinnacle coincided with the Greek archaic period. The Romans would later come to absorb the Etruscan culture into theirs but would also be greatly influenced by them and their art.
Timeline[edit]


Ancient art history


Middle East




Mesopotamia
Ancient Egypt




Asia




India
China
Japan




European prehistory




Nuragic
Etruscan
Celtic
Picts
Norse
Scythia
Visigothic




Classical art




Ancient Greece
Hellenistic
Rome







v
t
e






800-650 BC - "Oriental" or "Orientalising" period. Due to cultural exchanges amongst Mediterranean civilizations at this time, especially with Ancient Greece, a figurative tradition appeared in Etruscan art that was based on Greek models.
650-500 BC - Archaic period - Ionic and Corinthian influences. Due to more and more exchanges and due to the structure of Etruscan society, new artistic techniques emerged. Painting became highly developed in this period, as did painted sculpture in terracotta and vase-painting.
500-300 BC - Classical period - Peak; still marked by Greek influence; less and less art produced due to internal and external political and military crises, with the exception of the bronzes from Vulci.
300-100 BC - late phase; absorbed into Roman culture.

Art and religion[edit]




An ancient Etruscan necklace (University of Pennsylvania Museum)


Etruscan art was often religious in character and, hence, strongly connected to the requirements of Etruscan religion. The Etruscan afterlife was negative, in contrast to the positive view in ancient Egypt where it was but a continuation of earthly life, or the confident relations with the gods as in ancient Greece.[citation needed] The Etruscan gods were hostile and tended to bring misfortune, and so Etruscan religion was centered on interpreting their will and accepting or satisfying it.[citation needed] On the other hand, most remains of Etruscan funerary art have been found in excavations of cemeteries (as at Cerveteri, Tarquinia, Populonia, Orvieto, Vetulonia, Norchia), meaning that what we see of Etruscan art is primarily dominated by depictions of religion and in particular the funerary cult, whether or not that is a true reflection of Etruscan art as a whole.
Etruscan sculpture[edit]




Etruscan - Lion (bronze)
(Walters Art Museum)






Etruscan. Antefix Head of a Woman, ca. 500 B.C.E. Brooklyn Museum


The Etruscans were very accomplished sculptors. Though the renowned "Capitoline Wolf" (now at the Capitoline Museum of Rome) is now suggested to have been manufactured in the 13th century AD [1] surviving examples in terracotta and bronze are testimony to this. Some of the more famous examples include:

The Orator or Aule Metele by its name ("L'Arringatore" in Italian), bronze found in Umbria (now at the National Archaeological Museum of Florence)
the "Apollo of Veii", from the temple at Portanaccio (Veii), painted terracotta attributed to Vulca (now at the National Etruscan Museum)
the bronze "Chimera of Arezzo" now at the National Archaeological Museum of Florence
the "Sarcophagus of the Spouses", painted terracotta from Cerveteri (now at the National Etruscan Museum)

The Apollo of Veii is a good example of the mastery with which Etruscan artist produced these large art pieces. He was made, along with others, to adorn the temple at Portanaccio’s roof line. Although his style is reminiscent of the Greek Kroisos Kouros, the notion of having statues on the top of the roof is entirely an Etruscan derivation.[2]
Etruscan funerary art[edit]




Painted terracotta sarcophagus of Seainti Hanunia Tlesnasa, about 150-130 BCE


The Etruscans excelled in portraying humans. Throughout their history they used two sets of burial practices: cremation and inhumation.[3] Cinerary urns (for cremation) and sarcophagi (for inhumation) have been found together in the same tomb showing that throughout generations, both forms were used at the same time.[4] In the 7th century they started depicting human heads on canopic urns and when they started burying their dead in the late 6th century they did so in terracotta sarcophagi.[5] These sarcophagi were decorated with an image of the deceased reclining on the lid alone or sometimes with a spouse. The Etruscans invented the custom of placing figures on the lid which later influenced the Romans to do the same.[5] These urns were widely popular in Etruria and, from there, the style made its way to Chiusi. After studying the urns further, it was revealed that they were most likely made from molds, in large quantities. This was discovered due to their almost exact resemblance to one another. They have been identified as far back as the third century B.C. and are technically still used to this day (caskets.) Examples of these pieces can be found today in museums all around the world.
The Hellenistic period funerary urns were generally made in two pieces. The top lid usually depicted a banqueting man or woman (but not always) and the container part was either decorated in relief in the front only or, on more elaborate stone pieces, carved on its sides.[6] During this period, the terracotta urns were being mass-produced using moulds in Northern Etruria (specifically in and around Chiusi).[7] Often the scenes decorated in relief on the front of the urn were depicting generic Greek influenced scenes.[8] The production of these urns did not require skilled artists and so what we are left with is often mediocre, unprofessional art, made en masse.[9] However the color choices on the urns offer great evidence as to when it was created, because the color popularities changed over time due to availability, or even just pure aesthetic







Etruscan Cinerary Urn, mid-2nd century BC, terracotta - Worcester Art Museum









MMA Etruscan Funerary Urn









Etruscan Canopic Urn from Chiusi









Funerary Urn









Louvre, Sarcophagus of Cerveteri Couple 520BCE




Etruscan painting[edit]
The best preserved Etruscan paintings that have survived to modern times are mostly wall frescoes from graves, and mainly from Tarquinia. These are the most important example of pre-Roman figurative art in Italy known to scholars.[citation needed]
The frescoes are created by applying paint on top of fresh plaster, so that when the plaster dries the painting becomes part of the plaster, and consequently an integral part of the wall. Colours were created from ground up stones and minerals of different colours and were then mixed to the paint. Fine brushes were made of animal hair (even the best brushes can be produced with ox hair).[citation needed]
From the mid 4th century BC chiaroscuro began to be used to portray depth and volume.[citation needed] Sometimes scenes of everyday life are portrayed, but more often traditional mythological scenes. The concept of proportion does not appear in any surviving frescoes and we frequently find portrayals of animals or men out of proportion. One of the best-known Etruscan frescoes is that of Tomb of the Lioness at Tarquinia.
Gallery[edit]







Etruscan - Balsamarium in the Form of a Deity with Winged Helmet









Etruscan - Gem with Herakles at Rest









Etruscan - Breast Ornament (?)









Naked young man, small bronze, Hellenistic period









Femme étrusque (Terracotta)




See also[edit]

Villa Giulia
Etruscan architecture
Etruscan pottery from the Albegna Valley/Ager Cosanus survey in Internet Archaeology
Etruscan vase painting

Notes[edit]


^ "Cista Depicting a Dionysian Revel and Perseus with Medusa's Head". The Walters Art Museum.&#160;
^ (Ramage 2009: 46)
^ (Turfa 2005: 55)
^ (Richter 1940: 56, note 1)
^ a b (Ramage 2009:51)
^ (Maggiani 1985: 34)
^ (Maggiani 1985: 100)
^ (Nielsen 1995:328)
^ (Richter 1940: 50)


References[edit]

Brendel, Otto (1978). Etruscan Art. Harmondsworth: Pelican.&#160;
Brilliant, R. 1984. Visual Narratives: Storytelling in Etruscan and Roman Art. Ithaca: Cornell University Press
Bonfante, L. 1987. “Daily Life and Afterlife.” In Etruscan Life and Afterlife. Detroit: Wayne State University Press.
Maggiani, Adriano (1985). Artistic crafts: Northern Etruria in Hellenistic Rome. Italy: Electra.&#160;
Ramage, Nancy H. &amp; Andrew (2009). Roman Art: Romulus to Constantine. New Jersey: Pearson Prentice-Hall.&#160;
Richter, Gisela M. A. (1940). The Metropolitan Museum of Art: Handbook of the Etruscan Collection. New York: Metropolitan Museum of Art.&#160;
Sannibale, M. 1994. Le urne cinerarie di età ellenistica. Rome: “L’Erma” di Bretschneider.
Spivey, Nigel (1997). Etruscan Art. London: Thames and Hudson.&#160;
Turfa, Jean Macintosh (2005). Catalogue of the Etruscan Gallery of the University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.&#160;

External links[edit]
 Media related to Etruscan art at Wikimedia Commons

Etruscan Art, Laurel Taylor, Smarthistory









v
t
e


Etruscan-related topics






History



Origins
Padanian Etruria
Founding of Rome
Tyrrhenus
Tyrrhenians
Tarchon
Caelius Vibenna
Capys
Lucius Tarquinius Priscus
Tanaquil
Servius Tullius
Lucius Tarquinius Superbus
Aruns (son of Tarquinius Superbus)
Lars Porsena
Lars Tolumnius
Titus Vestricius Spurinna











Culture and society



Apollo of Veii
Architecture
Art
Chimera of Arezzo
Coins
Corpus Speculorum Etruscorum
Etruscan League
Etruscan names for Greek heroes
Etruscan Sibyl
Extispicy
Fanum Voltumnae
Haruspex
Jewelry
Lausus
Liver of Piacenza
Mezentius
Mythological figures
Mythology
Persius
Poppilia
Raeti
Religion
Sarcophagus of the Spouses
Tages
Terracotta warriors
Titus Lartius
Tomb of the Roaring Lions
Vulca








Military history



Battle of Alalia (540 BC–535 BC)
Siege of Rome (509 BC)
Siege of Rome (508 BC)
Battle of the Cremera (477 BC)
Battle of Cumae (474 BC)
Capture of Fidenae (435 BC)
Battle of Veii (c. 396 BC)
Battle of Lake Vadimo (310 BC)
Battle of Populonia (282 BC)








Language



Alphabet
Cippus Perusinus
Corpus Inscriptionum Etruscarum
English words of Etruscan origin
Lemnian language
Liber Linteus
Pyrgi Tablets
Raetic language
Spanish words of Etruscan origin
Tabula Capuana
Tabula Cortonensis
Tyrsenian languages








Archeology



Bucchero
Cuniculi
Etruscology
Impasto (pottery)
Monteleone Chariot
National Etruscan Museum
Negau helmet
Portonaccio
Tomb of Orcus
Tumulus of Montefortini
Vicus Tuscus








Key sites



Acquarossa
Adria
Aleria
Baratti
Bologna
Caere
Ceri
Civita di Bagnoregio
Clusium
Cumae
Etruria
Falerii
Fescennia
Fidenae
Norchia
Orvieto
Perusia
Poggio Colla
Populonia
Pyrgi
Rusellae
San Giovenale
Spina
Tarquinia
Tuscania
Veii
Vetulonia
Vie Cave
Volsinii
Volterra
Vulci









 Portal













					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Etruscan_art&amp;oldid=691412532"					
				Categories: Etruscan artEtruscansHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from February 2011				
							
		
		
			