


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Giorgio Vasari
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								  (Redirected from Vasari)
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				"Vasari" redirects here. For the Italian surname, see Vasari (surname).


Giorgio Vasari



Vasari's self-portrait



Born
(1511-07-30)30 July 1511
Arezzo, Tuscany


Died
27 June 1574(1574-06-27) (aged&#160;62)
Florence[1]


Nationality
Italian


Education
Andrea del Sarto


Known&#160;for
Painting, architecture


Notable work
Biographies of Italian artists


Movement
Renaissance


Giorgio Vasari (Italian:&#160;[ˈdʒordʒo vaˈzaːri]; 30 July 1511 – 27 June 1574) was an Italian painter, architect, writer and historian, most famous today for his Lives of the Most Excellent Painters, Sculptors, and Architects, considered the ideological foundation of art-historical writing.



Contents


1 Early life
2 Painting
3 Architecture
4 The Lives of the Most Excellent Painters, Sculptors, and Architects
5 Social standing
6 Public collections
7 See also
8 Gallery
9 References and sources
10 External links



Early life[edit]
Vasari was born in Arezzo, Tuscany.[1] Recommended at an early age by his cousin Luca Signorelli, he became a pupil of Guglielmo da Marsiglia, a skillful painter of stained glass. Sent to Florence at the age of sixteen by Cardinal Silvio Passerini, he joined the circle of Andrea del Sarto and his pupils Rosso Fiorentino and Jacopo Pontormo where his humanist education was encouraged. He was befriended by Michelangelo whose painting style would influence his own.
Painting[edit]




Giorgio Vasari, Italian humanists, Tuscan Poets: Dante, Petrarch, Guido Cavalcanti, Boccaccio, Cino da Pistoia and Guittone d'Arezzo[2]






Giorgio Vasari, The Garden of Gethsemane


In 1529, he visited Rome where he studied the works of Raphael and other artists of the Roman High Renaissance. Vasari's own Mannerist paintings were more admired in his lifetime than afterwards. In 1547 he completed the hall of the chancery in Palazzo della Cancelleria in Rome with frescoes that received the name Sala dei Cento Giorni. He was consistently employed by members of the Medici family in Florence and Rome, and worked in Naples, Arezzo and other places. Many of his pictures still exist, the most important being the wall and ceiling paintings in the Sala di Cosimo I in the Palazzo Vecchio in Florence, where he and his assistants were at work from 1555, and the frescoes begun by him inside the vast cupola of the Duomo were completed by Federico Zuccari and with the help of Giovanni Balducci. He also helped to organize the decoration of the Studiolo, now reassembled in the Palazzo Vecchio.
Architecture[edit]
Aside from his career as a painter, Vasari was also successful as an architect. His loggia of the Palazzo degli Uffizi by the Arno opens up the vista at the far end of its long narrow courtyard, a unique piece of urban planning that functions as a public piazza, and which, if considered as a short street, is unique as a Renaissance street with a unified architectural treatment. The view of the Loggia from the Arno reveals that, with the Vasari Corridor, it is one of very few structures that line the river which are open to the river itself and appear to embrace the riverside environment.




The Uffizi Loggia.


In Florence, Vasari also built the long passage, now called Vasari Corridor, which connects the Uffizi with the Palazzo Pitti on the other side of the river. The enclosed corridor passes alongside the River Arno on an arcade, crosses the Ponte Vecchio and winds around the exterior of several buildings.
He also renovated the medieval churches of Santa Maria Novella and Santa Croce. At both he removed the original rood screen and loft, and remodelled the retro-choirs in the Mannerist taste of his time. In Santa Croce, he was responsible for the painting of The Adoration of the Magi which was commissioned by Pope Pius V in 1566 and completed in February 1567. It was recently restored, before being put on exhibition in 2011 in Rome and in Naples. Eventually it is planned to return it to the church of Santa Croce in Bosco Marengo (Province of Alessandria, Piedmont).
In 1562 Vasari built the octagonal dome on the Basilica of Our Lady of Humility in Pistoia, an important example of high Renaissance architecture.[3]
In Rome, Vasari worked with Giacomo Barozzi da Vignola and Bartolomeo Ammanati at Pope Julius III's Villa Giulia.
The Lives of the Most Excellent Painters, Sculptors, and Architects[edit]
Main article: Lives of the Most Excellent Painters, Sculptors, and Architects




A cover of the Lives


Often called "the first art historian",[4] Vasari invented the genre of the encyclopedia of artistic biographies with his Le Vite de' più eccellenti pittori, scultori, ed architettori (Lives of the Most Eminent Painters, Sculptors, and Architects), dedicated to Grand Duke Cosimo I de' Medici, which was first published in 1550. He was the first to use the term "Renaissance" (rinascita) in print, though an awareness of the ongoing "rebirth" in the arts had been in the air since the time of Alberti, and he was responsible for our use of the term Gothic Art, though he only used the word Goth which he associated with the "barbaric" German style. The Lives also included a novel treatise on the technical methods employed in the arts.[5] The book was partly rewritten and enlarged in 1568, with the addition of woodcut portraits of artists (some conjectural).
The work has a consistent and notorious bias in favour of Florentines and tends to attribute to them all the developments in Renaissance art — for example, the invention of engraving. Venetian art in particular (along with arts from other parts of Europe), is systematically ignored in the first edition. Between the first and second editions, Vasari visited Venice and while the second edition gave more attention to Venetian art (finally including Titian) it did so without achieving a neutral point of view.
Vasari's biographies are interspersed with amusing gossip. Many of his anecdotes have the ring of truth, while others are inventions or generic fictions, such as the tale of young Giotto painting a fly on the surface of a painting by Cimabue that the older master repeatedly tried to brush away, a genre tale that echoes anecdotes told of the Greek painter Apelles. With a few exceptions, however, Vasari's aesthetic judgement was acute and unbiased.[citation needed] He did not research archives for exact dates, as modern art historians do, and naturally his biographies are most dependable for the painters of his own generation and those of the immediate past. Modern criticism – with new materials opened up by research – has corrected many of his traditional dates and attributions.
Vasari includes a sketch of his own biography at the end of the Lives, and adds further details about himself and his family in his lives of Lazzaro Vasari and Francesco Salviati.
According to the historian Richard Goldthwaite,[6] Vasari was one of the earliest authors to use the term "competition" (or "concorrenza" in Italian) in its economic sense. He used it repeatedly, and stressed the concept in his introduction to the life of Pietro Perugino, in explaining the reasons for Florentine artistic preeminence. In Vasari's view, Florentine artists excelled because they were hungry, and they were hungry because their fierce competition amongst themselves for commissions kept them so. Competition, he said, is "one of the nourishments that maintain them."
Social standing[edit]
Vasari enjoyed high repute during his lifetime and amassed a considerable fortune. In 1547, he built himself a fine house in Arezzo (now a museum honouring him), and decorated its walls and vaults with paintings. He was elected to the municipal council or priori of his native town, and finally rose to the supreme office of gonfaloniere.
In 1563, he helped found the Florence Accademia e Compagnia delle Arti del Disegno, with the Grand Duke and Michelangelo as capi of the institution and 36 artists chosen as members.
Public collections[edit]

Rijksmuseum Amsterdam[7]

See also[edit]

Reading Vasari, eds. Anne B. Barriault, Andrew T. Ladis, Norman E. Land, and Jeryldene M. Wood (London: Philip Wilson, 2005)
The Ashgate Research Companion to Giorgio Vasari, ed. David J. Cast (Surrey: Ashgate, 2014)

Gallery[edit]

Giorgio Vasari's works. Paintings






Alessandro de Medici resting









Pieta









Bird catchers









Holy Family, with Andrea Sarto









Last Supper by Giorgio Vasari









Entombment









Giorgio Vasari - Temptations of St Jerome









St Luke Painting the Virgin









Annunciation









Justice









The Prophet Elisha





Giorgio Vasari's frescos and decorations.






The painting of the interior of the dome of Florence Cathedral









Cosimo studies the taking of Siena









Apotheosis of Cosimo I









Defeat of the Venetians in Casentino






Giorgio Vasari's works. Architecture






The Uffizi colonnade and loggia









The Loggia of Vasari in Arezzo









Pietro in Montorio, Rome









Tomb of Michelangelo









Sala dei Cento Giorni - Giorgio Vasari - 1547 - Palazzo della Cancelleria









Villa Giulia - Court - Vasari - Vignola




References and sources[edit]




The Castration of Uranus: fresco by Vasari &amp; Cristofano Gherardi (c. 1560, Sala di Cosimo I, Palazzo Vecchio, Florence).



References



^ a b Gaunt, W. (ed.) (1962) Everyman's dictionary of pictorial art. Volume II. London: Dent, p. 328. ISBN 0-460-03006-X
^ "Giorgio Vasari Enciclopedia Dantesca". www.treccani.it.&#160;
^ The Christian Travelers Guide to Italy by David Bershad, Carolina Mangone, Irving Hexham 2001 ISBN 0-310-22573-6-page [1]
^ Vasari, Giorgio. Dictionary of Art Historians, 2013. Retrieved 26 May 2013. Archived here.
^ Vasari, Giorgio. (1907) Vasari on technique: being the introduction to the three arts of design, architecture, sculpture and painting, prefixed to the Lives of the most excellent painters, sculptors and architects. G. Baldwin Brown Ed. Louisa S. Maclehose Trans. London: Dent.
^ Richard Goldthwaite, The Economy of Renaissance Florence, 2009, pp. 390.
^ Collection Rijksmuseum



Sources


The Lives of the Artists Oxford University Press, 1998. ISBN 0-19-283410-X
Lives of the Painters, Sculptors and Architects, Volumes I and II. Everyman's Library, 1996. ISBN 0-679-45101-3
Vasari on Technique. Dover Publications, 1980. ISBN 0-486-20717-X
Life of Michelangelo. Alba House, 2003. ISBN 0-8189-0935-8

&#160;This article&#160;incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:&#160;Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.&#160;
External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Giorgio Vasari.



Works by Giorgio Vasari at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about Giorgio Vasari at Internet Archive
Works by Giorgio Vasari at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
Biography of Vasari and analysis for four major works
Petri Liukkonen. "Giorgio Vasari". Books and Writers (kirjasto.sci.fi). Archived from the original on 4 July 2013.
Giorgio Vasari – The First Art-Historian

Copies of Vasari's Lives of the Artists online:

“Giorgio Vasari's Lives of the Artists.” Site created by Adrienne DeAngelis. Now largely completed in the posting of the Lives, intended to be re-translated to become the unabridged English version.
“Le Vite." 1550 Unabridged, original Italian.
“Stories Of The Italian Artists From Vasari.” Translated by E L Seeley, 1908. Abridged, in English.
Le Vite – Edizioni Giuntina e Torrentiniana
Gli artisti principali citati dal Vasari nelle "Vite" (elenco)
Excerpts from the Vite combined with photos of works mentioned by Vasari.






Authority control



WorldCat
VIAF: 46768219
LCCN: n79084160
ISNI: 0000 0001 2130 9590
GND: 118626213
SELIBR: 207843
SUDOC: 027178021
BNF: cb119277288 (data)
ULAN: 500017608
NLA: 35578126
NDL: 00459589
NKC: jn19990008741
ICCU: IT\ICCU\CFIV\061377
BNE: XX827861
RKD: 436778















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Giorgio_Vasari&amp;oldid=688251534"					
				Categories: Tuscan painters16th-century Italian paintersItalian architectsMannerist paintersRenaissance architectsItalian art historiansItalian art criticsArt technological sourcesItalian biographersMale biographersItalian male writersKnights of the Golden SpurArtist authorsPeople from Arezzo1511 births1574 deathsUffiziHidden categories: Use dmy dates from May 2014Articles with hCardsAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from April 2012Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with no article parameterWikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia BritannicaCommons category with page title same as on WikidataAC with 14 elementsWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with ULAN identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiersWikipedia articles with SBN identifiersWikipedia articles with RKDartists identifiers				
							
		
		
			