


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Goldsmith
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				For other uses, see Goldsmith (disambiguation).
"Goldwork" redirects here. For the art of embroidery using metal threads, see Goldwork (embroidery).





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2010)






Fifteenth-century engraving of the goldsmith and patron saint of goldsmiths Saint Eligius in his workshop






The Baqdadi goldsmith by Kamal-ol-molk


A goldsmith is a metalworker who specializes in working with gold and other precious metals. Historically, goldsmiths also have made silverware, platters, goblets, decorative and serviceable utensils, and ceremonial or religious items, but the rising prices of precious metals have curtailed the making of such items to a large degree.
Goldsmiths must be skilled in forming metal through filing, soldering, sawing, forging, casting, and polishing metal. The trade has very often included jewellery-making skills, as well as the very similar skills of the silversmith. Traditionally, these skills had been passed along through apprenticeships, however, more recently jewellery arts schools specializing solely in teaching goldsmithing and a multitude of skills falling under the jewellery arts umbrella are available. Many universities and junior colleges also offer goldsmithing, silversmithing, and metal arts fabrication as a part of their fine arts curriculum.
At least in Europe, goldsmiths increasingly performed many of the functions we now regard as part of banking, especially providing custody of valuable items and currency exchange, though they were usually restrained from lending at interest, which was regarded as usury.



Contents


1 Gold
2 History
3 Contemporary goldsmithing
4 Notable historical goldsmiths
5 Contemporary goldsmiths of note
6 See also
7 References
8 External links



Gold[edit]
Main article: Gold




A Karo people (Indonesia) goldsmith in Sumatra (circa 1918)






Karo goldsmith and his tools


Compared to other metals, gold is malleable, ductile, rare, and it is the only solid metallic element with a yellow color. It may easily be melted, fused, and cast without the problems of oxides and gas that are problematic with other metals such as bronzes, for example. It is fairly easy to "pressure weld", wherein similarly to clay two small pieces may be pounded together to make one larger piece. Gold is classified as a noble metal—because it does not react with most elements. It usually is found in its native form, lasting indefinitely without oxidization and tarnishing.
History[edit]




A goldsmith workshop during the mid-seventeenth century


Gold has been worked by humans in all cultures where the metal is available, either indigenously or imported, and the history of these activities is extensive. Superbly made objects from the ancient cultures of Africa, Asia, Europe, India, North America, Mesoamerica, and South America grace museums and collections throughout the world. Some pieces date back thousands of years and were made using many techniques that still are used by modern goldsmiths. Techniques developed by some of those goldsmiths achieved a skill level that was lost and remained beyond the skills of those who followed, even to modern times.[1] Researchers attempting to uncover the chemical techniques used by ancient artisans have remarked that their findings confirm that "the high level of competence reached by the artists and craftsmen of these ancient periods who produced objects of an artistic quality that could not be bettered in ancient times and has not yet been reached in modern ones."[2]
In medieval Europe goldsmiths were organized into guilds and usually were one of the most important and wealthiest of the guilds in a city. The guild kept records of members and the marks they used on their products. These records, when they survive, are very useful to historians. Goldsmiths often acted as bankers, since they dealt in gold and had sufficient security for the safe storage of valuable items. In the Middle Ages, goldsmithing normally included silversmithing as well, but the brass workers and workers in other base metals normally were members of a separate guild, since the trades were not allowed to overlap. Many jewelers also were goldsmiths.




Gold and silver smith in Lucknow, India 1890


The Khudabadi Sindhi Swarankar community is one of the oldest communities in goldsmithing in India, whose superb gold artworks were displayed at The Great Exhibition of 1851 in London. In India, 'Vishwakarma' are the goldsmith caste.
The printmaking technique of engraving developed among goldsmiths in Germany around 1430, who had long used the technique on their metal pieces. The notable engravers of the fifteenth century were either goldsmiths, such as Master E. S., or the sons of goldsmiths, such as Martin Schongauer and Albrecht Dürer.
Contemporary goldsmithing[edit]




Goldsmith shop in Aceh, Sumatra, Indonesia. The man in the middle may be a "Klingalees" (orang Keling), someone from South India


A goldsmith might have a wide array of skills and knowledge at their disposal. Gold, being the most malleable metal of all, offers unique opportunities for the worker. In today's world a wide variety of other metals, especially platinum alloys, also may be used frequently. 24 Carat is pure gold and historically, was known as fine gold.[3]
Because it is so soft, however, 24 Carat gold is rarely used. It usually is alloyed to make it stronger and to create different colors; goldsmiths may have some skill in that process. The gold may be cast into some item then, usually with the lost wax casting process, or it may be used to fabricate the work directly in metal.
In the latter case, the goldsmith will use a variety of tools and machinery, including the rolling mill, the drawplate, and perhaps, swage blocks and other forming tools to make the metal into shapes needed to build the intended piece. Then parts are fabricated through a wide variety of processes and assembled by soldering. It is a testament to the history and evolution of the trade that those skills have reached an extremely high level of attainment and skill over time. A fine goldsmith can and will work to a tolerance approaching that of precision machinery, but largely using only his eyes and hand tools. Quite often the goldsmith's job involves the making of mountings for gemstones, in which case they often are referred to as jewelers.
'Jeweller', however, is a term mostly reserved for a person who deals in jewellery (buys and sells) and not to be confused with a goldsmith, silversmith, gemologist, diamond cutter, and diamond setters. A 'jobbing jeweller' is the term for a jeweller who undertakes a small basic amount of jewellery repair and alteration.
Notable historical goldsmiths[edit]
Main pages: Category:Goldsmiths and Category:Silversmiths

Jocelyn Burton
Paul de Lamerie
Paul Storr
Lorenzo Ghiberti
Benvenuto Cellini
Johannes Gutenberg
House of Fabergé
Jean-Valentin Morel
Adrien Vachette

Contemporary goldsmiths of note[edit]

Lois Etherington Betteridge
Andrea Cagnetti - Akelo
William Claude Harper
Mary Lee Hu
Linda MacNeil
Mazlo
John Paul Miller (1918-2013)
Gary Lee Noffke

See also[edit]

Society of North American Goldsmiths
Old master print, engraving, and niello - goldsmith's techniques or related trades in the Middle Ages
Bench jeweler
Toreutics
Persian-Sassanide art patterns
Jewelers' Row
Silver (household)
Sunar

References[edit]


^ American Chemical Society, Ancient technology for metal coatings 2,000 years ago can't be matched even today, ScienceDaily, ScienceDaily, July 24, 2013,
^ Gabriel Maria Ingo, Giuseppe Guida, Emma Angelini, Gabriella Di Carlo, Alessio Mezzi, Giuseppina Padeletti, Ancient Mercury-Based Plating Methods: Combined Use of Surface Analytical Techniques for the Study of Manufacturing Process and Degradation Phenomena, Accounts of Chemical Research, 2013; 130705111206005 DOI: 10.1021/ar300232e
^ McQuhae, William, McQuhae's Practical Technical Instructor (3rd ed.), p.&#160;91.&#160;


External links[edit]

 Media related to Goldsmithing at Wikimedia Commons
A goldsmith with a congenital anomaly









v
t
e


Metalworking










&#160;
Smithing






Smiths



Blacksmith
Bladesmith
Coppersmith
Goldsmith
Gunsmith
Locksmith
Pewtersmith
Silversmith
Tinsmith








Processes



Forging
Pattern welding
Planishing
Raising
Sinking
Swaging








Tools



Anvil
Forge
Fuller
Hammer
Hardy tools
Pritchel
Steam hammer
Swage block
Trip hammer














Casting
Fabrication
Forming
Jewellery
Machining
Metallurgy
Smithing
Tools and terminology
Welding
















v
t
e


Jewellery






Forms



Anklet
Barrette
Belt buckle
Belly chain
Bindi
Bracelet
Brooch
Chatelaine
Collar pin
Crown
Cufflink
Earring
Lapel pin
Necklace
Pendant
Ring
Tiara
Tie clip
Tie pin
Toe ring
Watch

pocket
strap










Making





People




Bench jeweler
Clockmaker
Goldsmith
Silversmith
Jewelry designer
Lapidary
Watchmaker









Processes




Casting

centrifugal
lost-wax
vacuum


Enameling
Engraving
Filigree
Metal clay
Plating
Polishing
Repoussé and chasing
Soldering
Stonesetting
Wire sculpture
Wire wrapped jewelry









Tools




Draw plate
File
Hammer
Mandrel
Pliers











Materials





Precious metals




Gold
Palladium
Platinum
Rhodium
Silver









Precious metal alloys




Britannia silver
Colored gold
Crown gold
Electrum
Shakudō
Shibuichi
Sterling silver
Tumbaga









Base metals




Brass
Bronze
Copper
Mokume-gane
Pewter
Stainless steel
Titanium
Tungsten









Mineral gemstones




Aventurine
Agate
Amethyst
Beryl
Carnelian
Chrysoberyl
Diamond
Diopside
Emerald
Garnet
Jade
Jasper
Lapis lazuli
Larimar
Malachite
Marcasite
Moonstone
Obsidian
Onyx
Opal
Peridot
Prasiolite
Quartz
Ruby
Sapphire
Sodalite
Sunstone
Tanzanite
Tiger's eye
Topaz
Tourmaline
Turquoise
Zircon









Organic gemstones




Abalone
Amber
Ammolite
Copal
Coral
Ivory
Jet
Pearl
Nacre









Other natural objects




Shell jewelry
Toadstone











Terms



Carat (mass)
Carat (purity)
Finding
Millesimal fineness











Related topics: Body piercing
Fashion
Gemology
Metalworking
Wearable art















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Goldsmith&amp;oldid=689587076"					
				Categories: History of bankingJewellery makingGoldsmithsOccupationsMetalworking occupationsArts occupationsHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from December 2010All articles needing additional references				
							
		
		
			