


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Graphic arts
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				







This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page.








This article needs attention from an expert in Visual arts. The specific problem is: The article needs pruning, maybe even a total rewrite.. WikiProject Visual arts (or its Portal) may be able to help recruit an expert. (October 2013)







This article includes a list of references, but its sources remain unclear because it has insufficient inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (June 2008)







This article focuses too much on specific examples without clearly discussing its abstract general subject. Please help by consulting secondary sources for general statements made about the subject and improving this article by adding more general information. (October 2013)












Graphic artists at work during the 1960s


A type of fine art, graphic art covers a broad range of art forms. Graphic art typically is two-dimensional and includes calligraphy, photography, drawing, painting, printmaking, lithography, typography, serigraphy (silk-screen printing), computer graphics, and bindery. Graphic art also consists of drawn plans and layouts for interior and architectural designs.[1] The responsibility for effective communication also falls under the auspices of the graphic designer.




Contents


1 History
2 Graphic Design Software

2.1 Free Software


3 Careers
4 See also
5 References



History[edit]
Throughout history, technological inventions have shaped the development of graphic art. In 2500 B.C., the Egyptians used graphic symbols to communicate their thoughts in a written form known as hieroglyphics. The Egyptians wrote and illustrated narratives on rolls of papyrus to share the stories and art with others. [2] During the Middle Ages, scribes manually copied each individual page of manuscripts to maintain their sacred teachings. The scribes would leave marked sections of the page available for artists to insert drawings and decorations. Using art alongside the carefully lettered text enhanced the religious reading experience.[3]
Johannes Gutenberg invented an improved movable type mechanical device known as the printing press in 1450, the first outside of Asia. His printing press facilitated the mass-production of text and graphic art and eventually, replaced manual transcriptions altogether.
Again during the Renaissance years, graphic art in the form of printing played a major role in the spread of classical learning in Europe. Within these manuscripts, book designers focused heavily on typeface.
Due to the development of larger fonts during the Industrial Revolution, posters became a popular form of graphic art used to communicate the latest information as well as to advertise the latest products and services.
The invention and popularity of film and television changed graphic art through the additional aspect of motion as advertising agencies attempted to use kinetics to their advantage.
The next major change in graphic arts came when the personal computer was invented in the twentieth century. Powerful computer software enables artists to manipulate images in a much faster and simpler way than the skills of board artists prior to the 1990s. With quick calculations, computers easily recolor, scale, rotate, and rearrange images if the programs are known.[1]
The scientific investigations into legibility has influenced such things as the design of street signs. New York City is in the process of changing out all of its street signs bearing all capital letters for replacement with signs bearing only upper and lower case letters. They estimate that the increased legibility will facilitate way-finding and reduce crashes and injuries significantly.
Graphic Design Software[edit]





This section may stray from the topic of the article. Please help improve this section or discuss this issue on the talk page. (October 2013)






Example of graphic arts created with the free tool, Paint.net.


Graphic artists applying for positions in today's job market are expected to be familiar with computers and a variety of software programs in order to create the most appealing, up to date designs.
Graphic art software includes applications such as:

Adobe Dreamweaver – a tool that facilitates the creation of webpages and dynamic internet content
Adobe Illustrator – an application that allows artists to manipulate vector graphics
Adobe InDesign – desktop publishing software used for layout and design manipulation
Adobe Photoshop – a bitmap graphics software including powerful graphics editing tools that provide a large variety of editing functionality
CorelDRAW – similar to Adobe Illustrator, it is another vector graphic manipulation tool
PhotoImpact – a digital photograph editor
QuarkXPress – similar to Adobe InDesign, it is another computer publishing software tool

Free Software[edit]

Paint.net - photograph editing capabilities with lots of plugins to expand use
GIMP - similar to paint.net and Photoshop

Beside computers and software, graphic artists are also expected to be creative with processing camera work, registration, crop marks, and masking.[3]
Careers[edit]





This article contains instructions, advice, or how-to content. The purpose of Wikipedia is to present facts, not to train. Please help improve this article either by rewriting the how-to content or by moving it to Wikiversity, Wikibooks or Wikivoyage. (October 2013)


One of the most common career paths for a graphic artist today is web design. With the popularity of the World Wide Web, the demand for web designers is immense. Graphic artists use their creativity with layouts, typography, and logos to market the products or services of the client’s business. In addition to creating graphical designs, graphic artists also need to understand hypertext, web programming, and web page maintenance in order to successfully create a web page.[3]
See also[edit]

Communication design
Crowdsourcing creative work
Graphic design
Printmaking

References[edit]


^ a b Meggs, Phillip B. “Graphic Design.” Encyclopædia Britannica. 2010. Encyclopædia Britannica Online. 26 Oct. 2010&lt;http://www.britannica.in the Graphic Arts and Computer Graphics (Career Resource Library). June 2000. New York: Rosen Publishing Group, 1999. Cite error: Invalid &lt;ref&gt; tag; name "Meggs" defined multiple times with different content (see the help page).
^ "graphic design (art) - Encyclopedia Britannica". Britannica.com. 2012-04-04. Retrieved 2014-01-16.&#160;
^ a b c [2] McGuire-Lyle, Erin. Careers in the Graphic Arts and Computer Graphics (Career Resource Library). June 2000. New York: Rosen Publishing Group, 1999.









					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Graphic_arts&amp;oldid=689185240"					
				Categories: Communication designGraphic designArt mediaHidden categories: Pages with reference errorsPages with duplicate reference namesArticles needing expert attention from October 2013All articles needing expert attentionVisual arts articles needing expert attentionArticles lacking in-text citations from June 2008All articles lacking in-text citationsWikipedia articles needing context from October 2013Wikipedia articles that may have off-topic sectionsArticles needing cleanup from October 2013All pages needing cleanupArticles containing how-to sections				
							
		
		
			