


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Greek art
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				

Part of a series on the


Culture of Greece





History


People


Languages




Mythology and folklore


Mythology






Cuisine


Festivals


Religion


Art




Literature


Ancient (to 4th century AD)
Byzantine (4th–15th century)
Modern (post 11th century)








Music and performing arts


Music








Media


Television
Cinema






Sport




Monuments


World Heritage Sites








Symbols


Flag
Coat of arms








 Greece  portal







v
t
e







Part of a series on the


History of Greek art





Greek Bronze Age




Cycladic art
Minoan art
Mycenean art




Ancient Greece




Archaic Greek art
Ancient Greek art
Ancient Greek architecture
Ancient Greek pottery
Ancient Greek sculpture
Hellenistic art
see also: Greco-Buddhist art




Medieval Greece




Byzantine art
Macedonian art




Post-Byzantine Greece




Cretan School
Heptanese School




Modern Greece




Modern Greek art
Modern Greek architecture
Munich School
Contemporary Greek art







v
t
e





Greek art (or, more accurately, art in Greece) began in the Cycladic and Minoan civilization, and gave birth to Western classical art in the subsequent Geometric, Archaic and Classical periods (with further developments during the Hellenistic Period). It absorbed influences of Eastern civilizations, of Roman art and its patrons, and the new religion of Orthodox Christianity in the Byzantine era and absorbed Italian and European ideas during the period of Romanticism (with the invigoration of the Greek Revolution), right up until the Modernist and Postmodernist. Greek art is mainly five forms: architecture, sculpture, painting, pottery and jewelry making.



Contents


1 Ancient period
2 Byzantine period
3 Post-Byzantine and modern period
4 Major museums and galleries in Greece

4.1 Attica
4.2 Thessaloniki
4.3 Crete
4.4 Corfu
4.5 Rest


5 See also
6 References
7 External links



Ancient period[edit]
Main article: Ancient Greek art
Further information: Cycladic art, Minoan civilization and Mycenean Greece




Woman kneeling before an altar. Attic red-figure kylix, 5th BC, Stoa of Attalos


Artistic production in Greece began in the prehistoric pre-Greek Cycladic and the Minoan civilizations, both of which were influenced by local traditions and the art of ancient Egypt.
There are three scholarly divisions of the stages of later ancient Greek art that correspond roughly with historical periods of the same names. These are the Archaic, the Classical and the Hellenistic. The Archaic period is usually dated from 1000 BC. The Persian Wars of 480 BC to 448 BC are usually taken as the dividing line between the Archaic and the Classical periods, and the death of Alexander the Great in 323 BC is regarded as separating the Classical from the Hellenistic period. Of course, different forms of art developed at different speeds in different parts of the Greek world, and varied to a degree from artist to artist.[1] There was no sharp transition from one artistic period to another.
The art of ancient Greece has exercised an enormous influence on the culture of many countries from ancient times until the present, particularly in the areas of sculpture and architecture. In the West, the art of the Roman Empire was largely derived from Greek models. In the East, Alexander the Great's conquests initiated several centuries of exchange between Greek, Central Asian and Indian cultures, resulting in Greco-Buddhist art, with ramifications as far as Japan. Following the Renaissance in Europe, the humanist aesthetic and the high technical standards of Greek art inspired generations of European artists. Pottery was either red with black designs or black with red designs.
Byzantine period[edit]
Main articles: Byzantine Art and Macedonian art (Byzantine)




Mosaic from Daphni Monastery (ca. 1100)


Byzantine art is the term created for the Eastern Roman Empire from about the 5th century until the fall of Constantinople in 1453. (The Roman Empire during this period is conventionally known as the Byzantine Empire.) The term can also be used for the art of states which were contemporary with the Persian Empire and shared a common culture with it, without actually being part of it, such as Bulgaria, or Russia, and also Venice, which had close ties to the Byzantine Empire despite being in other respects part of western European culture. It can also be used for the art of peoples of the former Byzantine Empire under the rule of Ottoman Empire after 1453. In some respects the Byzantine artistic tradition has continued in Russia and other Eastern Orthodox countries to the present day.[2]
Byzantine art grew from the art of ancient Greece and, at least before 1453, never lost sight of its classical heritage, but was distinguished from it in a number of ways. The most profound of these was that the humanist ethic of ancient Greek art was replaced by the Christian ethic. If the purpose of classical art was the glorification of man, the purpose of Byzantine art was the glorification of God.
In place of the nude, the figures of God the Father, Jesus Christ, the Virgin Mary and the saints and martyrs of Christian tradition were elevated and became the dominant - indeed almost exclusive - focus of Byzantine art. One of the most important forms of Byzantine art was, and still is, theded the Cretan school as the leading school of Greek post-Byzantine painting after Crete fell to the Ottomans in 1669. Like the Cretan school it combined Byzantine traditions with an increasing Western European artistic influence, and also saw the first signiand the National Gallery of Art in Washington, D.C.[3]
Post-Byzantine and modern period[edit]
Main articles: Cretan School, Heptanese School (painting) and Modern Greek art




Saint Eustace icon, an example of the Cretan School






Ηistoria (Allegory of History) by Nikolaos Gyzis (1892)






Athena column by Leonidas Drosis in front of the Academy of Athens (modern)


Cretan School describes the school of icon painting, also known as Post-Byzantine art, which flourished while Crete was under Venetian rule during the late Middle Ages, reaching its climax after the Fall of Constantinople, becoming the central force in Greek painting during the 15th, 16th and 17th centuries. The Cretan artists developed a particular style of painting under the influence of both Eastern and Western artistic traditions and movements; the most famous product of the school, El Greco, was the most successful of the many artists who tried to build a career in Western Europe, and also the one who left the Byzantine style farthest behind him in his later career.
The Heptanese School of painting (Greek: Επτανησιακή Σχολή, literally: The School of the seven islands, also known as the Ionian Islands' School) succeeded the Cretan School as the leading school of Greek post-Byzantine painting after Crete fell to the Ottomans in 1669. Like the Cretan school it combined Byzantine traditions with an increasing Western European artistic influence, and also saw the first significant depiction of secular subjects. The school was based in the Ionian Islands, which were not part of Ottoman Greece, from the middle of the 17th century until the middle of the 19th century.[4]
Modern Greek art, after the establishment of the Greek Kingdom, began to be developed around the time of Romanticism. Greek artists absorbed many elements from their European colleagues, resulting in the culmination of the distinctive style of Greek Romantic art, inspired by revolutionary ideals as well as the country's geography and history. After centuries of Ottoman rule, few opportunities for an education in the arts existed in the newly independent Greece, so studying abroad was imperative for artists. Munich, as an important international center for the arts at that time, was the place where the majority of the Greek artists of the 19th century chose to study. Later on, they would return to Greece and pass on their knowledge. Both academic and personal bonds developed between early Greek painters and Munich artistry giving birth to the Greek "Munich School" (Greek academic art of the 19th century). Nikolaos Gysis was an important teacher and artist at the Munich Academy and he soon became a leading figure among Greek artists. Many of these Munich School artists chose subjects such as everyday Greek life, local customs, and living conditions. Several important painters emerged at this time. Theodoros Vryzakis specialized in historical painting and especially inspired by the 1821 Greek War of Independence. Nikiphoros Lytras concentrated on realistic depictions of Greek life. Georgios Jakobides devoted his attention to infants and children and he would laterbecome the first Director of the new National Gallery of Athens. Georgios Roilos was another leading painter of the period closely associated with the Munich School, especially in his early career. Konstantinos Volanakis was inspired mostly by the Greek sea.[5]
Other notable painters of the era are Theodore Ralli, Ioannis Altamouras and the folk painter Theofilos Hatzimichail. Notable sculptors of the era are Leonidas Drosis (his major work was the extensive neo-classical architectural ornament at the Academy of Athens, Lazaros Sochos, Georgios Vitalis, Dimitrios Filippotis, Ioannis Kossos, Yannoulis Chalepas, Georgios Bonanos and Lazaros Fytalis.
Major museums and galleries in Greece[edit]
See also: List of museums in Greece
Attica[edit]

Goulandris Museum of Cycladic Art
Acropolis Museum
National Archaeological Museum, Athens
Stoa of Attalos
Numismatic Museum of Athens
Archaeological Museum of Piraeus
Benaki Museum
National Gallery (Athens)

Thessaloniki[edit]

Archaeological Museum of Thessaloniki
Museum of Byzantine Culture

Crete[edit]

Heraklion Archaeological Museum
Archaeological Museum of Chania
Agia Triada Monastery

Corfu[edit]

Archaeological Museum of Corfu
Byzantine Museum of Antivouniotissa

Rest[edit]

Archaeological Museum of Patras
Archaeological Museum of Volos
Archaeological Museum of Dion
Archaeological Museum of Amphipolis
Archaeological Museum of Pella
Archaeological Museum of Veroia
Archaeological Museum of Thasos
Archaeological Museum of Delos
Archaeological Museum of Rhodes
Archaeological Museum of Epidaurus
Archaeological Museum of Olympia
Delphi Archaeological Museum
Nea Moni of Chios
Florina Museum of Modern Art

See also[edit]

History of Greece
Culture of Greece
Modern Greek art
Byzantine and Christian Museum

References[edit]

^ Henri Stierlin. Greece: From Mycenae to the Parthenon. Taschen, 2004.
^ C. Mango, ed., The art of the Byzantine Empire, 312-1453: sources and documents (Inglewood Cliffs, 1972)
^ Theodoros Stamos
^ archive.gr - Διαδρομές στην Νεοελληνική Τέχνη
^ http://library.thinkquest.org/04oct/01181/GreekPainting_20thcentury.pdf

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Art of Greece.



Ancient Greece website
Art History Resources on the Web: Greek Art
A History of Greek Art by Frank Bigelow Tarbell
A History Of Greek Art by F. B. Tarbell
Byzantine Art Charles Diehl
National Gallery of Athens
Modern Greek Painters









v
t
e


European art






Sovereign states



Albania
Andorra
Armenia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Kazakhstan
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Malta
Moldova
Monaco
Montenegro
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
San Marino
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom









States with limited
recognition




Abkhazia
Kosovo
Nagorno-Karabakh
Northern Cyprus
South Ossetia
Transnistria









Dependencies and
other territories




Åland
Faroe Islands
Gibraltar
Guernsey
Jersey
Isle of Man
Svalbard
















v
t
e


Greece&#160;articles






History




Chronology



Aegean civilizations
Minoan civilization
Mycenaean period
Greek Dark Ages
Archaic period
Classical period
Hellenistic period
Roman era
Byzantine era
Latin states
Ottoman era
War of Independence
Modern Greece








By topic



Constitutional
Economic
Military
Greek countries and regions
Hellenic languages
Megali Idea














Geography







Cities
Climate
Earthquakes
Environmental issues
Islands
Lakes
Mountains
National Parks
Regions
Rivers
Volcanoes











Politics







Administrative divisions
Constitution
Elections
Foreign relations
Human rights

LGBT


Judicial system
Law enforcement
Military
Political parties











Economy







Agriculture
Banking
Central bank
Debt crisis
Energy
Greek economic miracle
Ports
Rankings
Shipping
Stock exchange
Taxation
Telecommunications
Tourism
Trade unions
Transportation











Society







Crime
Demographics
Diaspora
Education
Healthcare
Immigration
Language
Minorities
Religion








Culture



Anthem
Architecture
Art
Cinema
Coat of arms
Cuisine (wine)
Dances
Dress
Flag and national colours
Literature
Music
Mythology
Philhellenism
Public holidays
Name of Greece
Names of the Greeks
Newspapers
Sport
Television
Women
World Heritage Sites















Outline
Index
Bibliography



Category
Portal
WikiProject













Authority control



NDL: 00560726















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Greek_art&amp;oldid=686548580"					
				Categories: Arts in GreeceArt by nationalityHidden categories: Articles containing Greek-language textCommons category with local link same as on Wikidata				
							
		
		
			