


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Gudea
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				



Diorite statue, Louvre


Gudea was a ruler (ensi) of the state of Lagash in Southern Mesopotamia who ruled ca. 2144 - 2124 BC. He probably did not come from the city, but had married Ninalla, daughter of the ruler Urbaba (2164 - 2144 BC) of Lagash, thus gaining entrance to the royal house of Lagash. He was succeeded by his son Ur-Ningirsu.



Contents


1 Inscriptions
2 Title
3 Statues of Gudea
4 Religion
5 Reforms
6 Later influence
7 See also
8 References
9 Other Sources



Inscriptions[edit]
Inscriptions mention temples built by Gudea in Ur, Nippur, Adab, Uruk and Bad-Tibira[citation needed]. This indicates the growing influence of Gudea in Sumer. His predecessor, Urbaba, had already made his daughter Enanepada high priestess of Nanna at Ur, which indicates a great deal of political power as well. The 20 years of his reign are all known by name; the main military exploit seems to have occurred in his Year 6, called the "Year when Anshan was smitten with weapons".[1]
Title[edit]
Gudea chose the title of énsi (town-king or governor), not the more exalted lugal (Akkadian šarrum), although he did style himself "god of Lagash"{ct}. Gudea claimed to have conquered Elam and Anshan, but his inscriptions emphasize the building of irrigation channels and temples, and the creation of precious gifts to the gods. Materials for his buildings and statues were brought from all parts of western Asia: cedar wood from the Amanus mountains, quarried stones from Lebanon, copper from northern Arabia, gold and precious stones from the desert between Canaan and Egypt, diorite from Magan (Oman), and timber from Dilmun (Bahrain).
As the power of the Akkadian empire waned, Lagaš again declared independence, this time under Puzer-Mama, who declared himself lugal of Lagaš. Thereafter, this title would not be associated with Lagaš, at least until the end of the Gudean period. Lagašite rulers, including Ur-Ningirsu and Ur-Bau, whose reigns predated Gudea, referred to themselves as énsi, or governor, of Lagaš, and reserved the term lugal only for their gods or as a matter of rank in a relationship, but never as a political device. The continued use of lugal in reference to deities seems to indicate a conscious attempt on the parts of the rulers to assume a position of humility in relation to the world—whether this was honest humility or a political ploy is unknown.
Statues of Gudea[edit]
Main article: Statues of Gudea
Twenty-six statues of Gudea have been found so far during excavations of Telloh (ancient Girsu) with most of the rest coming from the art trade (these having unknown provenances and sometimes doubtful authenticity). The early statues were made of limestone, steatite and alabaster; later, when wide-ranging trade-connections had been established, the more costly exotic diorite was used. Diorite had already been used by old Sumerian rulers (Statue of Entemena). These statues include inscriptions describing trade, rulership and religion. These were one of many types of Neo-Sumerian art forms.
Religion[edit]
The pleas to the gods under Gudea and his successors appear more creative and honest: whereas the Akkadian kings followed a rote pattern of cursing the progeny and tearing out the foundations of those that vandalize a stele, the Lagašite kings send various messages. Times were violent after the Akkadian empire lost power over southern Mesopotamia, and the god receiving the most attention from Gudea was Ningirsu—a god of battle. Though there is only one mention of martial success on the part of Gudea, the many trappings of war which he builds for Ningirsu indicate a violent era. Southern Mesopotamian cities defined themselves through their worship, and the decision on Gudea’s part for Lagaš to fashion regalia of war for its gods is indicative of the temperament of the times.
Though obviously the foundation and progeny curse was not the only religious invocation by the political powers during the Akkadian empire, it demonstrates a certain standardization, and with it, stagnation, of the position of the gods that likely did not sit well with the people of Lagaš. Ur-Ningirsu I, with whom the Gudean dynasty of Lagaš begins, leaves little in the way of inscriptions, and though some mention of various gods seems to indicate a more central role, it is not until Gudea that there can be a side by side comparison with the old curse of Sargon. The inscription on a statue of Gudea as architect of the House of Ningirsu,[2] warns the reader of doom if the words are altered, but there is a startling difference between the warnings of Sargon or his line and the warnings of Gudea. The one is length; Gudea’s curse lasts nearly a quarter of the inscription’s considerable length,[3] and another is creativity. The gods will not merely reduce the offender’s progeny to ash and destroy his foundations, no, they will, "let him sit down in the dust instead of on the seat they set up for him". He will be "slaughtered like a bull… seized like an aurochs by his fierce horn".[4]
But these differences, though demonstrating a Lagašite respect of religious figures simply in the amount of time and energy they required, is not as telling as the language Gudea uses to justify any punishment. Whereas Sargon or Naram-Sin simply demand punishment to any who change their words, based on their power, Gudea defends his words through tradition, “since the earliest days, since the seed sprouted forth, no one was (ever) supposed to alter the utterance of a ruler of Lagaš who, after building the Eninnu for my lord Ningirsu, made things function as they should”.[5] Changing the words of Naram-Sin, the living god, is treason, because he is the king. But changing the words of Gudea, simple governor of Lagaš, is unjust, because he made things work right.
Reforms[edit]
The social reforms instituted during Gudea’s rulership, which included the cancellation of debts and allowing women to own family land, may have been honest reform or a return to old Lagašite custom.
His era was especially one of artistic development. But it was Ningirsu who received the majority of Gudea’s attention. Ningirsu the war god, for whom Gudea built maces, spears, and axes, all appropriately named for the destructive power of Ningirsu—enormous and gilt. However, the devotion for Ningirsu was especially inspired by the fact that this was Gudea's personal god and that Ningirsu was since ancient times the main god of the Lagashite region (together with his spouse Ba'u or Baba).
In matters of trade, Lagash under Gudea had extensive commercial communications with distant realms. According to his own records, Gudea brought cedars from the Amanus and Lebanon mountains in Syria, diorite from eastern Arabia, copper and gold from central and southern Arabia and from Sinai, while his armies were engaged in battles in Elam on the east.
The Gudea cylinders, written after the life of Gudea, paints an attractive picture of southern Mesopotamia during the Lagaš supremacy. In it, “The Elamites came to him from Elam… loaded with wood on their shoulders… in order to build Ningirsu’s House” (p.&#160;78), the general tone being one of brotherly love in an area that has known only regional conflict.
However, the common intimation that Gudea was a peaceful ruler, who funded his projects through trade, ignores the attention paid to Ningirsu, as well as the martial nature of Southern Mesopotamia in general. While Gudea was not likely an autocrat who ruled over all of Southern Mesopotamia, this part of the world was full of religious fervor and universal conflict.
Gudea built more than the House of Ningirsu, he restored tradition to Lagaš. His use of the title ensi, when he obviously held enough political influence, both in Lagaš and in the region, to justify lugal, demonstrates the same political tact as his emphasis on the power of the divine.
Ur-Ningirsu II, the next ruler of Lagaš, took as his title, "Ur-Ningirsu, ruler of Lagaš, son of Gudea, ruler of Lagaš, who had built Ningirsu’s house" (p.&#160;183).
Later influence[edit]




GUDEA GOV OF LAGASH - bust


Gudea's appearance is recognizable today because he had numerous statues or idols, depicting him with unprecedented, lifelike realism, placed in temples throughout Sumer. Gudea took advantage of artistic development because he evidently wanted posterity to know what he looked like. And in that he has succeeded—a feat available to him as royalty, but not to the common people who could not afford to have statues engraved of themselves.
Gudea, following Sargon, was one of the first rulers to claim divinity for himself, or have it claimed for him after his death. Some of his exploits were later added to the Gilgamesh Epic (N.K. Sandars, 1972, The Epic of Gilgamesh).
Following Gudea, the influence of Lagaš declined, until it suffered a military defeat by Ur-Nammu, whose Third Dynasty of Ur then became the reigning power in Southern Mesopotamia.
See also[edit]
 Media related to Gudea at Wikimedia Commons








v
t
e


Notable Rulers of Sumer










&#160;&#160;&#160;



Ante-Diluvian kings



Alulim
Dumuzid the Shepherd
En-men-dur-ana
Ziusudra








1st Dynasty of Kish



Etana
Enmebaragesi








1st Dynasty of Uruk



Enmerkar
Lugalbanda
Dumuzid, the Fisherman
Gilgamesh








1st Dynasty of Ur



Meskalamdug
Mesannepada
Puabi








2nd Dynasty of Uruk



Enshakushanna








1st Dynasty of Lagash



Ur-Nanshe
Eannatum
En-anna-tum&#160;I
Entemena
Urukagina








Dynasty of Adab



Lugal-Anne-Mundu









3rd Dynasty of Kish



Kubaba








3rd Dynasty of Uruk



Lugal-zage-si








Dynasty of Akkad



Sargon
Tashlultum
Enheduanna
Rimush
Manishtushu
Naram-Sin
Shar-Kali-Sharri
Dudu
Shu-turul








2nd Dynasty of Lagash



Puzer-Mama
Gudea








5th Dynasty of Uruk



Utu-hengal








3rd dynasty of Ur



Ur-Nammu
Shulgi
Amar-Sin
Shu-Sin
Ibbi-Sin















References[edit]


^ Year-names for Gudea
^ Dietz Otto Edzard, Gudea and His Dynasty, (pp.&#160;31–38)
^ Dietz Otto Edzard, Gudea and His Dynasty,(pp.&#160;36–38)
^ Dietz Otto Edzard, Gudea and His Dynasty,(p.&#160;38)
^ Dietz Otto Edzard, Gudea and His Dynasty,(p.&#160;37)


Other Sources[edit]

Edzard, Dietz Otto. (1997). Gudea and His Dynasty. University of Toronto Press Incorporated. Toronto, Buffalo, London.&#160;
Frayne, Douglas R. (1993). Sargonic and Gutian Periods. University of Toronto Press Incorporated. Toronto, Buffalo, London.&#160;
Black, J.A.; Cunningham, G., Fluckiger-Hawker, E, Robson, E., and Zólyomi, G. (1998). "The Electronic Text Corpus of Sumerian Literature.". Oxford.&#160; Cite uses deprecated parameter |coauthors= (help)


F. Johansen, "Statues of Gudea, ancient and modern". Mesopotamia 6, 1978.
A. Parrot, Tello, vingt campagnes des fouilles (1877-1933). (Paris 1948).
N.K. Sandars, "Introduction" page 16, The Epic of Gilgamesh, Penguin, 1972.
H. Steible, "Versuch einer Chronologie der Statuen des Gudea von Lagas". Mitteilungen der Deutschen Orient-Gesellschaft 126 (1994), 81-104.






Authority control



VIAF: 18019278
GND: 118833626















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gudea&amp;oldid=682927980"					
				Categories: Sumerian rulers22nd-century BC rulersHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from February 2011Pages containing cite templates with deprecated parametersWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers				
							
		
		
			