


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Hudson River School
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				



Thomas Cole (1801–1848), The Oxbow, View from Mount Holyoke, Northampton, Massachusetts, after a Thunderstorm, 1836, The Metropolitan Museum of Art


The Hudson River School was a mid-19th century American art movement embodied by a group of landscape painters whose aesthetic vision was influenced by romanticism. The paintings for which the movement is named depict the Hudson River Valley and the surrounding area, including the Catskill, Adirondack, and the White Mountains; eventually works by the second generation of artists associated with the school expanded to include other locales in New England, the Maritimes, the American West, and South America.



Contents


1 Overview
2 Founder
3 Second generation
4 Collections

4.1 Public collections
4.2 Other collections


5 Notable artists
6 See also
7 References
8 External links



Overview[edit]
Neither the originator of the term Hudson River School nor its first published use has been fixed with certainty. The term is thought to have originated with the New York Tribune art critic Clarence Cook or the landscape painter Homer Dodge Martin.[1] As originally used, the term was meant disparagingly, as the work so labeled had gone out of favor after the plein-air Barbizon School had come into vogue among American patrons and collectors.
Hudson River School paintings reflect three themes of America in the 19th century: discovery, exploration, and settlement. The paintings also depict the American landscape as a pastoral setting, where human beings and nature coexist peacefully. Hudson River School landscapes are characterized by their realistic, detailed, and sometimes idealized portrayal of nature, often juxtaposing peaceful agriculture and the remaining wilderness, which was fast disappearing from the Hudson Valley just as it was coming to be appreciated for its qualities of ruggedness and sublimity. In general, Hudson River School artists believed that nature in the form of the American landscape was an ineffable manifestation of God, though the artists varied in the depth of their religious conviction. They took as their inspiration such European masters as Claude Lorrain, John Constable and J. M. W. Turner. Their reverence for America's natural beauty was shared with contemporary American writers such as Henry David Thoreau and Ralph Waldo Emerson. Several painters, such as Albert Bierstadt, were members of the Düsseldorf school of painting.
While the elements of the paintings were rendered realistically, many of the scenes were composed as a synthesis of multiple scenes or natural images observed by the artists. In gathering the visual data for their paintings, the artists would travel to extraordinary and extreme environments, which generally had conditions that would not permit extended painting at the site. During these expeditions, the artists recorded sketches and memories, returning to their studios to paint the finished works later.
Founder[edit]




Thomas Cole, A View of the Two Lakes and Mountain House, Catskill Mountains, Morning, Brooklyn Museum of Art


The artist Thomas Cole is generally acknowledged as the founder of the Hudson River School.[2] Cole took a steamship up the Hudson in the autumn of 1825, the same year the Erie Canal opened, stopping first at West Point, then at Catskill landing. He hiked west high up into the eastern Catskill Mountains of New York State to paint the first landscapes of the area. The first review of his work appeared in the New York Evening Post on November 22, 1825.[3] At that time, only the English native Cole, born in a landscape where autumnal tints were of browns and yellows, found the brilliant autumn hues of the area to be inspirational. Cole's close friend, Asher Durand, became a prominent figure in the school as well, particularly when the banknote-engraving business evaporated in the Panic of 1837.
Second generation[edit]




Frederic Edwin Church, Niagara Falls, 1857, Corcoran Gallery of Art, Washington, DC.






Albert Bierstadt, Among the Sierra Nevada Mountains, California, 1868, Smithsonian American Art Museum, Washington, DC.






John Frederick Kensett, Mount Washington, 1869, Wellesley College Museum






Asher Brown Durand, The Catskills, 1859, Walters Art Museum, reflects the "sublime landscape" approach employed by the Hudson River school of painting.[4]


The second generation of Hudson River school artists emerged to prominence after Cole's premature death in 1848; its members included Cole's prize pupil Frederic Edwin Church, John Frederick Kensett, and Sanford Robinson Gifford. Works by artists of this second generation are often described as examples of Luminism. In addition to pursuing their art, many of the artists, including Kensett, Gifford and Church, were among the founders of the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York City.[5]
Most of the finest works of the Hudson River school were painted between 1855 and 1875. During that time, artists such as Frederic Edwin Church and Albert Bierstadt were celebrities. They were both influenced by the Düsseldorf school of painting, and Bierstadt had studied in the city for several years. When Church exhibited paintings such as Niagara[6] or Icebergs of the North,[7] thousands of people lined up around the block and paid fifty cents a head to view the solitary works. The epic size of the landscapes in these paintings, unexampled in earlier American painting, reminded Americans of the vast, untamed, but magnificent wilderness areas in their country. Such works were being painted during the period of settlement of the American West, preservation of national parks, and establishment of green city parks.
Collections[edit]
Public collections[edit]
One of the largest collections of paintings by artists of the Hudson River School is at the Wadsworth Atheneum in Hartford, Connecticut. Some of the most notable works in the Atheneum's collection are 13 landscapes by Thomas Cole, and 11 by Hartford native Frederic Edwin Church, both of whom were personal friends of the museum's founder, Daniel Wadsworth.
Other collections[edit]

Albany Institute of History &amp; Art in Albany, New York
Berkshire Museum in Pittsfield, MA
Brooklyn Museum in Brooklyn, NY
Corcoran Gallery of Art, in Washington, DC
Crystal Bridges Museum, in Bentonville, AR
Detroit Institute of Arts in Detroit, MI
Fenimore Art Museum in Cooperstown, NY
Frances Lehman Loeb Art Center, in Poughkeepsie, NY
Fruitlands Museum in Harvard, MA
Gilcrease Museum in Tulsa, OK
Haggin Museum in Stockton, CA
Hudson River Museum in Yonkers, NY
Mabee-Gerrer Museum of Art in Shawnee, OK[8]
Metropolitan Museum of Art, in Manhattan, NY
Museum of White Mountain Art at Jackson, in NH
National Gallery of Art in Washington, DC
Newark Museum in Newark, NJ
Newington-Cropsey Foundation in Hastings-on-Hudson, NY
New-York Historical Society, in Manhattan, NY
Olana State Historic Site, in Hudson, NY
St. Johnsbury Athenaeum, in St. Johnsbury, VT
Westervelt Warner Museum of American Art, in Tuscaloosa, AL
Thyssen-Bornemisza Museum, in Madrid, Spain.
The Heckscher Museum of Art, in Huntington, NY
Worcester Art Museum, in Worcester, MA

Notable artists[edit]
Main article: List of Hudson River School artists




Albert Bierstadt
John William Casilear
Frederic Edwin Church
Thomas Cole
Samuel Colman
Jasper Francis Cropsey
Thomas Doughty
Robert Duncanson




Asher Brown Durand
Sanford Robinson Gifford
James McDougal Hart
William Hart
William Stanley Haseltine
Martin Johnson Heade
Hermann Ottomar Herzog




Thomas Hill
David Johnson
John Frederick Kensett
Jervis McEntee
Thomas Moran
Robert Walter Weir[9][10]
Worthington Whittredge




See also[edit]




Visual Arts portal



Hudson Valley portal




Düsseldorf school of painting
History of painting
Landscape art
List of Hudson River School artists
Macchiaioli
Romanticism
Western painting
White Mountain art
Young America Movement

References[edit]
Notes


^ Howat, John K (1987). American Paradise: The World of the Hudson River School. New York: Metropolitan Museum of Art, Harry N. Abrams, Inc. pp.&#160;3, 4.&#160;
^ O'Toole, Judith H. (2005). Different Views in Hudson River School Painting. Columbia University Press. p.&#160;11.&#160;
^ Boyle, Alexander. "Thomas Cole (1801-1848) The Dawn of the Hudson River School". Hamilton Auction Galleries. Retrieved 19 December 2012.&#160;
^ "Walters Art Museum: The Catskills". The Walters Art Museum. Retrieved 19 December 2012.&#160;
^ Avery, Kevin J. "Metropolitan Museum of Art: Frederick Edwin Church". Metropolitan Museum of Art. Retrieved 19 December 2012.&#160;
^ "Corcoran Highlights: Niagara". Corcoran Museum of Art. Retrieved 19 December 2012.&#160;
^ Potter, Russell A. "Review of 'The Voyage of the Icebergs: Frederic Edwin Church's Arctic Masterpiece'". Rhode Island College. Retrieved 19 December 2012.&#160;
^ White, Mark Andrew (2002). Progress on the Land: Industry and the American Landscape Tradition. Oklahoma City, OK: Melton Art Reference Library. pp.&#160;6–13. ISBN&#160;0-9640163-1-1.&#160;
^ Allaback, Sarah. "19th Century Painters: Hudson River School" (PDF). 2006. Hudson River Valley National Heritage Area. Retrieved 19 December 2012.&#160;
^ Rickey, Frederick. "Robert W. Weir (1803-1889)". United States Military Academy. Retrieved 19 December 2012.&#160;


Sources

American paradise: the world of the Hudson River school. New York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art. 1987. ISBN&#160;9780870994968.&#160; External link in |title= (help)
Avery, Kevin J., &amp; Kelly, Frank (2003). Hudson River school visions: the landscapes of Sanford R. Gifford. New York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art. ISBN&#160;9780300101843.&#160; External link in |title= (help)
Ferber, Linda S. The Hudson River School: Nature and the American Vision. New-York Historical Society, 2009.
Sullivan, Mark W. The Hudson River School: An Annotated Bibliography. Metcuhen, NJ; Scarecrow Press, 1991.
Wilmerding, John. American Light: The Luminist Movement, 1850–1875: Paintings, Drawings, Photographs. National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C., 1980. ISBN 9780064389402. OCLC&#160;5706999.

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Hudson River School.



The Hudson River School, American Art Gallery
The Hudson River School, The Metropolitan Museum of Art
National Park Service overview of Hudson River School










v
t
e


Hudson River School






Movements:



Age of Enlightenment
Romanticism
Victorianism / Realism








Artists:



Thomas Cole
Asher Brown Durand
Frederic Edwin Church
John Frederick Kensett
Sanford Robinson Gifford
Albert Bierstadt
Eliza Pratt Greatorex








Museums:



Metropolitan Museum of Art
Wadsworth Atheneum
National Gallery of Art
New-York Historical Society
Westervelt Warner
Brooklyn Museum








Locations:



Catskill Mountain House
Kaaterskill Falls
North-South Lake
Olana
Thomas Cole House
















v
t
e


Romanticism






Countries



Denmark
England (literature)
France (literature)
Germany
Norway
Poland
Russia (literature)
Scotland








Movements



Bohemianism
Counter-Enlightenment
Dark Romanticism
Düsseldorf School
Gesamtkunstwerk
Gothic fiction
Gothic Revival (architecture)
Hudson River School
Indianism
Nazarene movement
Ossian
Romantic hero
Romanticism in science
Romantic nationalism
Opium and Romanticism
Transcendentalism
Ultra-Romanticism
Wallenrodism








Writers



Alencar
Andersen
A.&#160;v. Arnim
B.&#160;v. Arnim
Azevedo
Baratashvili
Barbauld (Aikin)
Batyushkov
Baudelaire
Beer
Bertrand
Blake
Botev
Brentano
Bryant
Burns
Byron
Cazotte
Orbeliani
Chateaubriand
Chavchavadze
Clare
Coleridge
Cooper
De Quincey
Dias
Dumas
Eichendorff
Emerson
Eminescu
Espronceda
Fouqué
Foscolo
Garrett
Gautier
Goethe
Grimm Brothers
Gutzkow
Hauff
Hawthorne
Heine
Heliade
Herculano
Hoffmann
Hölderlin
Hugo
Ilić
Irving
Jakšić
Jean Paul
Karadžić
Karamzin
Keats
Kleist
Krasiński
Lamartine
Larra
Leopardi
Lermontov
Mácha
Magalhães
Malczewski
Manzoni
Maturin
Mickiewicz
Musset
Nerval
Nodier
Norwid
Novalis
Oehlenschläger
Poe
Polidori
Potocki
Prešeren
Pushkin
Schiller
Schwab
Scott
Seward
M. Shelley
P. B. Shelley
Shevchenko
Słowacki
De Staël
Stendhal
Tieck
Uhland
Vörösmarty
Wordsworth
Zhukovsky
Zorrilla








Music



Adam
Alkan
Auber
Beethoven
Bellini
Berlioz
Bertin
Berwald
Chopin
Félicien David
Ferdinand David
Donizetti
Field
Franck
Franz
Glinka
Gomis
Halévy
Kalkbrenner
Liszt
Lysenko
Loewe
Marschner
Masarnau
Méhul
Fanny Mendelssohn
Felix Mendelssohn
Méreaux
Meyerbeer
Moniuszko
Moscheles
Niedermeyer
Onslow
Paganini
Prudent
Reicha
Rossini
Rubinstein
Schubert
Clara Schumann
Robert Schumann
Smetana
Sor
Spohr
Spontini
Thalberg
Verdi
Voříšek
Wagner
Weber









Theologians and
philosophers




Chaadayev
Coleridge
Feuerbach
Fichte
Goethe
Hegel
Müller
Ritschl
Rousseau
Schiller
A. Schlegel
F. Schlegel
Schopenhauer
Schleiermacher
Tieck
Wackenroder








Visual artists



Aivazovsky
Bierstadt
Blake
Bonington
Bryullov
Chassériau
Church
Constable
Cole
Corot
Dahl
David d'Angers
Delacroix
Friedrich
Fuseli
Géricault
Girodet
Głowacki
Goya
Gude
Hayez
Janmot
Jones
Kiprensky
Koch
Lampi
Leutze
Loutherbourg
Maison
Martin
Michałowski
Palmer
Porto-Alegre
Préault
Révoil
Richard
Rude
Runge
Saleh
Scheffer
Stattler
Stroj
Tidemand
Tropinin
Turner
Veit
Ward
Wiertz










&#160;«&#160;Age of Enlightenment
Realism&#160;»&#160;












Authority control



GND: 4160727-2















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hudson_River_School&amp;oldid=688546688"					
				Categories: Hudson River School19th-century American paintersLuminism (American art style)Landscape artCultural history of the United StatesHidden categories: CS1 errors: external linksCommons category with local link same as on WikidataWikipedia articles with GND identifiers				
							
		
		
			