


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Ideogram
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				This article is about the type of graphic symbol.  For chromosome ideograms, see Cytogenetics.  For the rhetorical device, see Ideograph (rhetoric).




"No dogs allowed" sign in Spain. The dog illustration is a pictogram. The red circle and bar is an ideogram representing the idea of "no" or "not allowed".






Ideogram in the Church of the Visitation, Jerusalem




Writing systems







History
Grapheme
List of writing systems




Types




Alphabet

featural


Abjad
Abugida
Syllabary
Logography
Shorthand




Related topics




Pictogram
Ideogram







v
t
e





An ideogram or ideograph (from Greek ἰδέα idéa "idea" and γράφω gráphō "to write") is a graphic symbol that represents an idea or concept, independent of any particular language, and specific words or phrases. Some ideograms are comprehensible only by familiarity with prior convention; others convey their meaning through pictorial resemblance to a physical object, and thus may also be referred to as pictograms.



Contents


1 Terminology
2 See also
3 References
4 External links



Terminology[edit]
Further information: Character (symbol) and Logogram
In proto-writing, used for inventories and the like, physical objects are represented by stylized or conventionalized pictures, or pictograms. For example, the pictorial Dongba symbols without Geba annotation cannot represent the Naxi language, but are used as a mnemonic for reciting oral literature.[1] Some systems also use ideograms, symbols denoting abstract concepts.
The term "ideogram" is often used to describe symbols of writing systems such as Egyptian hieroglyphs, Sumerian cuneiform and Chinese characters. However, these symbols are logograms, representing words or morphemes of a particular language rather than objects or concepts. In these writing systems, a variety of strategies were employed in the design of logographic symbols. Pictographic symbols depict the object referred to by the word, such as an icon of a bull denoting the Semitic word ʾālep "ox". Some words denoting abstract concepts may be reprented iconically, but most other words are represented using the rebus principle, borrowing a symbol for a similarly-sounding word. Later systems used selected symbols to represent the sounds of the language, for example the adaptation of the logogram for ʾālep "ox" as the letter aleph representing the initial sound of the word, a glottal stop.
Many signs in hieroglyphic as well as in cuneiform writing could be used either logographically or phonetically. For example, the Akkadian sign AN (𒀭) could be an ideograph for "deity", an ideogram for the god Anum in particular, a logograph for the Akkadian stem il- "deity", a logograph for the Akkadian word šamu "sky", or a syllabogram for either the syllable an or il.
Although Chinese characters are logograms, two of the smaller classes in the traditional classification are ideographic in origin:

Simple ideographs (指事字 zhǐshìzì) are abstract symbols such as 上 shàng "up" and 下 xià "down" or numerals such as 三 sān "three".
Semantic compounds (会意字 huìyìzì) are semantic combinations of characters, such as 明 míng "bright", composed of 日 rì "sun" and 月 yuè "moon", or 休 xiū "rest", composed of 人 rén "person" and 木 mù "tree". In the light of the modern understanding of Old Chinese phonology, researchers now believe that most of the characters originally classified as semantic compounds have an at least partially phonetic nature.[2]

See also[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ideogram.



Heterogram (linguistics)
Icon (computing)
Lexigram
List of symbols
List of writing systems (including a sublist of ideographic systems)
Logotype
Therblig
Traffic sign

References[edit]


^ Ramsey, S. Robert (1987). The Languages of China. Princeton University Press. p.&#160;266. ISBN&#160;978-0-691-01468-5.&#160;
^ Boltz, William (1994). The origin and early development of the Chinese writing system. American Oriental Society. pp.&#160;67–72, 149. ISBN&#160;978-0-940490-78-9.&#160;




DeFrancis, John. 1990. The Chinese Language: Fact and Fantasy. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press. ISBN 0-8248-1068-6
Hannas, William. C. 1997. Asia's Orthographic Dilemma. University of Hawaii Press. ISBN 0-8248-1892-X (paperback); ISBN 0-8248-1842-3 (hardcover)
Unger, J. Marshall. 2003. Ideogram: Chinese Characters and the Myth of Disembodied Meaning. ISBN 0-8248-2760-0 (trade paperback), ISBN 0-8248-2656-6 (hardcover)


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ideograms.



The Ideographic Myth Extract from DeFrancis' book.
American Heritage Dictionary definition
Merriam-Webster OnLine definition






&#160;
Links to related articles
















v
t
e


Visualization of technical information






Fields



Biological data visualization
Chemical imaging
Crime mapping
Data visualization
Educational visualization
Flow visualization
Geovisualization
Information visualization
Mathematical visualization
Medical imaging
Molecular graphics
Product visualization
Scientific visualization
Software visualization
Technical drawing
User interface design
Visual culture
Volume visualization








Image types



Chart
Diagram
Engineering drawing
Graph of a function
Ideogram
Map
Photograph
Pictogram
Plot
Schematic
Statistical graphics
Table
Technical drawings
Technical illustration
User interface








People



Jacques Bertin
Stuart Card
Thomas A. DeFanti
Michael Friendly
George Furnas
Nigel Holmes
Alan MacEachren
Jock D. Mackinlay
Michael Maltz
Bruce H. McCormick
Charles Joseph Minard
Gaspard Monge
Otto Neurath
Florence Nightingale
Clifford A. Pickover
William Playfair
Adolphe Quetelet
George G. Robertson
Arthur H. Robinson
Lawrence J. Rosenblum
Ben Shneiderman
Edward Tufte
Fernanda Viégas
Howard Wainer








Related topics



Cartography
Chartjunk
Computer graphics

in computer science


Graph drawing
Graphic design
Graphic organizer
Imaging science
Information graphics
Information science
Mental visualisation
Misleading graph
Neuroimaging
Patent drawing
Scientific modelling
Spatial analysis
Tools for Ideas
Visual analytics
Visual perception
















v
t
e


Writing systems






Overview



History of writing
History of the alphabet
Graphemes
Scripts in Unicode








Lists



Writing systems
Languages by writing system&#160;/ by first written account
Undeciphered writing systems
Inventors of writing systems








Types



Featural alphabets
Alphabets
Abjads
Alphasyllabaries&#160;/ Abugidas
Syllabaries
Semi-syllabaries
Ideogrammic
Pictographic
Logographic
Numeral






















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ideogram&amp;oldid=691695541"					
				Categories: Communication designGraphic designPictogramsWriting systemsHidden categories: Articles containing Ancient Greek-language textCommons category with local link different than on WikidataCommons category with local link same as on Wikidata				
							
		
		
			