


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Illustration
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				



Illustration by Jessie Willcox Smith


An illustration is a visualization or a depiction of a subject made by an artist, such as a drawing, sketch, painting, photograph, or other kind of image of things seen, remembered or imagined, using a graphical representation. The word comes from the latin word illustra'tio, illu'stro meaning enlighten, irradiate. Printing is the current process for reproducing illustrations, typically with ink on paper using a printing press. Illustrations can be artistic images illustrating for example a text, poem, fashion, magazines, stamps or a book and very often illustrations were made for children's books. The aim of an illustration is to elucidate or decorate a story, poem or piece of textual information by providing a visual representation of something described in the text. Illustrations can also represent scientific images of flora, medicine or different processes, a biological or chemical processes or technical illustrations to give information on how to use something.[1] Illustrations can be executed in different techniques, like watercolor, gouache, ink, oil, charcoal chalk or woodcut.
Illustrations are often carried out as a large-scale industrial process, and is an essential part of publishing and transaction printing.




People strolling by the banks of the River Thames.






Illustration beats explanation. Western Engraving &amp; Colortype Co.





Contents


1 History

1.1 Early to mid 19th Century
1.2 Golden age of illustration


2 Technical illustration
3 Illustration art
4 Illustration techniques
5 See also
6 References
7 External links



History[edit]
Medieval codices' illustrations were called illuminations. Johannes Gutenberg invented the printing press and independently developed a movable type system in Europe, along with innovations in casting the type based on a matrix and hand mould. He also added illustrations to his printed books, usually woodcuts. During the 15th century, books illustrated with woodcut illustrations became available. The main processes used for reproduction of illustrations during the 16th and 17th centuries were engraving and etching. At the end of the 18th century, lithography allowed even better illustrations to be reproduced. The most notable illustrator of this epoch was William Blake who rendered his illustrations in the medium of relief etching.
Early to mid 19th Century[edit]
Notable figures of the early century were John Leech, George Cruikshank, Dickens' illustrator Hablot Knight Browne, and, in France, Honoré Daumier. The same illustrators contributed to satirical and straight-fiction magazines, but in both cases the demand was for character-drawing that encapsulated or caricatured social types and classes.
The British humorous magazine Punch, which was founded in 1841 riding on the earlier success of Cruikshank's Comic Almanac (1827–1840), employed an uninterrupted run of high-quality comic illustrators, including Sir John Tenniel, the Dalziel Brothers, and Georges du Maurier, into the 20th century. It chronicles the gradual shift in popular illustration from reliance on caricature to sophisticated topical observations. These artists all trained as conventional fine-artists, but achieved their reputations primarily as illustrators. Punch and similar magazines such as the Parisian Le Voleur realised that good illustrations sold as many copies as written content.
Golden age of illustration[edit]
The American "golden age of illustration" lasted from the 1880s until shortly after World War I (although the active career of several later "golden age" illustrators went on for another few decades). As in Europe a few decades earlier, newspapers, mass market magazines, and illustrated books had become the dominant media of public consumption. Improvements in printing technology freed illustrators to experiment with color and new rendering techniques. A small group of illustrators in this time became rich and famous. The imagery they created was a portrait of American aspirations of the time.[2]
Technical illustration[edit]
Main article: Technical illustration




Illustration of a drum set


Technical illustration is the use of illustration to visually communicate information of a technical nature. Technical illustrations can be component technical drawings or diagrams. Technical illustration in general aim "to generate expressive images that effectively convey certain information via the visual channel to the human observer".[3] Nowadays, many illustration programs are used to create technical illustrations due the need for detailed imaging and repeated updating. Besides the commonplace 2-D Adobe Illustrator, there are many 3-D computer graphics software that are often utilized to create illustration for textbooks, especially scientific ones. Technical illustrations generally describe and explain the subjects to a nontechnical audience. Therefore, the visual image should be accurate in terms of dimensions and proportions, and should provide "an overall impression of what an object is or does, to enhance the viewer's interest and understanding".[4]
Illustration art[edit]
Today, there is a growing interest in collecting and admiring original artwork that was used as illustrations in books, magazines, posters, blogs, etc. Various museum exhibitions, magazines and art galleries have devoted space to the illustrators of the In the visual art world, illustrators have sometimes been considered less important in comparison with fine artists and graphic designers, the term "illustrative" sometimes being used as a negative critique. But, possibly in part due to the growth of video game and graphic novel industries, as well as a recent swing in value towards illustration in magazines and other publications over photography, illustration is becoming a valued, popular, and profitable art form that can acquire a wider market than the other two, such as in Korea, Japan, Hong Kong, and the United States. Original illustration art from the best-known magazine illustrators is known to bring prices into the hundreds of thousands of US Dollars at auction. Norman Rockwell's work transcends even these high standards, with his painting "Breaking Home Ties" selling in a 2006 Sotheby's auction for USD15.4 million.[5] The best-known pinup artists such as Gil Elvgren and Alberto Vargas also bring tremendous prices at auction, with a number of Elvgren's works having sold for over USD100,000 in Heritage Auctions.[6]







John Bauer, Swedish illustrator, Troll and Princess Tuvstarr









Trolls and Princess Tuvstarr in the book Bland tomtar och troll









Edward Lear illustration to a limerick, (There was an old man with a beard...)









In the book "Alice in Wonderland" the White Rabbit, by John Tenniel









Sports-related illustration from Punch Magazine circa 1910.









Andrew Lang illustration to One Thousand and One Nights.









William Blake, Oberon, Titania and Puck with Fairies Dancing (1786)









The prince thanking the Water Fairy, image from Princess Nobody (1884), illustrated by Doyle.




Illustration techniques[edit]




Little elves, playing with the Children of the Forest (1910) by Swedish author and illustrator Elsa Beskow.


Digolo and Mazrui subcategorize illustration into the techniques, which are being applied, such as: drawing, painting, printing, and pasting.[7] These techniques affect the art in various ways, being chosen for the different impact the chosen medium produces. The choice can be based on the requirements of the illustration, constraints of the artist, cost, or other factors.
Various illustration techniques have been available to the artist over the centuries. The invention of paper pushed its boundaries even further. Traditional illustration focuses on reproducible ways of creating illustration and can be classified into different types:

Engraving
Etching
Intaglio
Linocut
Pen-and-Ink Illustration
Sumi-E
Woodcut

Pen-and-ink illustration has been around in various forms. The Chinese Sumi-E can be attributed to this technique, incorporating the use of paints and dyes. Navigational maps have been produced using this technique in the 14-15th century.[8] The technique has not fallen out of disuse and is still popular with artists and illustrators, due to its simplicity of use, drying time, and visual impact. Modern artists use a brush, pen or quill to achieve the desired effects, samples see references.[9]







Illustration Great Egret by John James Audubon.









A natural history of birds: Illustrated with two hundred and five copper plates, curiously engraven from the life. And exactly colour'd by the author Eleazar Albin.









Castors by Audubon.









Eggs of Western Tragopan, Kuser's Blood Partridge and so on.









Illustration by Alfred Schmidt (1900) to a book of by Christian Winther.




See also[edit]

Archaeological illustration
Art gallery
Book illustration
Concept art
Communication design
Graphic design
Illustrators
Image development
Information graphics
Medical illustrator
National Museum of American Illustration
Posters
Technical illustration
Top-left lighting

References[edit]


^ cf. the freely available international Database of Scientific Illustrators 1450-1950 with 20 search fields and currently nearly 7000 entries of illustrators in science, medicine &amp; technology active prior to 1950
^ The R. Atkinson Fox Society: What Was the Golden Age of Illustration?
^ Ivan Viola and Meister E. Gröller (2005). "Smart Visibility in Visualization". In: Computational Aesthetics in Graphics, Visualization and Imaging. L. Neumann et al. (Ed.)
^ Industriegrafik.com website, Last modified: June 15, 2002. Accessed february 15, 2009.
^ Norman Rockwell's Rising Value Prices Out His Museum Zac Bissonnette, AOL Daily Finance, 2-22-10
^ Heritage Auctions search page
^ Digolo &amp; O. Mazrui (2005): Art &amp; Design Forms 1 and 2, Page 51.
^ Matthew Adam McLean (2007). The Cosmographia of Sebastian Münster, describing the world in the Reformation, Page 164.
^ Pen-and-ink illustration, Art of M. Neschetna website, Last modified: January 15, 2011. Accessed: May 20, 2011.


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Illustrations.





Look up illustration in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



&#160;"Illustration". Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). 1911.&#160;









v
t
e


Visualization of technical information






Fields



Biological data visualization
Chemical imaging
Crime mapping
Data visualization
Educational visualization
Flow visualization
Geovisualization
Information visualization
Mathematical visualization
Medical imaging
Molecular graphics
Product visualization
Scientific visualization
Software visualization
Technical drawing
User interface design
Visual culture
Volume visualization








Image types



Chart
Diagram
Engineering drawing
Graph of a function
Ideogram
Map
Photograph
Pictogram
Plot
Schematic
Statistical graphics
Table
Technical drawings
Technical illustration
User interface








People



Jacques Bertin
Stuart Card
Thomas A. DeFanti
Michael Friendly
George Furnas
Nigel Holmes
Alan MacEachren
Jock D. Mackinlay
Michael Maltz
Bruce H. McCormick
Charles Joseph Minard
Gaspard Monge
Otto Neurath
Florence Nightingale
Clifford A. Pickover
William Playfair
Adolphe Quetelet
George G. Robertson
Arthur H. Robinson
Lawrence J. Rosenblum
Ben Shneiderman
Edward Tufte
Fernanda Viégas
Howard Wainer








Related topics



Cartography
Chartjunk
Computer graphics

in computer science


Graph drawing
Graphic design
Graphic organizer
Imaging science
Information graphics
Information science
Mental visualisation
Misleading graph
Neuroimaging
Patent drawing
Scientific modelling
Spatial analysis
Tools for Ideas
Visual analytics
Visual perception













Authority control



GND: 4123412-1
NDL: 00570222















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Illustration&amp;oldid=689692494"					
				Categories: IllustrationGraphic designCommunication designHidden categories: Commons category with local link same as on WikidataWikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with an unnamed parameterWikipedia articles with GND identifiers				
							
		
		
			