


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Impressionism
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				This article is about the art movement.  For other uses, see Impressionism (disambiguation).




Claude Monet, Impression, soleil levant (Impression, Sunrise), 1872, oil on canvas, Musée Marmottan Monet, Paris. This painting became the source of the movement's name, after Louis Leroy's article The Exhibition of the Impressionists declared that the painting was at most, a sketch.


Impressionism is a 19th-century art movement that originated with a group of Paris-based artists whose independent exhibitions brought them to prominence during the 1870s and 1880s. Impressionist painting characteristics include relatively small, thin, yet visible brush strokes, open composition, emphasis on accurate depiction of light in its changing qualities (often accentuating the effects of the passage of time), ordinary subject matter, inclusion of movement as a crucial element of human perception and experience, and unusual visual angles.
The Impressionists faced harsh opposition from the conventional art community in France. The name of the style derives from the title of a Claude Monet work, Impression, soleil levant (Impression, Sunrise), which provoked the critic Louis Leroy to coin the term in a satirical review published in the Parisian newspaper Le Charivari.
The development of Impressionism in the visual arts was soon followed by analogous styles in other media that became known as impressionist music and impressionist literature.



Contents


1 Overview
2 Beginnings
3 Impressionist techniques
4 Content and composition
5 Main Impressionists
6 Gallery
7 Timeline: Lives of the Impressionists
8 Associates and influenced artists
9 Beyond France
10 Sculpture, photography and film
11 Music and literature
12 Post-Impressionism
13 See also
14 Notes
15 References
16 External links



Overview[edit]




Pierre-Auguste Renoir, Dance at Le Moulin de la Galette (Bal du moulin de la Galette), Musée d'Orsay, 1876


Radicals in their time, early Impressionists violated the rules of academic painting. They constructed their pictures from freely brushed colours that took precedence over lines and contours, following the example of painters such as Eugène Delacroix and J. M. W. Turner. They also painted realistic scenes of modern life, and often painted outdoors. Previously, still lifes and portraits as well as landscapes were usually painted in a studio.[1] The Impressionists found that they could capture the momentary and transient effects of sunlight by painting en plein air. They portrayed overall visual effects instead of details, and used short "broken" brush strokes of mixed and pure unmixed colour—not blended smoothly or shaded, as was customary—to achieve an effect of intense colour vibration.
Impressionism emerged in France at the same time that a number of other painters, including the Italian artists known as the Macchiaioli, and Winslow Homer in the United States, were also exploring plein-air painting. The Impressionists, however, developed new techniques specific to the style. Encompassing what its adherents argued was a different way of seeing, it is an art of immediacy and movement, of candid poses and compositions, of the play of light expressed in a bright and varied use of colour.
The public, at first hostile, gradually came to believe that the Impressionists had captured a fresh and original vision, even if the art critics and art establishment disapproved of the new style.
By recreating the sensation in the eye that views the subject, rather than delineating the details of the subject, and by creating a welter of techniques and forms, Impressionism is a precursor of various painting styles, including Neo-Impressionism, Post-Impressionism, Fauvism, and Cubism.
Beginnings[edit]
In the middle of the 19th century—a time of change, as Emperor Napoleon III rebuilt Paris and waged war—the Académie des Beaux-Arts dominated French art. The Académie was the preserver of traditional French painting standards of content and style. Historical subjects, religious themes, and portraits were valued; landscape and still life were not. The Académie preferred carefully finished images that looked realistic when examined closely. Paintings in this style were made up of precise brush strokes carefully blended to hide the artist's hand in the work.[2] Colour was restrained and often toned down further by the application of a golden varnish.[3]
The Académie had an annual, juried art show, the Salon de Paris, and artists whose work was displayed in the show won prizes, garnered commissions, and enhanced their prestige. The standards of the juries represented the values of the Académie, represented by the works of such artists as Jean-Léon Gérôme and Alexandre Cabanel.
In the early 1860s, four young painters—Claude Monet, Pierre-Auguste Renoir, Alfred Sisley, and Frédéric Bazille—met while studying under the academic artist Charles Gleyre. They discovered that they shared an interest in painting landscape and contemporary life rather than historical or mythological scenes. Following a practice that had become increasingly popular by mid-century, they often ventured into the countryside together to paint in the open air, but not for the purpose of making sketches to be developed into carefully finished works in the studio, as was the usual custom.[4] By painting in sunlight directly from nature, and making bold use of the vivid synthetic pigments that had become available since the beginning of the century, they began to develop a lighter and brighter manner of painting that extended further the Realism of Gustave Courbet and the Barbizon school. A favourite meeting place for the artists was the Café Guerbois on Avenue de Clichy in Paris, where the discussions were often led by Édouard Manet, whom the younger artists greatly admired. They were soon joined by Camille Pissarro, Paul Cézanne, and Armand Guillaumin.[5]




Édouard Manet, The Luncheon on the Grass (Le déjeuner sur l'herbe), 1863


During the 1860s, the Salon jury routinely rejected about half of the works submitted by Monet and his friends in favour of works by artists faithful to the approved style.[6] In 1863, the Salon jury rejected Manet's The Luncheon on the Grass (Le déjeuner sur l'herbe) primarily because it depicted a nude woman with two clothed men at a picnic. While the Salon jury routinely accepted nudes in historical and allegorical paintings, they condemned Manet for placing a realistic nude in a contemporary setting.[7] The jury's severely worded rejection of Manet's painting appalled his admirers, and the unusually large number of rejected works that year perturbed many French artists.
After Emperor Napoleon III saw the rejected works of 1863, he decreed that the public be allowed to judge the work themselves, and the Salon des Refusés (Salon of the Refused) was organized. While many viewers came only to laugh, the Salon des Refusés drew attention to the existence of a new tendency in art and attracted more visitors than the regular Salon.[8]




Alfred Sisley, View of the Saint-Martin Canal, Paris, 1870, Musée d'Orsay


Artists' petitions requesting a new Salon des Refusés in 1867, and again in 1872, were denied. In December 1873, Monet, Renoir, Pissarro, Sisley, Cézanne, Berthe Morisot, Edgar Degas and several other artists founded the Société Anonyme Coopérative des Artistes Peintres, Sculpteurs, Graveurs ("Cooperative and Anonymous Association of Painters, Sculptors, and Engravers") to exhibit their artworks independently.[9] Members of the association were expected to forswear participation in the Salon.[10] The organizers invited a number of other progressive artists to join them in their inaugural exhibition, including the older Eugène Boudin, whose example had first persuaded Monet to adopt plein air painting years before.[11] Another painter who greatly influenced Monet and his friends, Johan Jongkind, declined to participate, as did Édouard Manet. In total, thirty artists participated in their first exhibition, held in April 1874 at the studio of the photographer Nadar.




Claude Monet, Haystacks, (sunset), 1890–1891, Museum of Fine Arts, Boston


The critical response was mixed. Monet and Cézanne received the harshest attacks. Critic and humorist Louis Leroy wrote a scathing review in the newspaper Le Charivari in which, making wordplay with the title of Claude Monet's Impression, Sunrise (Impression, soleil levant), he gave the artists the name by which they became known. Derisively titling his article The Exhibition of the Impressionists, Leroy declared that Monet's painting was at most, a sketch, and could hardly be termed a finished work.
He wrote, in the form of a dialog between viewers,

Impression—I was certain of it. I was just telling myself that, since I was impressed, there had to be some impression in it ... and what freedom, what ease of workmanship! Wallpaper in its embryonic state is more finished than that seascape.[12]





Claude Monet, Woman with a Parasol - Madame Monet and Her Son (Camille and Jean Monet), 1875, National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C.


The term Impressionist quickly gained favour with the public. It was also accepted by the artists themselves, even though they were a diverse group in style and temperament, unified primarily by their spirit of independence and rebellion. They exhibited together—albeit with shifting membership—eight times between 1874 and 1886. The Impressionists' style, with its loose, spontaneous brushstrokes, would soon become synonymous with modern life.[3]
Monet, Sisley, Morisot, and Pissarro may be considered the "purest" Impressionists, in their consistent pursuit of an art of spontaneity, sunlight, and colour. Degas rejected much of this, as he believed in the primacy of drawing over colour and belittled the practice of painting outdoors.[13] Renoir turned away from Impressionism for a time during the 1880s, and never entirely regained his commitment to its ideas. Édouard Manet, although regarded by the Impressionists as their leader,[14] never abandoned his liberal use of black as a colour, and never participated in the Impressionist exhibitions. He continued to submit his works to the Salon, where his painting Spanish Singer had won a 2nd class medal in 1861, and he urged the others to do likewise, arguing that "the Salon is the real field of battle" where a reputation could be made.[15]




Camille Pissarro, Boulevard Montmartre, 1897, the Hermitage, Saint Petersburg


Among the artists of the core group (minus Bazille, who had died in the Franco-Prussian War in 1870), defections occurred as Cézanne, followed later by Renoir, Sisley, and Monet, abstained from the group exhibitions so they could submit their works to the Salon. Disagreements arose from issues such as Guillaumin's membership in the group, championed by Pissarro and Cézanne against opposition from Monet and Degas, who thought him unworthy.[16] Degas invited Mary Cassatt to display her work in the 1879 exhibition, but also insisted on the inclusion of Jean-François Raffaëlli, Ludovic Lepic, and other realists who did not represent Impressionist practices, causing Monet in 1880 to accuse the Impressionists of "opening doors to first-come daubers".[17] The group divided over invitations to Paul Signac and Georges Seurat to exhibit with them in 1886. Pissarro was the only artist to show at all eight Impressionist exhibitions.
The individual artists achieved few financial rewards from the Impressionist exhibitions, but their art gradually won a degree of public acceptance and support. Their dealer, Durand-Ruel, played a major role in this as he kept their work before the public and arranged shows for them in London and New York. Although Sisley died in poverty in 1899, Renoir had a great Salon success in 1879.[18] Monet became secure financially during the early 1880s and so did Pissarro by the early 1890s. By this time the methods of Impressionist painting, in a diluted form, had become commonplace in Salon art.[19]
Impressionist techniques[edit]




Mary Cassatt, Lydia Leaning on Her Arms (in a theatre box), 1879


French painters who prepared the way for Impressionism include the Romantic colourist Eugène Delacroix, the leader of the realists Gustave Courbet, and painters of the Barbizon school such as Théodore Rousseau. The Impressionists learned much from the work of Jean-Baptiste-Camille Corot and Eugène Boudin, who painted from nature in a direct and spontaneous style that prefigured Impressionism, and who befriended and advised the younger artists.
A number of identifiable techniques and working habits contributed to the innovative style of the Impressionists. Although these methods had been used by previous artists—and are often conspicuous in the work of artists such as Frans Hals, Diego Velázquez, Peter Paul Rubens, John Constable, and J.&#160;M.&#160;W.&#160;Turner—the Impressionists were the first to use them all together, and with such consistency. These techniques include:

Short, thick strokes of paint quickly capture the essence of the subject, rather than its details. The paint is often applied impasto.
Colours are applied side-by-side with as little mixing as possible, a technique that exploits the principle of simultaneous contrast to make the colour appear more vivid to the viewer.
Grays and dark tones are produced by mixing complementary colours. Pure impressionism avoids the use of black paint.
Wet paint is placed into wet paint without waiting for successive applications to dry, producing softer edges and intermingling of colour.
Impressionist paintings do not exploit the transparency of thin paint films (glazes), which earlier artists manipulated carefully to produce effects. The impressionist painting surface is typically opaque.
The paint is applied to a white or light-coloured ground. Previously, painters often used dark grey or strongly coloured grounds.
The play of natural light is emphasized. Close attention is paid to the reflection of colours from object to object. Painters often worked in the evening to produce effets de soir—the shadowy effects of evening or twilight.
In paintings made en plein air (outdoors), shadows are boldly painted with the blue of the sky as it is reflected onto surfaces, giving a sense of freshness previously not represented in painting. (Blue shadows on snow inspired the technique.)

New technology played a role in the development of the style. Impressionists took advantage of the mid-century introduction of premixed paints in tin tubes (resembling modern toothpaste tubes), which allowed artists to work more spontaneously, both outdoors and indoors.[20] Previously, painters made their own paints individually, by grinding and mixing dry pigment powders with linseed oil, which were then stored in animal bladders.[21]
Many vivid synthetic pigments became commercially available to artists for the first time during the 19th century. These included cobalt blue, viridian, cadmium yellow, and synthetic ultramarine blue, all of which were in use by the 1840s, before Impressionism.[22] The Impressionists' manner of painting made bold use of these pigments, and of even newer colours such as cerulean blue,[3] which became commercially available to artists in the 1860s.[22]
The Impressionists' progress toward a brighter style of painting was gradual. During the 1860s, Monet and Renoir sometimes painted on canvases prepared with the traditional red-brown or grey ground.[23] By the 1870s, Monet, Renoir, and Pissarro usually chose to paint on grounds of a lighter grey or beige colour, which functioned as a middle tone in the finished painting.[23] By the 1880s, some of the Impressionists had come to prefer white or slightly off-white grounds, and no longer allowed the ground colour a significant role in the finished painting.[24]
Content and composition[edit]




Camille Pissarro, Hay Harvest at Éragny, 1901, National Gallery of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario


Prior to the Impressionists, other painters, notably such 17th-century Dutch painters as Jan Steen, had emphasized common subjects, but their methods of composition were traditional. They arranged their compositions so that the main subject commanded the viewer's attention. The Impressionists relaxed the boundary between subject and background so that the effect of an Impressionist painting often resembles a snapshot, a part of a larger reality captured as if by chance.[25] Photography was gaining popularity, and as cameras became more portable, photographs became more candid. Photography inspired Impressionists to represent momentary action, not only in the fleeting lights of a landscape, but in the day-to-day lives of people.




Berthe Morisot, Reading, 1873, Cleveland Museum of Art


The development of Impressionism can be considered partly as a reaction by artists to the challenge presented by photography, which seemed to devalue the artist's skill in reproducing reality. Both portrait and landscape paintings were deemed somewhat deficient and lacking in truth as photography "produced lifelike images much more efficiently and reliably".[26]
In spite of this, photography actually inspired artists to pursue other means of artistic expression, and rather than compete with photography to emulate reality, artists focused "on the one thing they could inevitably do better than the photograph—by further developing into an art form its very subjectivity in the conception of the image, the very subjectivity that photography eliminated".[26] The Impressionists sought to express their perceptions of nature, rather than create exact representations. This allowed artists to depict subjectively what they saw with their "tacit imperatives of taste and conscience".[27] Photography encouraged painters to exploit aspects of the painting medium, like colour, which photography then lacked: "The Impressionists were the first to consciously offer a subjective alternative to the photograph".[26]




Claude Monet, Jardin à Sainte-Adresse, 1867, Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York.,[28] a work showing the influence of Japanese prints


Another major influence was Japanese ukiyo-e art prints (Japonism). The art of these prints contributed significantly to the "snapshot" angles and unconventional compositions that became characteristic of Impressionism. An example is Monet's Jardin à Sainte-Adresse, 1867, with its bold blocks of colour and composition on a strong diagonal slant showing the influence of Japanese prints[29]
Edgar Degas was both an avid photographer and a collector of Japanese prints.[30] His The Dance Class (La classe de danse) of 1874 shows both influences in its asymmetrical composition. The dancers are seemingly caught off guard in various awkward poses, leaving an expanse of empty floor space in the lower right quadrant. He also captured his dancers in sculpture, such as the Little Dancer of Fourteen Years.
Main Impressionists[edit]




Berthe Morisot, The Harbour at Lorient, 1869, National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C.


The central figures in the development of Impressionism in France, listed alphabetically, were:

Frédéric Bazille (who only posthumously participated in the Impressionist exhibitions) (1841–1870)
Gustave Caillebotte (who, younger than the others, joined forces with them in the mid-1870s) (1848–1894)
Mary Cassatt (American-born, she lived in Paris and participated in four Impressionist exhibitions) (1844–1926)
Paul Cézanne (although he later broke away from the Impressionists) (1839–1906)
Edgar Degas (who despised the term Impressionist) (1834–1917)
Armand Guillaumin (1841–1927)
Édouard Manet (who did not participate in any of the Impressionist exhibitions) (1832–1883)[31]
Claude Monet (the most prolific of the Impressionists and the one who embodies their aesthetic most obviously)[32] (1840–1926)
Berthe Morisot (1841–1895)
Camille Pissarro (1830–1903)
Pierre-Auguste Renoir (1841–1919)
Alfred Sisley (1839–1899)

Gallery[edit]







Frédéric Bazille, Paysage au bord du Lez, 1870, Minneapolis Institute of Art









Alfred Sisley, Bridge at Villeneuve-la-Garenne, 1872, Metropolitan Museum of Art









Berthe Morisot, The Cradle, 1872, Musée d'Orsay









Armand Guillaumin, Sunset at Ivry (Soleil couchant à Ivry), 1873, Musee d'Orsay









Édouard Manet, Boating, 1874, Metropolitan Museum of Art









Alfred Sisley, La Seine au Point du jour, 1877, Museum of modern art André Malraux - MuMa, Le Havre









Édouard Manet, The Plum, 1878, National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C.









Édouard Manet, A Bar at the Folies-Bergère (Un Bar aux Folies-Bergère), 1882, Courtauld Institute of Art









Edgar Degas, After the Bath, Woman Drying Herself, c. 1884–1886 (reworked between 1890 and 1900), MuMa, Le Havre









Edgar Degas, L'Absinthe, 1876, Musée d'Orsay, Paris









Edgar Degas, Dancer with a Bouquet of Flowers (Star of the Ballet), 1878









Edgar Degas, Woman in the Bath, 1886, Hill-Stead Museum, Farmington, Connecticut









Edgar Degas, Dancers at The Bar, 1888, The Phillips Collection, Washington, D.C.









Gustave Caillebotte, Paris Street, Rainy Day, 1877, Art Institute of Chicago









Pierre-Auguste Renoir, On the Terrace, 1881, Art Institute of Chicago









Pierre-Auguste Renoir, Girl with a Hoop, 1885









Claude Monet, The Cliff at Étretat after the Storm, 1885, Clark Art Institute, Williamstown, Massachusetts









Mary Cassatt, The Child's Bath (The Bath), 1893, oil on canvas, Art Institute of Chicago




Timeline: Lives of the Impressionists[edit]

The Impressionists 

Associates and influenced artists[edit]




James Abbott McNeill Whistler, Nocturne in Black and Gold: The Falling Rocket, 1874, Detroit Institute of Arts


Among the close associates of the Impressionists were several painters who adopted their methods to some degree. These include Giuseppe De Nittis, an Italian artist living in Paris who participated in the first Impressionist exhibit at the invitation of Degas, although the other Impressionists disparaged his work.[33] Federico Zandomeneghi was another Italian friend of Degas who showed with the Impressionists. Eva Gonzalès was a follower of Manet who did not exhibit with the group. James Abbott McNeill Whistler was an American-born painter who played a part in Impressionism although he did not join the group and preferred grayed colours. Walter Sickert, an English artist, was initially a follower of Whistler, and later an important disciple of Degas; he did not exhibit with the Impressionists. In 1904 the artist and writer Wynford Dewhurst wrote the first important study of the French painters published in English, Impressionist Painting: its genesis and development, which did much to popularize Impressionism in Great Britain.
By the early 1880s, Impressionist methods were affecting, at least superficially, the art of the Salon. Fashionable painters such as Jean Béraud and Henri Gervex found critical and financial success by brightening their palettes while retaining the smooth finish expected of Salon art.[34] Works by these artists are sometimes casually referred to as Impressionism, despite their remoteness from Impressionist practice.
The influence of the French Impressionists lasted long after most of them had died. Artists like J.D. Kirszenbaum were borrowing Impressionist techniques throughout the twentieth century.
Beyond France[edit]




Golden Summer, Eaglemont (1889) by Arthur Streeton, a leader of the Heidelberg School






Peder Severin Krøyer's 1888 work Hip, Hip, Hurrah! shows members of the Skagen Painters


As the influence of Impressionism spread beyond France, artists, too numerous to list, became identified as practitioners of the new style. Some of the more important examples are:

The American Impressionists, including Mary Cassatt, William Merritt Chase, Frederick Carl Frieseke, Childe Hassam, Willard Metcalf, Lilla Cabot Perry, Theodore Robinson, Edmund Charles Tarbell, John Henry Twachtman, Catherine Wiley and J. Alden Weir.
The Australian Impressionists, including Tom Roberts, Arthur Streeton, Walter Withers, Charles Conder and Frederick McCubbin (who were prominent members of the Heidelberg School), and John Peter Russell, a friend of Van Gogh, Rodin, Monet and Matisse.
The Amsterdam Impressionists in the Netherlands, including George Hendrik Breitner, Isaac Israëls, Willem Bastiaan Tholen, Willem de Zwart, Willem Witsen and Jan Toorop.
Anna Boch, Vincent van Gogh's friend Eugène Boch, Georges Lemmen and Théo van Rysselberghe, Impressionist painters from Belgium.
Ivan Grohar, Rihard Jakopič, Matija Jama, and Matej Sternen, Impressionists from Slovenia. Their beginning was in the school of Anton Ažbe in Munich and they were influenced by Jurij Šubic and Ivana Kobilca, Slovenian painters working in Paris
Wynford Dewhurst, Walter Richard Sickert, and Philip Wilson Steer were well known Impressionist painters from the United Kingdom.
The German Impressionists, including Lovis Corinth, Max Liebermann, Ernst Oppler, Max Slevogt and August von Brandis.
László Mednyánszky in Hungary
Theodor von Ehrmanns and Hugo Charlemont who were rare Impressionists among the more dominant Vienna Secessionist painters in Austria
William John Leech, Roderic O'Conor, and Walter Osborne in Ireland
Konstantin Korovin and Valentin Serov in Russia
Francisco Oller y Cestero, a native of Puerto Rico and a friend of Pissarro and Cézanne
James Nairn in New Zealand.
William McTaggart in Scotland.
Laura Muntz Lyall, a Canadian artist
Władysław Podkowiński, a Polish Impressionist and symbolist
Nicolae Grigorescu in Romania
Nazmi Ziya Güran, who brought Impressionism to Turkey
Chafik Charobim in Egypt
Eliseu Visconti in Brazil
Joaquín Sorolla in Spain
Faustino Brughetti, Fernando Fader, Candido Lopez, Martín Malharro, Walter de Navazio, Ramón Silva in Argentina
Skagen Painters a group of Scandinavian artists who painted in a small Danish fishing village
Nadežda Petrović in Serbia
Frits Thaulow in Norway and later France.

Sculpture, photography and film[edit]
The sculptor Auguste Rodin is sometimes called an Impressionist for the way he used roughly modeled surfaces to suggest transient light effects.[35]
Pictorialist photographers whose work is characterized by soft focus and atmospheric effects have also been called Impressionists.
French Impressionist Cinema is a term applied to a loosely defined group of films and filmmakers in France from 1919–1929, although these years are debatable. French Impressionist filmmakers include Abel Gance, Jean Epstein, Germaine Dulac, Marcel L’Herbier, Louis Delluc, and Dmitry Kirsanoff.
Music and literature[edit]
Main articles: Impressionist music and Impressionism (literature)




Claude Monet, Water Lilies, 1916, The National Museum of Western Art, Tokyo


Musical Impressionism is the name given to a movement in European classical music that arose in the late 19th century and continued into the middle of the 20th century. Originating in France, musical Impressionism is characterized by suggestion and atmosphere, and eschews the emotional excesses of the Romantic era. Impressionist composers favoured short forms such as the nocturne, arabesque, and prelude, and often explored uncommon scales such as the whole tone scale. Perhaps the most notable innovations of Impressionist composers were the introduction of major 7th chords and the extension of chord structures in 3rds to five- and six-part harmonies.
The influence of visual Impressionism on its musical counterpart is debatable. Claude Debussy and Maurice Ravel are generally considered the greatest Impressionist composers, but Debussy disavowed the term, calling it the invention of critics. Erik Satie was also considered in this category, though his approach was regarded as less serious, more musical novelty in nature. Paul Dukas is another French composer sometimes considered an Impressionist, but his style is perhaps more closely aligned to the late Romanticists. Musical Impressionism beyond France includes the work of such composers as Ottorino Respighi (Italy) Ralph Vaughan Williams, Cyril Scott, and John Ireland (England), and Manuel De Falla, and Isaac Albeniz (Spain).
The term Impressionism has also been used to describe works of literature in which a few select details suffice to convey the sensory impressions of an incident or scene. Impressionist literature is closely related to Symbolism, with its major exemplars being Baudelaire, Mallarmé, Rimbaud, and Verlaine. Authors such as Virginia Woolf, D.H. Lawrence, and Joseph Conrad have written works that are Impressionistic in the way that they describe, rather than interpret, the impressions, sensations and emotions that constitute a character's mental life.




Camille Pissarro, Children on a Farm, 1887


Post-Impressionism[edit]
Main article: Post-Impressionism
Post-Impressionism developed from Impressionism. During the 1880s several artists began to develop different precepts for the use of colour, pattern, form, and line, derived from the Impressionist example: Vincent van Gogh, Paul Gauguin, Georges Seurat, and Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec. These artists were slightly younger than the Impressionists, and their work is known as post-Impressionism. Some of the original Impressionist artists also ventured into this new territory; Camille Pissarro briefly painted in a pointillist manner, and even Monet abandoned strict plein air painting. Paul Cézanne, who participated in the first and third Impressionist exhibitions, developed a highly individual vision emphasising pictorial structure, and he is more often called a post-Impressionist. Although these cases illustrate the difficulty of assigning labels, the work of the original Impressionist painters may, by definition, be categorised as Impressionism.







Georges Seurat, A Sunday Afternoon on the Island of La Grande Jatte, 1884–1886, The Art Institute of Chicago









Vincent van Gogh, Cypresses, 1889, Metropolitan Museum of Art









Paul Gauguin, The Midday Nap, 1894, Metropolitan Museum of Art









Paul Cézanne, The Card Players, 1894–1895, Musée d'Orsay, Paris




See also[edit]


Art periods
Expressionism (as a reaction to Impressionism)
Les XX
Luminism (Impressionism)
Macchiaioli


Notes[edit]


^ Exceptions include Canaletto, who painted outside and may have used the camera obscura.
^ Nathalia Brodskaya, Impressionism, Parkstone International, 2014, pp. 13-14
^ a b c Samu, Margaret. "Impressionism: Art and Modernity". In Heilbrunn Timeline of Art History. New York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art, 2000 (October 2004)
^ Bomford et al. 1990, pp. 21–27.
^ Greenspan, Taube G. "Armand Guillaumin", Grove Art Online. Oxford Art Online, Oxford University Press.
^ Seiberling, Grace, "Impressionism", Grove Art Online. Oxford Art Online, Oxford University Press.
^ Denvir (1990), p.133.
^ Denvir (1990), p.194.
^ Bomford et al. 1990, p. 209.
^ Jensen 1994, p. 90.
^ Denvir (1990), p.32.
^ Rewald (1973), p. 323.
^ Gordon; Forge (1988), pp. 11–12.
^ Distel et al. (1974), p. 127.
^ Richardson (1976), p. 3.
^ Denvir (1990), p.105.
^ Rewald (1973), p. 603.
^ Distel, Anne, Michel Hoog, and Charles S. Moffett. 1974. Impressionism; a Centenary Exhibition, the Metropolitan Museum of Art, December 12, 1974–February 10, 1975. [New York]: [Metropolitan Museum of Art]. p. 190. ISBN 0870990977.
^ Rewald (1973), p. 475–476.
^ Bomford et al. 1990, pp. 39–41.
^ Renoir and the Impressionist Process. The Phillips Collection, retrieved May 21, 2011
^ a b Wallert, Arie; Hermens, Erma; Peek, Marja (1995). Historical painting techniques, materials, and studio practice: preprints of a symposium, University of Leiden, Netherlands, 26-29 June, 1995. [Marina Del Rey, Calif.]: Getty Conservation Institute. p. 159. ISBN 0892363223.
^ a b Stoner, Joyce Hill; Rushfield, Rebecca Anne (2012). The conservation of easel paintings. London: Routledge. p. 177. ISBN 1136000410.
^ Stoner, Joyce Hill; Rushfield, Rebecca Anne (2012). The conservation of easel paintings. London: Routledge. p. 178. ISBN 1136000410.
^ Rosenblum (1989), p. 228.
^ a b c Levinson, Paul (1997) The Soft Edge; a Natural History and Future of the Information Revolution, Routledge, London and New York
^ Sontag, Susan (1977) On Photography, Penguin, London
^ Metropolitan Museum of Art
^ Gary Tinterow, Origins of Impressionism, Metropolitan Museum of Art,1994, page 433
^ Baumann; Karabelnik, et al. (1994), p. 112.
^ Cole, Bruce (1991). Art of the Western World: From Ancient Greece to Post Modernism. Simon and Schuster. p. 242. ISBN 0671747282
^ Denvir (1990), p.140.
^ Denvir (1990), p.152.
^ Rewald (1973), p.476–477.
^ Kleiner, Fred S., and Helen Gardner (2014). Gardner's art through the ages: a concise Western history. Boston, MA: Wadsworth, Cengage Learning. p. 382. ISBN 9781133954798.


References[edit]


Baumann, Felix Andreas, Marianne Karabelnik-Matta, Jean Sutherland Boggs, and Tobia Bezzola (1994). Degas Portraits. London: Merrell Holberton. ISBN 1-85894-014-1
Bomford, David, Jo Kirby, John Leighton, Ashok Roy, and Raymond White (1990). Impressionism. London: National Gallery. ISBN 0-300-05035-6
Denvir, Bernard (1990). The Thames and Hudson Encyclopaedia of Impressionism. London: Thames and Hudson. ISBN 0-500-20239-7
Distel, Anne, Michel Hoog, and Charles S. Moffett (1974). Impressionism; a centenary exhibition, the Metropolitan Museum of Art, December 12, 1974-February 10, 1975. New York: Metropolitan Museum of Art. ISBN 0-8709-9097-7
Gordon, Robert; Forge, Andrew (1988). Degas. New York: Harry N. Abrams. ISBN 0-8109-1142-6
Gowing, Lawrence, with Adriani, Götz; Krumrine, Mary Louise; Lewis, Mary Tompkins; Patin, Sylvie; Rewald, John (1988). Cézanne: The Early Years 1859-1872. New York: Harry N. Abrams.
Jensen, Robert (1994). Marketing modernism in fin-de-siècle Europe. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. ISBN 0691033331.
Moskowitz, Ira; Sérullaz, Maurice (1962). French Impressionists: A Selection of Drawings of the French 19th Century. Boston and Toronto: Little, Brown and Company. ISBN 0-316-58560-2
Rewald, John (1973). The History of Impressionism (4th, Revised Ed.). New York: The Museum of Modern Art. ISBN 0-87070-360-9
Richardson, John (1976). Manet (3rd Ed.). Oxford: Phaidon Press Ltd. ISBN 0-7148-1743-0
Rosenblum, Robert (1989). Paintings in the Musée d'Orsay. New York: Stewart, Tabori &amp; Chang. ISBN 1-55670-099-7
Moffett, Charles S. (1986). "The New Painting, Impressionism 1874-1886". Geneva: Richard Burton SA.


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Impressionist paintings.





Wikiquote has quotations related to: Impressionism





Look up impressionism in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



Hecht Museum
Mauclair, Camille (1903):
The French Impressionists (1860-1900) at Project Gutenberg
Museumsportal Schleswig-Holstein
Suburban Pastoral The Guardian, 24 February 2007
Impressionism: Paintings collected by European Museums (1999) was an art exhibition co-organized by the High Museum of Art, Atlanta, the Seattle Art Museum, and the Denver Art Museum, touring from May through December 1999. Online guided tour
Monet's Years at Giverny: Beyond Impressionism, exhibition catalogue fully online as PDF from The Metropolitan Museum of Art, which discusses Monet's role in this movement
Degas: The Artist's Mind, exhibition catalogue fully online as PDF from The Metropolitan Museum of Art, which discusses Degas's role in this movement
Definition of impressionism on the Tate Art Glossary









v
t
e


Impressionism






Originators



Frédéric Bazille
Eugène Boudin
Gustave Caillebotte
Mary Cassatt
Paul Cézanne
Edgar Degas
Armand Guillaumin
Édouard Manet
Claude Monet
Berthe Morisot
Camille Pissarro
Pierre-Auguste Renoir
Alfred Sisley











Patrons



Gustave Caillebotte
Henry O. Havemeyer
Ernest Hoschedé








Dealers



Paul Durand-Ruel
Georges Petit
Ambroise Vollard








American artists



William Merritt Chase
Frederick Carl Frieseke
Childe Hassam
Willard Metcalf
Lilla Cabot Perry
Theodore Robinson
John Henry Twachtman
J. Alden Weir








Other artists



John Peter Russell
Lovis Corinth
Antoine Guillemet
Max Liebermann
Max Slevogt
Konstantin Korovin
Valentin Serov
Francisco Oller
Joaquín Sorolla
Philip Wilson Steer
Laura Muntz Lyall
Władysław Podkowiński
Nazmi Ziya Güran
Henry Moret








Other media



Music
Literature
French Impressionist Cinema








See also



American Impressionism
California Impressionism
Pennsylvania Impressionism
Heidelberg School
Amsterdam Impressionism
Decorative Impressionism
Post-Impressionism
















v
t
e


Post-Impressionism






19th-century
movements



Neo-impressionism
Divisionism
Pointillism
Cloisonnism
Les Nabis
Synthetism
Symbolism
Art Nouveau








Artists



Cuno Amiet
Charles Angrand
Émile Bernard
Pierre Bonnard
Marius Borgeaud
Paul Cézanne
Henri-Edmond Cross
Maurice Denis
Georges Dufrénoy
Paul Gauguin
Hippolyte Petitjean
Paul Ranson
Odilon Redon
Henri Rousseau
René Schützenberger
Paul Sérusier
Georges Seurat
Paul Signac
Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec
Charles Laval
Georges Lemmen
Maximilien Luce
Paul Ranson
Vincent van Gogh
Théo van Rysselberghe
Félix Vallotton
Édouard Vuillard








20th-century
movements



Fauvism
Die Brücke
Der Blaue Reiter
Expressionism
Cubism








Artists



Georges Braque
Charles Camoin
André Derain
Raoul Dufy
Henri Matisse
Albert Gleizes
Ernst Ludwig Kirchner
Karl Schmidt-Rottluff
Wassily Kandinsky
Sonia Lewitska
Franz Marc
Jean Metzinger
Henry Ottmann
Francis Picabia
Pablo Picasso
Robert Antoine Pinchon
Henriette Tirman
Jean Marchand
Othon Friesz








Exhibitions



Artistes Indépendants
Les XX
Volpini Exhibition
Le Barc de Boutteville
La Libre Esthétique
Ambroise Vollard
Salon d'Automne
Salon des Indépendants
Salon des Cent
Salon des Tuileries








Critics



Félix Fénéon
Albert Aurier








See also



Impressionism
Modernism
Modern art
Secessionism
















v
t
e


Modernism






Milestones



Le Déjeuner sur l’herbe (1862-63)
Olympia (1863)
A Sunday Afternoon on the Island of La Grande Jatte (1886)
Mont Sainte-Victoir) (1887)
The Starry Night (1889)
Ubu Roi (1896)
Verklärte Nacht (1899)
Le bonheur de vivre (1905-1906)
Les Demoiselles d'Avignon (1907)
The Firebird (1910)
Afternoon of a Faun (1912)
Nude Descending a Staircase, No. 2 (1912)
In Search of Lost Time (1913–1927)
The Metamorphosis (1915)
Fountain (1917)
The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari (1920)
Six Characters in Search of an Author (1921)
Ulysses (1922)
The Waste Land (1922)
The Magic Mountain (1924)
Battleship Potemkin (1925)
The Sun Also Rises (1926)
The Threepenny Opera (1928)
Un Chien Andalou (1929)
Villa Savoye (1931)
The Blue Lotus (1936)
Fallingwater (1936)
Waiting for Godot (1953)








Literature



Guillaume Apollinaire
Djuna Barnes
Tadeusz Borowski
André Breton
Mikhail Bulgakov
Anton Chekhov
Joseph Conrad
Alfred Döblin
E. M. Forster
William Faulkner
Gustave Flaubert
Ford Madox Ford
André Gide
Knut Hamsun
Jaroslav Hašek
Ernest Hemingway
Hermann Hesse
James Joyce
Franz Kafka
Arthur Koestler
D. H. Lawrence
Wyndham Lewis
Thomas Mann
Katherine Mansfield
Filippo Tommaso Marinetti
Guy de Maupassant
Robert Musil
Katherine Anne Porter
Marcel Proust
Gertrude Stein
Italo Svevo
Virginia Woolf








Poetry



Anna Akhmatova
Richard Aldington
W. H. Auden
Charles Baudelaire
Luca Caragiale
Constantine P. Cavafy
Blaise Cendrars
Hart Crane
H.D.
Robert Desnos
T. S. Eliot
Paul Éluard
Odysseas Elytis
F. S. Flint
Stefan George
Max Jacob
Federico García Lorca
Amy Lowell
Robert Lowell
Mina Loy
Stéphane Mallarmé
Marianne Moore
Wilfred Owen
Octavio Paz
Fernando Pessoa
Ezra Pound
Lionel Richard
Rainer Maria Rilke
Arthur Rimbaud
Giorgos Seferis
Wallace Stevens
Dylan Thomas
Tristan Tzara
Paul Valéry
William Carlos Williams
W. B. Yeats








Visual art



Josef Albers
Jean Arp
Balthus
George Bellows
Umberto Boccioni
Pierre Bonnard
Georges Braque
Constantin Brâncuși
Alexander Calder
Charles Camoin
Mary Cassatt
Paul Cézanne
Marc Chagall
Giorgio de Chirico
Camille Claudel
Joseph Cornell
Joseph Csaky
Salvador Dalí
Edgar Degas
Raoul Dufy
Othon Friesz
Willem de Kooning
Robert Delaunay
Charles Demuth
Otto Dix
Theo van Doesburg
Marcel Duchamp
James Ensor
Max Ernst
Jacob Epstein
Paul Gauguin
Alberto Giacometti
Vincent van Gogh
Natalia Goncharova
Julio González
Juan Gris
George Grosz
Raoul Hausmann
Hannah Höch
Edward Hopper
Frida Kahlo
Wassily Kandinsky
Ernst Ludwig Kirchner
Paul Klee
Oskar Kokoschka
Pyotr Konchalovsky
Aristarkh Lentulov
André Lhote
Fernand Léger
Franz Marc
Albert Marque
Ilya Mashkov
Jean Marchand
René Magritte
Kazimir Malevich
Édouard Manet
Henri Matisse
Colin McCahon
Jean Metzinger
Joan Miró
Amedeo Modigliani
Piet Mondrian
Claude Monet
Henry Moore
Edvard Munch
Emil Nolde
Georgia O'Keeffe
Méret Oppenheim
Henri Ottmann
Francis Picabia
Pablo Picasso
Camille Pissarro
Man Ray
Odilon Redon
Pierre-Auguste Renoir
Auguste Rodin
Henri Rousseau
Egon Schiele
René Schützenberger
Georges Seurat
Paul Signac
Alfred Sisley
Edward Steichen
Alfred Stieglitz
Henriette Tirman
Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec
Louis Valtat
Édouard Vuillard
Grant Wood








Music



George Antheil
Milton Babbitt
Jean Barraqué
Alban Berg
Luciano Berio
Nadia Boulanger
Pierre Boulez
John Cage
Elliott Carter
Aaron Copland
Henry Cowell
Henri Dutilleux
Morton Feldman
Henryk Gorecki
Josef Matthias Hauer
Paul Hindemith
Arthur Honegger
Charles Ives
Leoš Janáček
György Ligeti
Witold Lutosławski
Olivier Messiaen
Luigi Nono
Harry Partch
Krzysztof Penderecki
Sergei Prokofiev
Luigi Russolo
Erik Satie
Pierre Schaeffer
Arnold Schoenberg
Dmitri Shostakovich
Richard Strauss
Igor Stravinsky
Edgard Varèse
Anton Webern
Kurt Weill
Iannis Xenakis








Theatre



Edward Albee
Maxwell Anderson
Jean Anouilh
Antonin Artaud
Samuel Beckett
Bertolt Brecht
Anton Chekhov
Friedrich Dürrenmatt
Jean Genet
Maxim Gorky
Walter Hasenclever
Henrik Ibsen
William Inge
Eugène Ionesco
Alfred Jarry
Georg Kaiser
Maurice Maeterlinck
Vladimir Mayakovsky
Arthur Miller
Seán O'Casey
Eugene O'Neill
John Osborne
Luigi Pirandello
Erwin Piscator
George Bernard Shaw
August Strindberg
John Millington Synge
Ernst Toller
Frank Wedekind
Thornton Wilder
Stanisław Ignacy Witkiewicz








Film



Ingmar Bergman
Anton Giulio Bragaglia
Luis Buñuel
Marcel Carné
Charlie Chaplin
René Clair
Jean Cocteau
Maya Deren
Alexander Dovzhenko
Carl Theodor Dreyer
Viking Eggeling
Sergei Eisenstein
Jean Epstein
Robert J. Flaherty
Abel Gance
Isidore Isou
Buster Keaton
Lev Kuleshov
Fritz Lang
Marcel L'Herbier
Georges Méliès
F. W. Murnau
Georg Wilhelm Pabst
Vsevolod Pudovkin
Jean Renoir
Walter Ruttmann
Victor Sjöström
Josef von Sternberg
Dziga Vertov
Jean Vigo
Robert Wiene








Dance



George Balanchine
Merce Cunningham
Clotilde von Derp
Sergei Diaghilev
Isadora Duncan
Michel Fokine
Loie Fuller
Martha Graham
Hanya Holm
Doris Humphrey
Léonide Massine
Vaslav Nijinsky
Alwin Nikolais
Alexander Sakharoff
Ted Shawn
Anna Sokolow
Ruth St. Denis
Helen Tamiris
Charles Weidman
Mary Wigman








Architecture



Alvar Aalto
Marcel Breuer
Gordon Bunshaft
Antoni Gaudí
Walter Gropius
Hector Guimard
Raymond Hood
Victor Horta
Friedensreich Hundertwasser
Philip Johnson
Louis Kahn
Le Corbusier
Adolf Loos
Konstantin Melnikov
Erich Mendelsohn
Pier Luigi Nervi
Richard Neutra
Oscar Niemeyer
Hans Poelzig
Antonin Raymond
Gerrit Rietveld
Eero Saarinen
Rudolf Steiner
Edward Durell Stone
Louis Sullivan
Vladimir Tatlin
Paul Troost
Jørn Utzon
Ludwig Mies van der Rohe
Frank Lloyd Wright








Related articles



American modernism
Armory Show
Art Deco
Art Nouveau
Ashcan School
Avant-garde
Ballets Russes
Bauhaus
Buddhist modernism
Constructivism
Cubism
Dada
Degenerate art
De Stijl
Der Blaue Reiter
Die Brücke
Expressionism
Expressionist music
Fauvism
Fourth dimension in art
Fourth dimension in literature
Futurism
Imagism
Impressionism
International Style
Late modernism
Late modernity
Lettrism
List of art movements
List of avant-garde artists
List of modernist poets
Lyrical abstraction
Minimalism
Modern art
Modernity
Neo-Dada
Neo-primitivism
New Objectivity
Orphism
Post-Impressionism
Postminimalism
Postmodernism
Reactionary modernism
Metamodernism
Remodernism
Romanticism
Second Viennese School
Structural film
Surrealism
Symbolism
Synchromism
Tonalism
















v
t
e


Avant-garde movements






Visual art



Abstract expressionism
Art Nouveau
Conceptual art
Cubism
Proto-Cubism
Cubo-Futurism
De Stijl
Devětsil
Divisionism
Ego-Futurism
Fauvism
Impressionism
Neo-Impressionism
Post-Impressionism
Color Field
Lyrical Abstraction
Incoherents
Minimalism
Mail art
Neue Slowenische Kunst
Nonconformism
Pop art
Rayonism
Suprematism
Vorticism
Nouveau réalisme








Music



Aleatoric music
Ars subtilior
Atonal music
Avant-garde jazz
Avant-garde metal
Avant-prog
Drone music
Electroacoustic music
Electronic music
Experimental rock
Free jazz
Futurism (music)
Industrial music
Krautrock
Microtonal music
Minimal music
Musique concrète
New Complexity
No wave
Noise music
Post-rock
Progressive rock
Rock in Opposition
Second Viennese School
Serialism
Spectral music
Stochastic music
Textural music
Totalism
Twelve-tone technique








Literature and poetry



Acmeist poetry
Angry Penguins
Asemic writing
Cyberpunk
Experimental literature
Flarf poetry
Hungry generation
Imaginism
Language poets
Neoteric
Oberiu
Oulipo
Ultraísmo
Visual poetry
Nouveau roman








Cinema and theatre



Cinéma pur
Dogme 95
Drop Art
Epic theatre
Remodernist film
Theatre of the Absurd
Theatre of Cruelty








General



Bauhaus
Dada
Expressionism
Fluxus
Futurism
Lettrism
Modernism
Minimalism
Postminimalism
Neo-minimalism
Neo-Dada
Neoism
Postmodernism
Late modernism
Primitivism
Russian Futurism
Russian symbolism
Situationist International
Social realism
Socialist realism
Surrealism
Symbolism









 Book














v
t
e


Art movements






Medieval



Byzantine
Merovingian
Carolingian
Ottonian
Romanesque
Gothic (International Gothic)








Renaissance



Early Netherlandish
High Renaissance
Mannerism








17th century



Baroque
Caravaggisti
Classicism
Dutch Golden Age








18th century



Rococo
Neoclassicism
Romanticism








19th century



Nazarene
Realism / Realism
Historicism
Biedermeier
Gründerzeit
Barbizon school
Pre-Raphaelites
Academic
Aestheticism
Decadent
Macchiaioli
Art Nouveau
Peredvizhniki
Impressionism
Post-Impressionism
Neo-impressionism
Divisionism
Pointillism
Cloisonnism
Les Nabis
Synthetism
Kalighat painting
Symbolism
Hudson River School








20th century



Bengal School of Art
Amazonian pop art
Cubism
Orphism
Purism
Synchromism
Expressionism
Scuola Romana
Abstract expressionism
Kinetic art
Neue Künstlervereinigung München
Der Blaue Reiter
Die Brücke
New Objectivity
Dada
Fauvism
Neo-Fauvism
Precisionism
Bauhaus
De Stijl
Art Deco
Op art
Vienna School of Fantastic Realism
Pop art
Photorealism
Futurism
Metaphysical art
Rayonism
Vorticism
Suprematism
Surrealism
Color Field
Minimalism
Minimalism (visual arts)
Nouveau réalisme
Social realism
Lyrical abstraction
Tachisme
COBRA
Action painting
International Typographic Style
Fluxus
Lettrism
Letterist International
Situationist International
Conceptual art
Installation art
Land art
Performance art
Endurance art
Systems art
Video art
Neo-expressionism
Neo-Dada
Outsider art
Lowbrow
New media art
Young British Artists








21st century



Art intervention
Hyperrealism
Neo-futurism
Stuckism International
Remodernism
Sound art
Superstroke
Superflat
Relational art
Video game art








Related articles



List of art movements
Modern art
Modernism
Late modernism
Postmodern art
Avant-garde
















v
t
e


Claude Monet






Works



List of works
Women in the Garden (1866)
Garden at Sainte-Adresse (1867)
Regatta at Sainte-Adresse (1867)
L'Enfant a la tasse (1868)
The Magpie (1868)
Bain à la Grenouillère (1869)
Impression, Sunrise (1872)
Springtime (1872)
Boulevard des Capucines (1873)
Snow at Argenteuil (1875)
Woman with a Parasol - Madame Monet and Her Son (1875)
Bords de la Seine à Argenteuil (1875)
Beach in Pourville (1882)
The Cliff Walk at Pourville (1882)
Stormy Sea in Étretat (1883)
Boating on the River Epte (1890)
San Giorgio Maggiore at Dusk (1908)
Le Bassin Aux Nymphéas (1919)
Water Lilies (1919)











Painting series



Haystacks (1890–91)
Poplars (1891)
Rouen Cathedral (1892–94)
Charing Cross Bridge (1899–1904)
Houses of Parliament (1900–05)
Water Lilies








Movement



Impressionism








People



Camille Doncieux (first wife)
Alice Hoschedé (second wife)
Suzanne Hoschedé (step-daughter)
Blanche Hoschedé Monet (step-daughter and daughter-in law)
Jean Monet (son b.1867)
Michel Monet (son b.1878)
Theodore Earl Butler (son-in law who married Monet's
step-daughters, Suzanne and Marthe)
Jacques-François Ochard (teacher)
Eugène Boudin (teacher)
Ernest Hoschedé (patron)
Paul Durand-Ruel (dealer)








Places



Giverny
Musée de l'Orangerie
Musée d'Orsay
Musée Marmottan Monet















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Impressionism&amp;oldid=691556001"					
				Categories: ImpressionismArt movementsFrench artHidden categories: Commons category with local link different than on WikidataArticles which contain graphical timelines				
							
		
		
			