


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Installation art
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				



Rachel Whiteread, Embankment at Tate Modern, London


Installation art is an artistic genre of three-dimensional works that are often site-specific and designed to transform the perception of a space. Generally, the term is applied to interior spaces, whereas exterior interventions are often called public art, land art or intervention art; however, the boundaries between these terms overlap.



Contents


1 History
2 Installation
3 Gesamtkunstwerk
4 Art and Objecthood
5 Interactive installations
6 Immersive virtual reality
7 Gallery
8 See also
9 Notes
10 Bibliography
11 External links



History[edit]




A golf ball of enormous proportions alongside the antennas at an altitude of 5000 meters above sea level.[1]


Installation art can be either temporary or permanent. Installation artworks have been constructed in exhibition spaces such as museums and galleries, as well as public and private spaces. The genre incorporates a broad range of everyday and natural materials, which are often chosen for their "evocative" qualities, as well as new media such as video, sound, performance, immersive virtual reality and the internet. Many installations are site-specific in that they are designed to exist only in the space for which they were created, appealing to qualities evident in a three-dimensional immersive medium. Artistic collectives such as the Exhibition Lab at New York's American Museum of Natural History created environments to showcase the natural world in as realistic a medium as possible. Likewise, Walt Disney Imagineering employed a similar philosophy when designing the multiple immersive spaces for Disneyland in 1955. Since its acceptance as a separate discipline, a number of institutions focusing on Installation art were created. These included the Mattress Factory, Pittsburgh, the Museum of Installation in London, and the Fairy Doors of Ann Arbor, MI, among others.
Installation art came to prominence in the 1970s but its roots can be identified in earlier artists such as Marcel Duchamp and his use of the readymade and Kurt Schwitters' Merz art objects, rather than more traditional craft based sculpture. The "intention" of the artist is paramount in much later installation art whose roots lie in the conceptual art of the 1960s. This again is a departure from traditional sculpture which places its focus on form. Early non-Western installation art includes events staged by the Gutai group in Japan starting in 1954, which influenced American installation pioneers like Allan Kaprow. Wolf Vostell shows his installation 6 TV Dé-coll/age in 1963[2] at the Smolin Gallery in New York.
Installation[edit]




Allan McCollum.The Shapes Project, 2005/06


Installation as nomenclature for a specific form of art came into use fairly recently; its first use as documented by the Oxford English Dictionary was in 1969. It was coined in this context, in reference to a form of art that had arguably existed since prehistory but was not regarded as a discrete category until the mid-twentieth century. Allan Kaprow used the term “Environment” in 1958 (Kaprow 6) to describe his transformed indoor spaces; this later joined such terms as “project art” and “temporary art.”
Essentially, installation/environmental art takes into account a broader sensory experience, rather than floating framed points of focus on a “neutral” wall or displaying isolated objects (literally) on a pedestal. This may leave space and time as its only dimensional constants, implying dissolution of the line between "art" and "life"; Kaprow noted that “if we bypass ‘art’ and take nature itself as a model or point of departure, we may be able to devise a different kind of art... out of the sensory stuff of ordinary life” (Kaprow 12).
Gesamtkunstwerk[edit]
The conscious act of artistically addressing all the senses with regard to a total experience made a resounding debut in 1849 when Richard Wagner conceived of a Gesamtkunstwerk, or an operatic work for the stage that drew inspiration from ancient Greek theater in its inclusion of all the major art forms: painting, writing, music, etc. (Britannica). In devising operatic works to commandeer the audience’s senses, Wagner left nothing unobserved: architecture, ambience, and even the audience itself were considered and manipulated in order to achieve a state of total artistic immersion. In the book "Themes in Contemporary Art", it is suggested that “installations in the 1980s and 1990s were increasingly characterized by networks of operations involving the interaction among complex architectural settings, environmental sites and extensive use of everyday objects in ordinary contexts. With the advent of video in 1965, a concurrent strand of installation evolved through the use of new and ever-changing technologies, and what had been simple video installations expanded to include complex interactive, multimedia and virtual reality environments”(Themes, 199).
Art and Objecthood[edit]




Guardians of Time, Manfred Kielnhofer, Festival of Lights (Berlin) French Cathedral, Berlin, Velotaxi 2011


In “Art and Objecthood,” Michael Fried derisively labels art that acknowledges the viewer as “theatrical” (Fried 45). There is a strong parallel between installation and theater: both play to a viewer who is expected to be at once immersed in the sensory/narrative experience that surrounds him and maintain a degree of self-identity as a viewer. The traditional theater-goer does not forget that he has come in from outside to sit and take in a created experience; a trademark of installation art has been the curious and eager viewer, still aware that he is in an exhibition setting and tentatively exploring the novel universe of the installation.
The artist and critic Ilya Kabakov mentions this essential phenomenon in the introduction to his lectures “On the “Total” Installation:” “[One] is simultaneously both a ‘victim’ and a viewer, who on the one hand surveys and evaluates the installation, and on the other, follows those associations, recollections which arise in him[;] he is overcome by the intense atmosphere of the total illusion” (Kabakov 256). Here installation art bestows an unprecedented importance on the observer’s inclusion in that which he observes. The expectations and social habits that the viewer takes with him into the space of the installation will remain with him as he enters, to be either applied or negated once he has taken in the new environment. What is common to nearly all installation art is a consideration of the experience in toto and the problems it may present, namely the constant conflict between disinterested criticism and sympathetic involvement. Television and video offer somewhat immersive experiences, but their unrelenting control over the rhythm of passing time and the arrangement of images precludes an intimately personal viewing experience (Kabakov 257). Ultimately, the only things a viewer can be assured of when experiencing the work are his own thoughts and preconceptions and the basic rules of space and time. All else may be molded by the artist’s hands.
The central importance of the subjective point of view when experiencing installation art, points toward a disregard for traditional Platonic image theory. In effect, the entire installation adopts the character of the simulacrum or flawed statue: it neglects any ideal form in favor of optimizing its direct appearance to the observer. Installation art operates fully within the realm of sensory perception, in a sense “installing” the viewer into an artificial system with an appeal to his subjective perception as its ultimate goal.
Interactive installations[edit]




An urban interactive art installation by Maurizio Bolognini (Genoa, 2005), which everybody can modify by using a cell phone.


Interactive installation is a sub-category of installation art. An interactive installation frequently involves the audience acting on the work of art or the piece responding to users' activity.[3] There are several kinds of interactive installations that artists produce, these include web-based installations (e.g., Telegarden), gallery-based installations, digital-based installations, electronic-based installations, mobile-based installations, etc. Interactive installations appeared mostly at end of the 1980s (Legible City by Jeffrey Shaw, La plume by Edmond Couchot, Michel Bret...) and became a genre during the 1990s, when artists became particularly interested in using the participation of the audiences to activate and reveal the meaning of the installation.
Immersive virtual reality[edit]
With the improvement of technology over the years, artists are more able to explore outside of the boundaries that were never able to be explored by artists in the past.[4] The media used are more experimental and bold; they are also usually cross media and may involve sensors, which plays on the reaction to the audiences’ movement when looking at the installations. By using virtual reality as a medium, immersive virtual reality art is probably the most deeply interactive form of art.[5] By allowing the spectator to "visit" the representation, the artist creates "situations to live" vs "spectacle to watch".[6] At the turn of a new century, there is a trend of interactive installations using digital, video, film, sound and sculpture.
Gallery[edit]







Marcel Duchamp, Fountain, 1917. Photograph by Alfred Stieglitz.









Carsten Höller. Test Site, Tate Modern, 2006. Members of public slid down as much as five stories inside tubular slides.









Jacek Tylicki, Give if you can - Take if you have to. In the jungle, Arambol, Goa, India.









Eberhard Bosslet, Anmaßend I, documenta 8, Kassel, Germany 1987









Maurice Benayoun, Neorizon, urban interactive art installation, eArts Festival Shanghai, 2008.









Pascal Dombis, Irrationnal Geometrics, 2008.









Milton Becerra Ale'ya Durban Segnini Gallery Miami 2009.[7]









My Inner Beast, sculpture by the Danish artist Jens Galschiøt. Exhibited in twenty cities across Europe without permission of the authorities.




See also[edit]

Appropriation (art)
Art intervention
Classificatory disputes about art
Conceptual art
Environmental sculpture
Found art
Interactive art
Modern art
Neo-conceptual art
Performance art
Sound art
Sound installation
Street installations
Video installation

Notes[edit]


^ "Artistic Apparition at ALMA". Retrieved 29 June 2015.&#160;
^ Wolf Vostell, 6 TV Dé-coll/age, 1963
^ Younis, Lauren (March 5, 2009). "Hearts and Scissors Exhibit to Open". Retrieved 23 November 2014. “Installation art can facilitate a direct, immediate interaction with the viewer,” [Cindy] Hinant said.&#160;
^ Joseph Nechvatal, Immersive Ideals / Critical Distances. LAP Lambert Academic Publishing. 2009, p. 14
^ Joseph Nechvatal, Immersive Ideals / Critical Distances. LAP Lambert Academic Publishing. 2009, pp. 367-368
^ Maurice Benayoun, Maurice Benayoun Open Art, Nouvelles éditions Scala, 2011, French version, ISBN 978-2-35988-046-5
^ Milton Becerra Book Analysis of a process over time - 2007 - ISBN 980-6472-21-7


Bibliography[edit]

Bishop, Claire. Installation Art a Critical History. London: Tate, 2005.
Coulter-Smith, Graham. Deconstructing Installation Art. Online resource
Fried, Michael. Art and Objecthood. In Art and Objecthood: Essays and Reviews. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998.
“Installation [Environment].Grove Art Encyclopedia. 2006. Grove Art Online. 30 January 2006 [1].
“Installation.” Oxford English Dictionary. 2006. Oxford English Dictionary Online. 30 January 2006 [2].
“Install, v.” Oxford English Dictionary. 2006. Oxford English Dictionary Online. 30 January 2006 [3].
Timothy Murray, Derrick de Kerckhove, Oliver Grau, Kristine Stiles, Jean-Baptiste Barrière, Dominique Moulon, Jean-Pierre Balpe, Maurice Benayoun Open Art, Nouvelles éditions Scala, 2011, French version, ISBN 978-2-35988-046-5
Kabakov, Ilya. On the “Total” Installation. Ostfildern, Germany: Cantz, 1995, 243-260.
Kaprow, Allan. “Notes on the Creation of a Total Art.” In Essays on the Blurring of Art and Life, ed. Jeff Kelley. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2003. ISBN 0-520-24079-0
Mondloch, Kate. Screens: Viewing Media Installation Art. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2010. ISBN 978-0-8166-6522-8
Joseph Nechvatal, Immersive Ideals / Critical Distances. LAP Lambert Academic Publishing. 2009.
Oliver Grau Virtual Art, from Illusion to Immersion, MIT Press 2004, ISBN 0-262-57223-0
"opera." Britannica Student Encyclopedia. 2006. Encyclopædia Britannica Online. 15 February 2006 [4].
Reiss, Julie H. From Margin to Center: The Spaces of Installation Art. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001. ISBN 0-262-68134-X
Rosenthal, Mark. Understanding Installation Art: From Duchamp to Holzer. Munich: Prestel Verlag, 2003. ISBN 3-7913-2984-7
Suderburg, Erika. Space, Site, Intervention: Situating Installation Art. Minneapolis London: University of Minnesota Press, 2000. ISBN 0-8166-3159-X
Ferriani, Barbara. Ephemeral Monuments: History and Conservation of Installation Art. Los Angeles: Getty Publications, 2013. ISBN 978-1-60606-134-3

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Installation art.







This article's use of external links may not follow Wikipedia's policies or guidelines. Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links, and converting useful links where appropriate into footnote references. (January 2015)



Dossier: Site-specific Installations in Germany
Installation artists and art...the-artists.org
Installation artists at DMOZ
Museum of Installation (London): Interview with directors Nico de Oliveira &amp; Nicola Oxley (2008). Sculpture / artdesigncafe.
Public Art Installation Of Paul Kuniholm Pauper
Sculpture Installations at DMOZ
Installation art definition from the Tate Art Glossary


Contemporary installation organizations and museums


Dia-Beacon Riggio Galleries
The Massachusetts Museum of Contemporary Art
The Mattress Factory Art Museum
Medicine Factory
MuseumZeitraum Leipzig


Installation art


Electronic Language International Festival Interactive art installations and New media art.
Media art center, Karlsruhe Germany one of the biggest center with a permanent collection of interactive installations.






Authority control



NDL: 01159407















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Installation_art&amp;oldid=683129110"					
				Categories: Installation artContemporary artArt movementsArt genresHidden categories: Commons category with local link same as on WikidataWikipedia external links cleanup from January 2015Wikipedia spam cleanup from January 2015Articles with DMOZ links				
							
		
		
			