


		
		
		
			

							
						

			International Typographic Style
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				



Akzidenz-Grotesk designed in 1896 for the H. Berthold AG type foundry. The face was a hallmark of the modernist Swiss Style.


The International Typographic Style, also known as the Swiss Style, is a graphic design style developed in Switzerland in the 1950s that emphasizes cleanliness, readability and objectivity.[1] Hallmarks of the style are asymmetric layouts, use of a grid, sans-serif typefaces like Akzidenz Grotesk, and flush left, ragged right text. The style is also associated with a preference for photography in place of illustrations or drawings. Many of the early International Typographic Style works featured typography as a primary design element in addition to its use in text, and it is for this that the style is named.[2][3]



Contents


1 History
2 Characteristics of style
3 See also
4 References
5 Further reading
6 External links



History[edit]
Two major Swiss design schools are responsible for the early years of International Typographic Style. A graphic design technique based on grid-work that began in the 19th century became inspiration for modifying the foundational course at the School of Design in 1908. Shortly thereafter, in 1918 Ernst Keller became a professor at the Zurich School of the Applied Arts (Kunstgewerbeschule) and began developing a graphic design and typography course. He did not teach a specific style to his students, rather he taught a philosophy of style that dictated “the solution to the design problem should emerge from its content.”[4] Keller’s work uses simple geometric forms, vibrant colors and evocative imagery to further elucidate the meaning behind each design. Other early pioneers include Théo Ballmer and Max Bill.
The 1950s saw the distillation of International Typographic Style elements into sans-serif font families such as Univers. Univers paved the way for Max Miedinger and collaborator Edouard Hoffman to design the typeface Neue Haas Grotesk, which would be later renamed Helvetica. The movement began to coalesce after a periodical publication began in 1959 titled New Graphic Design, which was edited by several influential designers who played major roles in the development of International Typographic Style. The format of the journal represented many of the important elements of the style--visually demonstrating the content—and was published internationally, thus spreading the movement beyond Switzerland’s borders. One of the editors, Josef Müller-Brockmann, “sought an absolute and universal form of graphic expression through objective and impersonal presentation, communicating to the audience without the interference of the designer’s subjective feelings or propagandistic techniques of persuasion.”[5] Many of Müller-Brockmann’s feature large photographs as objective symbols meant to convey his ideas in particularly clear and powerful ways.
After World War II international trade began to increase and relations between countries grew steadily stronger. Typography and design were crucial to helping these relationships progress—clarity, objectivity, region-less glyphs, and symbols are essential to communication between international partners. International Typographic Style found its niche in this communicative climate and expanded further beyond Switzerland, to America.
One of the first American designers to integrate Swiss design with his own was Rudolph de Harak.[6] The influence of International Typographic Style on deHarak’s own works can be seen in his many book jacket designs for McGraw-Hill publishers in the 1960s. Each jacket shows the book title and author, often aligned with a grid—flush left, ragged-right. One striking image covers most of the jacket, elucidating the theme of the particular book. International Typographic Style was embraced by corporations and institutions in America from the 1960s on, for almost two decades. One institution particularly devoted to the style was MIT.[7]
Characteristics of style[edit]
Each design done with International Typographic Style in mind begins with a mathematical grid, because a grid is the “most legible and harmonious means for structuring information.”[8] Text is then applied, most often aligned flush left, ragged right. Fonts chosen for the text are sans serif, a type style believed to “[express] the spirit of a more progressive age” by early designers in the movement.[9] Objective photography is another design element meant to present information clearly, and without any of the persuading influences of propaganda or commercial advertising. Such a strong focus on order and clarity is drawn from early pioneers of the movement believing that design is a “socially useful and important activity... the designers define their roles not as artists but as objective conduites for spreading important information between components of society.” [10]
See also[edit]

International style (architecture)
Helvetica
Max Bill
Adrian Frutiger
Armin Hofmann
Richard Paul Lohse
Josef Müller-Brockmann
Paul Rand
Emil Ruder
Jan Tschichold

References[edit]


^ Encyclopædia Britannica, International Typographic Style
^ Encyclopædia Britannica, Arts &amp; Entertainment: graphic design, THE INTERNATIONAL TYPOGRAPHIC STYLE
^ International Poster Gallery
^ Meggs, P. B., Purvis, A. W., &amp; Meggs, P. B.. Meggs' History of Graphic Design. John Wiley &amp; Sons, Inc., 2006, p. 356.
^ Meggs, P. B., Purvis, A. W., &amp; Meggs, P. B.. Meggs' History of Graphic Design. John Wiley &amp; Sons, Inc., 2006, p. 364.
^ Meggs, P. B., Purvis, A. W., &amp; Meggs, P. B.. Meggs' History of Graphic Design. John Wiley &amp; Sons, Inc., 2006, p. 370.
^ Meggs, P. B., Purvis, A. W., &amp; Meggs, P. B.. Meggs' History of Graphic Design. John Wiley &amp; Sons, Inc., 2006, p. 372.
^ Meggs, P. B., Purvis, A. W., &amp; Meggs, P. B.. Meggs' History of Graphic Design. John Wiley &amp; Sons, Inc., 2006, p. 356.
^ Meggs, P. B., Purvis, A. W., &amp; Meggs, P. B.. Meggs' History of Graphic Design. John Wiley &amp; Sons, Inc., 2006, p. 356.
^ Meggs, P. B., Purvis, A. W., &amp; Meggs, P. B.. Meggs' History of Graphic Design. John Wiley &amp; Sons, Inc., 2006, p. 356.


Further reading[edit]

Fiedl, Frederich, Nicholas Ott and Bernard Stein. Typography: An Encyclopedic Survey of Type Design and Techniques Through History. Black Dog &amp; Leventhal: 1998. ISBN 1-57912-023-7.
Hollis, Richard. Swiss Graphic Design: The Origins and Growth of an International Style, 1920-1965. Yale University Press: 2006. ISBN 0-300-10676-9.
Müller-Brockmann, Josef. Grid Systems in Graphic Design. Niggli: 1996. ISBN 3-7212-0145-0.
Ruder, Emil. Typography. Hastings House: 1981. ISBN 0-8038-7223-2.


External links[edit]

internationalposter.com - International Typographic Style
International Style / Swiss Style Color Palette









v
t
e


Art movements






Medieval



Byzantine
Merovingian
Carolingian
Ottonian
Romanesque
Gothic (International Gothic)








Renaissance



Early Netherlandish
High Renaissance
Mannerism








17th century



Baroque
Caravaggisti
Classicism
Dutch Golden Age








18th century



Rococo
Neoclassicism
Romanticism








19th century



Nazarene
Realism / Realism
Historicism
Biedermeier
Gründerzeit
Barbizon school
Pre-Raphaelites
Academic
Aestheticism
Decadent
Macchiaioli
Art Nouveau
Peredvizhniki
Impressionism
Post-Impressionism
Neo-impressionism
Divisionism
Pointillism
Cloisonnism
Les Nabis
Synthetism
Kalighat painting
Symbolism
Hudson River School








20th century



Bengal School of Art
Amazonian pop art
Cubism
Orphism
Purism
Synchromism
Expressionism
Scuola Romana
Abstract expressionism
Kinetic art
Neue Künstlervereinigung München
Der Blaue Reiter
Die Brücke
New Objectivity
Dada
Fauvism
Neo-Fauvism
Precisionism
Bauhaus
De Stijl
Art Deco
Op art
Vienna School of Fantastic Realism
Pop art
Photorealism
Futurism
Metaphysical art
Rayonism
Vorticism
Suprematism
Surrealism
Color Field
Minimalism
Minimalism (visual arts)
Nouveau réalisme
Social realism
Lyrical abstraction
Tachisme
COBRA
Action painting
International Typographic Style
Fluxus
Lettrism
Letterist International
Situationist International
Conceptual art
Installation art
Land art
Performance art
Endurance art
Systems art
Video art
Neo-expressionism
Neo-Dada
Outsider art
Lowbrow
New media art
Young British Artists








21st century



Art intervention
Hyperrealism
Neo-futurism
Stuckism International
Remodernism
Sound art
Superstroke
Superflat
Relational art
Video game art








Related articles



List of art movements
Modern art
Modernism
Late modernism
Postmodern art
Avant-garde












This art movement-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.


v
t
e








This communication design-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.


v
t
e












					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=International_Typographic_Style&amp;oldid=686938883"					
				Categories: Art movementsSwiss artGraphic designCommunication designModern artArt movement stubsDesign stubsCommunication stubsHidden categories: All stub articles				
							
		
		
			