


		
		
		
			

							
						

			La Tène culture
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								  (Redirected from La Tene)
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				For the municipality in Neuchâtel for which the culture is named, see La Tène, Neuchâtel.





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2012)






Overview of the Hallstatt and La Tène cultures. The core Hallstatt territory (800 BCE) is shown in solid yellow, the area of influence by 500 BCE (HaD) in light yellow. The core territory of the La Tène culture (450 BCE) is shown in solid green, the eventual area of La Tène influence by 50 BCE in light green. The territories of some major Celtic tribes are labelled. Map drawn after Atlas of the Celtic World, by John Haywood (2001: 30–37).



La Tène culture

Geographical range
Europe


Period
Iron Age Europe


Dates
circa 500 BCE. — circa 1 BCE


Type site
La Tène, Neuchâtel


Preceded by
Hallstatt culture


Followed by
Roman Empire




Iron Age
This box:

view
talk
edit





↑ Bronze Age



Bronze Age collapse
Ancient Near East (1200 BC – 500 BC)

Anatolia, Assyria, Caucasus, Cyprus, Egypt, Levant, Neo-Babylonian Empire, Persia

India (1200 BC – 200 BC)

Painted Grey Ware
Northern Black Polished Ware
Mauryan period
Anuradhapura Kingdom - Sri Lanka

Europe (1200 BC – 1 BC)

Aegean
Caucasus
Novocherkassk
Hallstatt C
La Tène C
Villanovan C
British Iron Age
Dacia, Transylvania, Southeastern Europe
Greece, Rome, Celts
Scandinavia

China (600 BC – 200 BC)

Spring and Autumn period and Warring States period

Japan (100 BC – 300 AD)

Yayoi period

Korea (400 BC – 400 AD)

Late Gojoseon period
Proto-Three Kingdoms period

Sub-Saharan Africa (1000 BC – 800 AD)

Nok
Djenné-Djenno
Igbo-Ukwu





Axial Age
Classical antiquity
Zhou dynasty
Vedic period
Alphabetic writing
Metallurgy



↓ Ancient history


Historiography

Greek, Roman, Chinese, Islamic








Reconstruction of a late La Tène period (1st century BCE) settlement in Altburg near Bundenbach.



Reconstruction of a late La Tène period (2nd/1st century BCE) settlement in Havranok, Slovakia.








A 1st-century BCE mirror found in Desborough, Northants, showing the spiral and trumpet theme.



Vix Grave




The La Tène culture (/ləˈtɛn/; French pronunciation:&#160;​[la tɛn]) was a European Iron Age culture named after the archaeological site of La Tène on the north side of Lake Neuchâtel in Switzerland, where a rich cache of artifacts was discovered by Hansli Kopp in 1857.
La Tène culture developed and flourished during the late Iron Age (from 450 BCE to the Roman conquest in the 1st century BCE) in Belgium, eastern France, Switzerland, Austria, Southern Germany, the Czech Republic, Poland, Slovakia, Slovenia, Hungary and Romania. To the north extended the contemporary Jastorf culture of Northern Germany.[1]
La Tène culture developed out of the early Iron Age Hallstatt culture without any definite cultural break, under the impetus of considerable Mediterranean influence from the Culture of Golasecca,[2] the Greeks in pre-Roman Gaul and the Etruscans.[3] Barry Cunliffe notes localization of La Tène culture during the 5th century when there arose "two zones of power and innovation: a Marne – Moselle zone in the west with trading links to the Po Valley via the central Alpine passes and the Golasecca culture, and a Bohemian zone in the east with separate links to the Adriatic via the eastern Alpine routes and the Venetic culture".[4] A shift of settlement centres took place in the 4th century.
La Tène cultural material appeared over a large area, including parts of Ireland and Great Britain, northern Spain, northern-central Italy,[5] Burgundy, and Austria. Elaborate burials also reveal a wide network of trade. In Vix, France, an elite woman of the 6th century BCE was buried with a very large bronze cauldron made in Greece. Exports from La Tène cultural areas to the Mediterranean cultures were based on salt, tin and copper, amber, wool and leather, furs and gold.



Contents


1 La Tène "homeland"
2 Periodization
3 Ethnology
4 Material culture
5 Discovery
6 Sites
7 Artifacts
8 See also
9 Notes and references
10 Further reading
11 External links



La Tène "homeland"[edit]




The Hallstatt and La Tène Cultures.


Though there is no agreement on the precise region in which La Tène culture first developed, there is a broad consensus that the center of the culture lay on the northwest edges of Hallstatt culture, north of the Alps, within the region between the valleys of the Marne and Moselle in the west and modern Bavaria and Austria in the east. In 1994 a prototypical ensemble of elite grave sites of the early 5th century BCE was excavated at Glauberg in Hesse, northeast of Frankfurt-am-Main, in a region that had formerly been considered peripheral to the La Tène sphere.[6]
From their homeland, La Tène groups expanded in the 4th century to Hispania, Italy, the Balkans, and even as far as Asia Minor, in the course of several major migrations. In the 4th century BCE, a Gallic army led by Brennus reached Rome and took the city. In the 3rd century BCE, Gallic bands entered Greece and threatened the oracle of Delphi, while another band settled Galatia in Asia Minor.
Periodization[edit]
Extensive contacts through trade are recognized in foreign objects deposited in elite burials; stylistic influences on La Tène material culture can be recognized in Etruscan, Italic, Greek, Dacian and Scythian sources. Dateable Greek pottery at La Tène sites analyzed employing dendrochronology and thermoluminescence help provide date ranges in an absolute chronology at some La Tène sites.
As with many archaeological periods, La Tène history was originally divided into "early" (6th century BCE), "middle" (c. 450–100 BCE), and "late" (1st century BCE) stages, with the Roman occupation effectively driving the culture underground and ending its development. A broad cultural unity was not paralleled by overarching social-political unifying structures, and the extent to which the material culture can be linguistically linked is debated.
Ethnology[edit]
Our knowledge of this cultural area derives from three sources: from archaeological evidence, from Greek and Latin literary evidence, and more controversially, from ethnographical evidence suggesting some La Tène artistic and cultural survivals in traditionally Celtic regions of far western Europe. Some of the societies that are archaeologically identified with La Tène material culture were identified by Greek and Roman authors from the 5th century onwards as Keltoi ("Celts") and Galli ("Gauls"). Herodotus (iv.49) correctly placed Keltoi at the source of the Ister/Danube, in the heartland of La Tène material culture: "The Ister flows right across Europe, rising in the country of the Celts", whom however, apparently misunderstanding his source,[7] he places "farthest to the west of any people of Europe"[8]
Whether the usage of classical sources means that the whole of La Tène culture can be attributed to a unified Celtic people is difficult to assess; archaeologists have repeatedly concluded that language, material culture, and political affiliation do not necessarily run parallel. Frey notes (Frey 2004) that in the 5th century, "burial customs in the Celtic world were not uniform; rather, localised groups had their own beliefs, which, in consequence, also gave rise to distinct artistic expressions".
Material culture[edit]
Main article: Celtic art
La Tène metalwork in bronze, iron and gold, developing technologically out of Hallstatt culture, is stylistically characterized by inscribed and inlaid intricate spirals and interlace, on fine bronze vessels, helmets and shields, horse trappings and elite jewelry, especially the neck rings called torcs and elaborate clasps called fibulae. It is characterized by elegant, stylized curvilinear animal and vegetal forms, allied with the Hallstatt traditions of geometric patterning. The Early Style of La Tène art and culture mainly featured static, geometric decoration, while the transition to the Developed Style constituted a shift to movement-based forms, such as triskeles. Some subsets within the Developed Style contain more specific design trends, such as the recurrent serpentine scroll of the Waldalgesheim Style [9]
Initially La Tène folk lived in open settlements that were dominated by the chieftains’ towering hill forts.[10] The development of towns—oppida—appears in mid-La Tène culture. La Tène dwellings were carpenter-built rather than of masonry. La Tène peoples also dug ritual shafts, in which votive offerings and even human sacrifices were cast. Severed heads appear to have held great power and were often represented in carvings. Burial sites included weapons, carts, and both elite and household goods, evoking a strong continuity with an afterlife.
Discovery[edit]
La Tène is a village on the northern shore of Lake Neuchâtel, Switzerland. It is both an archaeological site and the eponymous site for the late Iron Age La Tène culture, also spelt "Latène" or "La-Tène".
In 1857, prolonged drought lowered the waters of the lake by about 2 m. On the northernmost tip of the lake, between the river Thielle and a point south of the village of Marin-Epagnier, Hansli Kopp, looking for antiquities for Colonel Frédéric Schwab, discovered several rows of wooden piles that still reached about 50&#160;cm into the water. From among these, Kopp collected about forty iron swords.
The Swiss archaeologist Ferdinand Keller published his findings in 1868 in his influential first report on the Swiss pile dwellings (Pfahlbaubericht). In 1863 he interpreted the remains as a Celtic village built on piles. Eduard Desor, a geologist from Neuchâtel, started excavations on the lakeshore soon afterwards. He interpreted the site as an armory, erected on piles over the lake and later destroyed by enemy action. Another interpretation accounting for the presence of cast iron swords that had not been sharpened, was of a site of sacrifices.
With the first systematic lowering of the Swiss lakes from 1868 to 1883, the site fell completely dry. In 1880, Emile Vouga, a teacher from Marin-Epagnier, uncovered the wooden remains of two bridges (designated "Pont Desor" and "Pont Vouga") originally over 100 m long, that crossed the little Thielle River (today a nature reserve) and the remains of five houses on the shore. After Vouga had finished, F. Borel, curator of the Marin museum, began to excavate as well. In 1885 the canton asked the Société d'Histoire of Neuchâtel to continue the excavations, the results of which were published by Vouga in the same year.
All in all, over 2500 objects, mainly made from metal, have been excavated in La Tène. Weapons predominate, there being 166 swords (most without traces of wear), 270 lanceheads, and 22 shield bosses, along with 385 brooches, tools, and parts of chariots. Numerous human and animal bones were found as well.
Interpretations of the site vary. Some scholars believe the bridge was destroyed by high water, while others see it as a place of sacrifice after a successful battle (there are almost no female ornaments).
An exhibition marking the 150th anniversary of the discovery of the La Tène site was launched in June 2007 at the Musée Schwab in Bienne, Switzerland. It was scheduled to move to Zürich in 2008 and the Mont Beuvray in Burgundy in 2009.
Sites[edit]
Some sites are:




La Tène, Marin-Epagnier
Bern, Engehalbinsel: oppidum
Jolimont
Manching: oppidum
Mormont
Münsingen, burial field
Petinesca
Basel oppidum
Bibracte, oppidum of the Aedui at Mont Beuvray in Burgundy
Erstfeld hoard
Hochdorf Chieftain's Grave
Turicum–Lindenhof
Bopfingen: Viereckschanze, a characteristic rectangular enclosure




Fellbach-Schmiden, near Stuttgart: Viereckschanze; ritual objects recovered from a well
Kleinaspergle: elite graves of La Tène I
Waldalgesheim chariot burial: an elite chariot burial, 4th century
Glauberg, oppidum and elite graves
Dürrnberg near Hallein: Burial field and earthworks of late Hallstatt–early La Tène
Donnersberg: oppidum
Vill near Innsbruck: remains of dwellings
Sandberg Celtic city near Platt and Roseldorf in Lower Austria
Vix/Mont Lassois: oppidum and elaborate graves
Titelberg: oppidum in Luxembourg
Reinheim: Tomb of a princess/priestess with burial gifts




Artifacts[edit]
Some outstanding La Tène artifacts are:

The Strettweg Cart (7th century BCE), found in southeast Austria, a four-wheeled cart with a goddess, riders with axes and shields, attendants and stags. (Landesmuseum Johanneum, Graz, Austria)
A woman in Vix (Châtillon-sur-Seine, Burgundy) buried with an 1100-litre (290 gallon) bronze krater, the largest ever found.
The silver "Gundestrup cauldron" (3rd or 2nd century BCE), found ritually broken in a peat bog near Gundestrup, Denmark, but probably made near the Black Sea, perhaps in Thrace. (National Museum of Denmark, Copenhagen)
"Battersea Shield" (350–50 BCE), found in the Thames, made of bronze with red enamel. (British Museum, London)
"Witham Shield" (4th century BCE). (British Museum, London) [11][12]
"Chertsey Shield (400–200 BCE). (British Museum, London) [13]
"Turoe stone" in Galway, Ireland
Chariot burial found at Waldalgesheim, Bad Kreuznach, Germany, late 4th century BCE. (Rheinisches Landesmuseum Bonn)
Chariot burial found at La Gorge Meillet (St-Germain-en-Laye: Musée des Antiquités Nationales).
A life-sized sculpture of a warrior that accompanied the Glauberg burials.
A gold-and-bronze model of an oak tree (3rd century BCE) found at the Oppidum of Manching.
Noric steel

See also[edit]




Celtic Studies portal




Golasecca culture

Notes and references[edit]


^ The Jastorf culture is the southern part of the Pre-Roman Iron Age of the north.
^ Venceslas Kruta, La grande storia dei Celti. La nascita, l'affermazione, la decadenza, (Newton &amp; Compton), Roma, 2003 ISBN 978-88-8289-851-9 , a translation of Les Celtes, histoire et dictionnaire. Des origines à la romanisation et au christianisme, Robert Laffont, Paris, 2000, without the dictionary
^ Sarunas Milisauskas , European Prehistory: a survey, p. 354
^ Cunliffe 1997:66.
^ "Manufatti in ferro di tipo La Tène in area italiana&#160;: le potenzialità non sfruttate".&#160;
^ Mystery of the Celts Archived 15 January 2010 at the Wayback Machine
^ Lionel Pearson, "Herodotus on the Source of the Danube", Classical Philology 29.4 (October 1934:328–337).
^ In another place (ii.33.) Herodotus mentions the Ister, which "rising in the country of the Celts, beginning from the city of Pyrene, cuts Europe in half", which would have made it intersect with the Rhone; Pyrene is not mentioned aside from this context.
^ Harding, D. W. The Archaeology of Celtic Art. New York: Routledge, 2007
^ frankfurt,kultur,highlights,mystery of the kelts[dead link]
^ British Museum - The Witham Shield
^ Treasures Of The Celtic Causeway - The Fiskerton Log Boat | Culture24
^ British Museum - Chertsey Shield


Further reading[edit]

Cunliffe, Barry. The Ancient Celts. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 1997
Collis, John. The Celts: Origins, Myths, Invention. London: Tempus, 2003.
Kruta, Venceslas, La grande storia dei Celti. La nascita, l'affermazione, la decadenza, Newton &amp; Compton, Roma, 2003 ISBN 978-88-8289-851-9 (492 pp. - a translation of Les Celtes, histoire et dictionnaire. Des origines à la romanisation et au christianisme, Robert Laffont, Paris, 2000, without the dictionary)
James, Simon. The Atlantic Celts. London: British Museum Press, 1999.
James, Simon &amp; Rigby, Valery. Britain and the Celtic Iron Age. London: British Museum Press, 1997.

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to La Tène culture.



Charles Bergengren, Cleveland Institute of Art, 1999: illustrations of La Tène artifacts
La Tène Archaeological Sites in Romania









v
t
e


Archaeological Sites in Switzerland









Augusta Raurica
Aventicum
Centum Prata
Noviodunum
La Tène
Lousonna
Octodure
Petinesca
Turicum
Vallis poenina
Vitudurum
















v
t
e


Celts






Ancient Celts
Celtic studies




Peoples



Names
Gaels
Britons
Picts
Gauls
Iberian Celts








Places



Gaelic Ireland
Dálriata / Alba
Iron Age Britain / Roman Britain / Sub-Roman Britain
Dumnonia
Iron Age Gaul / Roman Gaul / Brittany
Gallaecia
Britonia
Gallia Cisalpina
Balkans
Transylvania
Galatia








Religion



Polytheism
Christianity
Animism








Mythology



Irish
Scottish
Welsh
British
Breton
Cornish








Society



Calendar
Law
Warfare (Gaelic warfare)
Coinage








Art



Insular
Pictish
Brooches
Carnyx
High cross
Interlace
Knotwork
Mazes
Triple spiral
Wheels














Modern Celts
Celtic Revival



Modern Celtic nations
Pan-Celticism (Celtic Congress
Celtic League)
Music (Rock)
Neopaganism

Reconstructionist
Celtic Wicca
Neo-Druidism










Languages



Italo-Celtic
Proto-Celtic
Insular Celtic

Brythonic
Goidelic


Continental Celtic

Celtiberian
Gaulish
Galatian
Gallaecian
Lepontic
Noric










Festivals



Samhain/Calan Gaeaf
Imbolc/Gŵyl Fair
Beltane/Calan Mai
Lughnasadh/Calan Awst








Lists



Celts
Tribes
Deities
English words of Celtic origin
Spanish words of Celtic origin
Galician words of Celtic origin
French words of Gaulish origin
















Archaeology portal
Switzerland portal













Authority control



GND: 4034668-7
HDS: 8015















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=La_Tène_culture&amp;oldid=690215176"					
				Categories: Archaeological sites in SwitzerlandAncient CeltsIron Age EuropeArchaeology of AustriaArchaeological cultures of EuropeArchaeology of the Czech RepublicArchaeology of FranceArchaeology of GermanyArchaeology of HungaryArchaeology of RomaniaArchaeology of SlovakiaArchaeology of SwitzerlandArchaeology of SloveniaArchaeological cultures in RomaniaArchaeological cultures in SerbiaHidden categories: All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from November 2013Articles needing additional references from February 2012All articles needing additional referencesCommons category with local link same as on WikidataUse dmy dates from October 2011Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers				
							
		
		
			