


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Lace
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				For other uses, see Lace (disambiguation).




Valuable old lace, cut and framed for sale in Bruges, Belgium


Lace is a delicate fabric made of yarn or thread in an open weblike pattern,[1] made by machine or by hand.
Originally linen, silk, gold, or silver threads were used. Now lace is often made with cotton thread, although linen and silk threads are still available. Manufactured lace may be made of synthetic fiber. A few modern artists make lace with a fine copper or silver wire instead of thread. A totally different scale are the architectural lace fences by Dutch designers.



Contents


1 Etymology
2 Types
3 History
4 Patrons and lace makers
5 See also
6 References
7 External links



Etymology[edit]
The word lace is from Middle English, from Old French las, noose, string, from Vulgar Latin *laceum, from Latin laqueus, noose; probably akin to lacere, to entice or ensnare.[1]
Types[edit]
There are many types of lace, classified by how they are made. These include:

Needle lace, such as Venetian Gros Point, is made using a needle and thread. This is the most flexible of the lace-making arts. While some types can be made more quickly than the finest of bobbin laces, others are very time-consuming. Some purists regard needle lace as the height of lace-making. The finest antique needle laces were made from a very fine thread that is not manufactured today.


Cutwork, or whitework, is lace constructed by removing threads from a woven background, and the remaining threads wrapped or filled with embroidery.


Bobbin lace, as the name suggests, is made with bobbins and a pillow. The bobbins, turned from wood, bone, or plastic, hold threads which are woven together and held in place with pins stuck in the pattern on the pillow. The pillow contains straw, preferably oat straw or other materials such as sawdust, insulation styrofoam, or ethafoam. Also known as Bone-lace. Chantilly lace is a type of bobbin lace.


Tape lace makes the tape in the lace as it is worked, or uses a machine- or hand-made textile strip formed into a design, then joined and embellished with needle or bobbin lace.


Knotted lace includes macramé and tatting. Tatted lace is made with a shuttle or a tatting needle.


Crocheted lace includes Irish crochet, pineapple crochet, and filet crochet.


Knitted lace includes Shetland lace, such as the "wedding ring shawl", a lace shawl so fine that it can be pulled through a wedding ring.


Machine-made lace is any style of lace created or replicated using mechanical means.


Chemical lace: the stitching area is stitched with embroidery threads that form a continuous motif. Afterwards, the stitching areas are removed and only the embroidery remains. The stitching ground is made of a water-soluble or non-heat-resistant material.








Needle lace, showing button hole stitch









Bobbin lace made on a pillow with bobbins and pins









Broderie anglaise, a type of cutwork









Filet lace, embroidered on an existing net









Lace knitting









Tatting, with shuttle




History[edit]




Early lace on a fragment of The Virgin and Child by Hans Memling.[2]


The origin of lace is disputed by historians. An Italian claim is a will of 1493 by the Milanese Sforza family.[3] A Flemish claim is lace on the alb of a worshiping priest in a painting about 1485 by Hans Memling.[4] But since lace evolved from other techniques, it is impossible to say that it originated in any one place.[5]
The late 16th century century marked the rapid development of lace, both needle lace and bobbin lace became dominant in both fashion as well as home décor. For enhancing the beauty of collars and cuffs, needle lace was embroidered with loops and picots.[6]
Lace was used by clergy of the early Catholic Church as part of vestments in religious ceremonies but did not come into widespread use until the 16th century in the northwestern part of the European continent.[7] The popularity of lace increased rapidly and the cottage industry of lace making spread throughout Europe. In North America in the 19th century, missionaries spread the knowledge of lace making to the Native American tribes.[8] St. John Francis Regis helped many country girls stay away from the cities by establishing them in the lace making and embroidery trade, which is why he became the Patron Saint of lace making.[citation needed]
The English diarist Samuel Pepys often wrote about the lace used for his, his wife's, and his acquaintances' clothing, and on May 10, 1669, noted that he intended to remove the gold lace from the sleeves of his coat "as it is fit [he] should", possibly in order to avoid charges of ostentatious living.[9]
For the industrial revolution, see Lace machine.
To date inspiring journals, guilds and foundations show that old techniques with a new twist can challenge young people to create works that can definitely classify as art.[10]
Patrons and lace makers[edit]
Historical

Giovanna Dandolo 1457–1462
Barbara Uthmann 1514–1575
Morosina Morosini 1545–1614
Federico de Vinciolo sixteenth-century

Contemporary

Rosa Elena Egipciaco

See also[edit]

Ribbons
See-through clothing
Scranton Lace Company
Anglo Scotian Mills
Lippitt Mill
lacebark

References[edit]


^ a b "Show election". Lace. Retrieved 2012-05-23.&#160;
^ Site officiel du musée du Louvre
^ Verhaegen, Pierre (1912). La Dentelle Belge. Brussel: L. Lebègue. p.&#160;10.&#160;
^ van Steyvoort, Collette (1983). Inleiding to kantcreatie (Introduction to creating lace) (translation by Magda Grisar ed.). Paris: Dessain et Tolra. p.&#160;11. ISBN&#160;224927665X.&#160;
^ "The Origins of Lace". LaceGuild.org. Retrieved 7 January 2015.&#160;
^ "History of Lace | Lace Trends | Lace Spreads". Decoratingwithlaceoutlet.com. Retrieved 2012-09-11.&#160;
^ Lacemakerslace.oddquine.co.uk
^ archived Lace.lacefairy.com
^ Pepys, Samuel (10 May 1669). "diaries". Retrieved 7 January 2015.&#160;
^ Dings, Marcella. "Schatgraven - Uitdaging (Treasure Hunt - Challenge)". Kantbrief (2014-4): 34.&#160;


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Lace.



A lace collection including images and descriptions
Museo del Merletto, Venice









v
t
e


Lace types






Needle lace



Punto in Aria
Point de Venise
Point de France
Alençon
Argentan
Argentella
Armenian
Halas lace
Hollie Point
Point de Gaze
Kenmare Lace
Pag
Youghal




Embroidered



Buratto
Reticella
Limerick
Filet/Lacis
Needlerun net
Tambour
Ñandutí
Teneriffe








Cutwork



Broderie Anglaise
Carrickmacross














Bobbin lace




Mesh
grounds



Torchon
Freehand
Arras
Bayeux
Blonde
Bucks point
Chantilly
Tønder
Beveren
Lille
Binche
Flanders
Paris
Valenciennes
Antwerp
Mechlin








Guipure



Genoese
Bedfordshire
Cluny
Maltese
Yak lace








Part laces



Honiton
Bruges
Brussels
Rosaline








Tape



Milanese
Hinojosa
Russian
Idrija
Schneeberg
Peasant











Tape lace



Mezzopunto
Princess
Renaissance
Battenberg
Romanian point
Branscombe








Crocheted lace



Broomstick lace
Irish crochet
Hairpin
Filet crochet








Machine-made lace



Bobbinet
Leavers
Pusher
Barmen
Curtain Machine
Chemical
Warp Knit








&#160;



Metal laces
Lace knitting
Macramé
Tatting
Punto a groppo
Sprang









 Media related to Lace at Wikimedia Commons  Fashion portal  Textile arts portal














v
t
e


Textile arts






Fundamentals



Applique
Beadwork
Crochet
Dyeing
Embroidery
Fabric
Felting
Fiber
Knitting
Lace
Macramé
Nålebinding
Needlework
Patchwork
Passementerie
Plying
Quilting
Rope
Rug making
Sewing
Stitch
Textile printing
Weaving
Yarn













History of ...



Byzantine silk
Clothing and textiles
Silk
Quilting
Silk in the Indian subcontinent
Textile manufacturing by pre-industrial methods
Textiles in the Industrial Revolution
Modern Industrial Textile Production
Timeline of textile technology








Regional and ethnic



African
Andean
Australian Aboriginal
Hmong
Indigenous peoples of the Americas
Korean
Māori
Maya
Mexican
Navajo
Oaxacan








Related



Blocking
Fiber art
Mathematics and fiber arts
Manufacturing
Preservation
Recycling
Textile industry
Textile Museums
Units of measurement
Wearable fiber art








Reference



Dyeing terms
Sewing terms
Textile terms













Authority control



NDL: 00569425















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lace&amp;oldid=683828298"					
				Categories: LaceNet fabricsHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from April 2009Commons category with local link same as on WikidataUse dmy dates from September 2010				
							
		
		
			