


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Land art
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				



Spiral Jetty by Robert Smithson from atop Rozel Point, in mid-April 2005


Land art, earthworks (coined by Robert Smithson), or Earth art is an art movement in which landscape and the work of art are inextricably linked. It is also an art form that is created in nature, using natural materials such as soil, rock (bed rock, boulders, stones), organic media (logs, branches, leaves), and water with introduced materials such as concrete, metal, asphalt, or mineral pigments. Sculptures are not placed in the landscape, rather, the landscape is the means of their creation. Often earth moving equipment is involved. The works frequently exist in the open, located well away from civilization, left to change and erode under natural conditions. Many of the first works, created in the deserts of Nevada, New Mexico, Utah or Arizona were ephemeral in nature and now only exist as video recordings or photographic documents. They also pioneered a category of art called site-specific sculpture, designed for a particular outdoor location.



Contents


1 History
2 Contemporary land artists
3 See also
4 References

4.1 Notes
4.2 Further reading


5 External links



History[edit]




Museum paper board left on the bank of the river for 4 days. By Jacek Tylicki, S.W. of Lund, Sweden, 473 X 354 mm. 1981






Bunjil geoglyph at the You Yangs, Lara, Australia, by Andrew Rogers. The creature has a wing span of 100 metres and a 1500 tonnes of rock was used to construct it.






Satellite view of Roden Crater, the site of an earthwork in progress by James Turrell, outside Flagstaff, Arizona.


Land art is an artistic protest against the "perceived artificiality, plastic aesthetics and ruthless commercialization" of art in America in the late 1960s.[1] Exponents of land art rejected the museum or gallery as the setting of artistic activity and developed monumental landscape projects which were beyond the reach of traditional transportable sculpture and the commercial art market. Land art was inspired by minimal art and Conceptual art but also by modern movements such as De Stijl, cubism, minimalism and the work of Constantin Brâncuși and Joseph Beuys. Many of the artists associated with land art had been involved with minimal art and conceptual art. Isamu Noguchi's 1941 design for Contoured Playground in New York is sometimes interpreted as an important early piece of land art even though the artist himself never called his work "land art" but simply "sculpture". His influence on contemporary land art, landscape architecture and environmental sculpture is evident in many works today.
Alan Sonfist is a pioneer of an alternative approach to working with nature and culture that he began in 1965 by bringing historical nature and sustainable art back into New York City. His most inspirational work is Time Landscape an indigenous forest he planted in New York City. He also created several other Time Landscapes around the world such as Circles of Time in Florence Italy documenting the historical usage of the land, and recently at the deCordova Sculpture Park and Museum outside Boston. According to critic Barbara Rose, writing in Artforum in 1969, he had become disillusioned with the commodification and insularity of gallery bound art. In 1967, the art critic Grace Glueck writing in the New York Times declared the first earthwork was done by Douglas Leichter and Richard Saba at the Skowhegan School of Painting and Sculpture. The sudden appearance of land art in 1968 can be located as a response by a generation of artists mostly in their late twenties to the heightened political activism of the year and the emerging environmental and women's liberation movements.
The movement began in October 1968 with the group exhibition "Earth Works"[2] at the Dwan Gallery in New York. In February 1969, Willoughby Sharp curated the "Earth Art" exhibition at the Andrew Dickson White Museum of Art at Cornell University, Ithaca, New York. The artists included were Walter De Maria, Jan Dibbets, Hans Haacke, Michael Heizer, Neil Jenney, Richard Long, David Medalla, Robert Morris, Dennis Oppenheim, Robert Smithson, and Gunther Uecker. The exhibition was directed by Thomas W. Leavitt. Gordon Matta-Clark, who lived in Ithaca at the time, was invited by Sharp to help the artists in "Earth Art" with the on-site execution of their works for the exhibition.
Perhaps the best known artist who worked in this genre was the American Robert Smithson whose 1968 essay "The Sedimentation of the Mind: Earth Projects" provided a critical framework for the movement as a reaction to the disengagement of Modernism from social issues as represented by the critic Clement Greenberg. His best known piece, and probably the most famous piece of all land art, is the Spiral Jetty (1970), for which Smithson arranged rock, earth and algae so as to form a long (1500&#160;ft) spiral-shape jetty protruding into Great Salt Lake in northern Utah, U.S.. How much of the work, if any, is visible is dependent on the fluctuating water levels. Since its creation, the work has been completely covered, and then uncovered again, by water. Smithson's Gravel Mirror with Cracks and Dust (1968) is an example of land art existing in a gallery space rather than in the natural environment. It consists of a pile of gravel by the side of a partially mirrored gallery wall. In its simplicity of form and concentration on the materials themselves, this and other pieces of land art have an affinity with minimalism. There is also a relationship to Arte Povera in the use of materials traditionally considered "unartistic" or "worthless". The Italian Germano Celant, founder of Arte Povera, was one of the first curator to promote Land Art.[3]
'Land Artists' have tended to be American, with other prominent artists in this field including, Carl Andre, Alice Aycock, Walter De Maria, Hans Haacke, Michael Heizer, Nancy Holt, Ana Mendieta, Dennis Oppenheim, Andrew Rogers, Charles Ross, Robert Smithson, Alan Sonfist, and James Turrell. Turrell began work in 1972 on possibly the largest piece of land art thus far, reshaping the earth surrounding the extinct Roden Crater volcano in Arizona. Perhaps the most prominent non-American land artists are the British Chris Drury, Andy Goldsworthy, Peter Hutchinson, Richard Long and the Australian Andrew Rogers.[4] In 1973 Jacek Tylicki begins to lay out blank canvases or paper sheets in the natural environment for the nature to create art.
Some projects by the artists Christo and Jeanne-Claude (who are famous for wrapping monuments, buildings and landscapes in fabric) have also been considered land art by some, though the artists themselves consider this incorrect.[5] Joseph Beuys' concept of 'social sculpture' influenced 'Land art' and his '7000 Eichen' project of 1982 to plant 7000 Oak trees has many similarities to 'Land art' processes. Rogers' “Rhythms of Life” project is the largest contemporary land-art undertaking in the world, forming a chain of stone sculptures, or geoglyphs, around the globe – 12 sites – in disparate exotic locations (from below sea level and up to altitudes of 4,300 m/14,107&#160;ft). Up to three geoglyphs (ranging in size up to 40,000 sq m/430,560 sq ft) are located in each site.
Eduardo Sanguinetti, the latinoamerican philosopher and land-artist, presented in 1979 his "Sculptures in Earth". They were placed in natural spaces, they became functional as plants and animals made their homes in that particular ´topos´instalated en La Pampa desert. Later they acquired the noise of codes capable of classifying smells and colurs, and will complete the original idea of our artist, who was at that time absorbed by the countryside and its specular radiation...in his Land-Art Performance "Solum" (1987), in the zoomorphy of that horse that greatly seduce the audience of the Centro Cultural Recoleta (ex Centro Cultural Ciudad de Buenos Aires). "Amarillo Total" the name of the horse, not only stopped the ecologic blow but also paraded the models who had been completely painted by our artist, their naked painted bodies put another body to painting, with artesan colours prepared with earth and plants pigments.[6] In Sanguinetti's Essay "Alter Ego" (1986), he said: "Spontaneus Activity in Nature...In nature, there is a type of spontaneous activity. This concept does not exist in cultured man, and if it does remain in children, it is like a faint reminiscence of the primitive mind...Consequently I think that the survival of an awareness of the supernatural in nature, should, in all works of Land-Art, be the thing which ´animates Everything´".[7][8]
Land artists in America relied mostly on wealthy patrons and private foundations to fund their often costly projects. With the sudden economic down turn of the mid-1970s funds from these sources largely stopped. With the death of Robert Smithson in a plane crash in 1973 the movement lost one of its most important figureheads and faded out. Charles Ross continues to work on the Star Axis project, which he began in 1971. Michael Heizer continues his work on City, and James Turrell continues to work on the Roden Crater project. In most respects 'Land Art' has become part of mainstream public art and in many cases the term "Land Art" is misused to label any kind of art in nature even though conceptually not related to the avant-garde works by the pioneers of Land Art.
Contemporary land artists[edit]




Eberhard Bosslet, side effect X, Tias, Lanzarote, (2008)






Vito Acconci
Betty Beaumont
Milton Becerra
Marinus Boezem
Chris Booth
Eberhard Bosslet
Mel Chin
Christo and Jeanne Claude
Walter De Maria
Lucien den Arend
Agnes Denes
Jim Denevan
Jan Dibbets
Harvey Fite
Barry Flanagan
Hamish Fulton
Andy Goldsworthy &#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;
Michael Heizer
Nancy Holt
Junichi Kakizaki
Maya Lin




Richard Long
Robert Morris
Vik Muniz
Ahmad Nadalian
David Nash
Dennis Oppenheim
Georgia Papageorge
Beverly Pepper
Andrew Rogers
Charles Ross
Sabina Shikhlinskaya
Richard Shilling
Nobuo Sekine
Robert Smithson
Alan Sonfist
James Turrell
Jacek Tylicki
Nils Udo
Bill Vazan
Strijdom van der Merwe
Seth Wulsin




YATOO – a Korean Nature Artists’ Association which was founded in 1981, started working with Nature equipped with nothing but empty hands and wide open minds and seeking direct inspirations from Nature. YATOO International Project (YATOO-i), is a newly organized project and is based on the idea that the Nature we live in is seamlessly connected regardless of the human-designated borderlines.[9]
See also[edit]




Manfred Kielnhofer, the kiss, feld, Enns, Austria, (2005)



Environmental art
Environmental sculpture
Land Arts of the American West
Site-specific art
Ecological art
Ecofeminist art
Ecovention

References[edit]
Notes[edit]


^ Natural Art. PediaPress.&#160;
^ "Leftmatrix". leftmatrix.com. Retrieved February 8, 2011.&#160;
^ "Observatoire du Land Art". obsart.blogspot.fr. Retrieved June 2, 2012.&#160;
^ "Monumental Land Art of the United States". daringdesigns.com. Retrieved August 27, 2010.&#160;
^ Christo and Jeanne-Claude. "Common Errors". Christojeanneclaude.net. Retrieved 2008-11-07.&#160;
^ Espartaco Carlos 1989, "Eduardo Sanguinetti: The Experience of Limits" pag.86, 87 (Ediciones de Arte Gaglianone, first published 1989) ISBN 950-9004-98-7
^ Sanguinetti Eduardo 1984, "Alter Ego" pag. 53, 54 (Pentland, Edinburgh, First Published in 1986 in the English languaje translated from the Spanish in 1986) ISBN 9780946270170
^ Alter ego - Eduardo Sanguinetti - Google Libros. Books.google.com.ar. 2011-11-29. Retrieved 2013-03-23.&#160;
^ "Yatooi". Jeon, Won-gil. Retrieved 23 June 2014.&#160;








This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2008)


Further reading[edit]

Lawrence Alloway, Wolfgang Becker, Robert Rosenblum et al., Alan Sonfist, Nature: The End of Art, Gli Ori,Dist. Thames &amp; Hudson Florence, Italy,2004 ISBN 0-615-12533-6
Max Andrews (Ed.): Land, Art: A Cultural Ecology Handbook. London 2006 ISBN 978-0-901469-57-1
John Beardsley: Earthworks and Beyond. Contemporary Art in the Landscape. New York 1998 ISBN 0-7892-0296-4
Suzaan Boettger, Earthworks: Art and the Landscape of the Sixties. University of California Press 2002. ISBN 0-520-24116-9
Amy Dempsey: Destination Art. Berkeley CA 2006 ISBN 9780520250253
Eduardo Sanguinetti,Alter Ego (Pentland, Edinburgh, First Published in 1986 in the English language translated from the Spanish in 1986). ISBN 9780946270170
Carlos Espartaco, Eduardo Sanguinetti: The Experience of Limit Buenos Aires, Argentina, Ediciones de Arte Gaglianone, first published 1989 ISBN 950-9004-98-7
Michel Draguet, Nils-Udo, Bob Verschueren, Bruseels: Atelier 340, 1992
Jack Flam (Ed.). Robert Smithson: The Collected Writings, Berkeley CA 1996 ISBN 0-520-20385-2
John K. Grande: New York, London. Balance: Art and Nature, Black Rose Books, 1994, 2003 ISBN 1-55164-234-4
Eleanor Heartney, Andrew Rogers Geoglyphs, Rhythms of Life, Edizioni Charta srl, Italy, 2009 ISBN 978-88-8158-712-4
Robert Hobbs, Robert Smithson: A Retrospective View, Wilhelm Lehmbruck Museum, Duisburg / Herbert F. Johnson Museum of Art, Cornell University,
Jeffrey Kastner, Brian Wallis: Land and Environmental Art. Boston 1998 ISBN 0-7148-4519-1
Lucy R Lippard: Overlay: Contemporary Art and the Art of Prehistory. New York 1983 ISBN 978-0-394-51812-1
Udo Weilacher: Between Landscape Architecture and Land Art. Basel Berlin Boston 1999 ISBN 3-7643-6119-0
Edward Lucie-Smith (Intro) and John K. Grande: Art Nature Dialogues: Interviews with Environmental Artists, New York 2004 ISBN 978-0-7914-6194-5
David Peat &amp; Edward Lucie-Smith (Introduction &amp; forward) Dialogues in Diversity, Italy: Pari Publishing, 2007, ISBN 978-88-901960-7-2
Chris Taylor and Bill Gilbert. Land Arts of the American West. Austin: University of Texas Press; 2009. ISBN 978-0-292-71672-8
Gilles A. Tiberghien: Land Art. Ed. Carré 1993/1995/2012

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Land art.



Monumental Land Art of the United States.
Alan Sonfist Official Website
Artist in Nature International Network
Denarend.com - About land art
Land Arts of the American West
Official UNM Land Arts of the American West Program Website
Land &amp; Environmental Artists &amp; Art
Australian land arts
Roden Crater by James Turrell
Jacek Tylicki Land &amp; Environmental Art projects
Land Art project in South Africa
Broken Circle
Land Art Contemporary
OBSART | Observatoire du Land Art
(French) Portail du Land Art
(German) Using Land art as a form of advertising
Center for Land Use Interpretation entry for Land Art









v
t
e


Art movements






Medieval



Byzantine
Merovingian
Carolingian
Ottonian
Romanesque
Gothic (International Gothic)








Renaissance



Early Netherlandish
High Renaissance
Mannerism








17th century



Baroque
Caravaggisti
Classicism
Dutch Golden Age








18th century



Rococo
Neoclassicism
Romanticism








19th century



Nazarene
Realism / Realism
Historicism
Biedermeier
Gründerzeit
Barbizon school
Pre-Raphaelites
Academic
Aestheticism
Decadent
Macchiaioli
Art Nouveau
Peredvizhniki
Impressionism
Post-Impressionism
Neo-impressionism
Divisionism
Pointillism
Cloisonnism
Les Nabis
Synthetism
Kalighat painting
Symbolism
Hudson River School








20th century



Bengal School of Art
Amazonian pop art
Cubism
Orphism
Purism
Synchromism
Expressionism
Scuola Romana
Abstract expressionism
Kinetic art
Neue Künstlervereinigung München
Der Blaue Reiter
Die Brücke
New Objectivity
Dada
Fauvism
Neo-Fauvism
Precisionism
Bauhaus
De Stijl
Art Deco
Op art
Vienna School of Fantastic Realism
Pop art
Photorealism
Futurism
Metaphysical art
Rayonism
Vorticism
Suprematism
Surrealism
Color Field
Minimalism
Minimalism (visual arts)
Nouveau réalisme
Social realism
Lyrical abstraction
Tachisme
COBRA
Action painting
International Typographic Style
Fluxus
Lettrism
Letterist International
Situationist International
Conceptual art
Installation art
Land art
Performance art
Endurance art
Systems art
Video art
Neo-expressionism
Neo-Dada
Outsider art
Lowbrow
New media art
Young British Artists








21st century



Art intervention
Hyperrealism
Neo-futurism
Stuckism International
Remodernism
Sound art
Superstroke
Superflat
Relational art
Video game art








Related articles



List of art movements
Modern art
Modernism
Late modernism
Postmodern art
Avant-garde
















v
t
e


Environmental humanities






Art



Crop art
Environmental art
Environmental sculpture
Land art
Landscape painting
Photography

conservation
landscape
nature
wildlife


Sculpture trail
Site-specific art
Sustainable art











Culture



Cultural ecology
Cultural landscape
Ecolinguistics
Ecological anthropology
Ecosemiotics
Environmental anthropology
Ethnoecology
Traditional ecological knowledge








Literature



Ecocomposition
Ecocriticism
Ecopoetry
Geocriticism
Nature writing
Outdoor literature
Zoopoetics








Philosophy



Constructivism
Cosmology
Critical realism
Deep ecology
Ecofeminism
Ecophenomenology
Ecosophy
Environmental ethics
Environmental justice
Environmental philosophy
Materialism
Natural philosophy
Philosophy of mind
Philosophy of science
Social ecology








Religion



Ecotheology
Environmental theology
Religion and environmentalism
Spiritual ecology
Stewardship








Other



Anthrozoology
Ecomusicology
Environmental communication
Environmental education

adult
arts-based


Environmental history
Environmental interpretation
Environmental journalism
Environmental law
Outdoor education
Psychogeography
Thematic interpretation








Related



Animal studies
Bioethics
Biophilia hypothesis
Do it yourself (ethic)
Natural history (museums)
Popular science
Property theory (common property)
Science, technology and society

science studies


Simple living
Slow food
Spirit of place
Sustainability studies








Applied



Arts and Crafts movement
Acoustic ecology
Biomimicry
Ecodesign
Ecological design
Ecomuseum
Educational trail
Environmental design
Landscape architecture

assessment
planning


Nature center
New Urbanism
Sustainable architecture
Sustainable design
Sustainable fashion
Themed walk
Transition design
Urban acupuncture











 Environment portal
 Category
 Commons
Journals
Degrees
Institutions















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Land_art&amp;oldid=688767955"					
				Categories: Land artContemporary artInstallation artArtificial landformsEnvironmental designHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from November 2008All articles needing additional referencesCommons category with page title same as on WikidataArticles with French-language external linksArticles with German-language external links				
							
		
		
			