


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Lao art
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								  (Redirected from Art of Laos)
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				




The lead section of this article may need to be rewritten. Please discuss this issue on the article's talk page. Use the lead layout guide to ensure the section will be inclusive of all essential details. (August 2013)






Monument to King Setthathirat






Reliefs at the Wat Pa Phai monastery


Lao art has a long and eventful history.
Ceramics[edit]
Main article: Lao ceramics
Lao ceramics were first uncovered in 1970 at a construction site at kilometer 3, Thadeua Road in the Vientiane area, Mekong Valley, Laos. Construction was halted only temporarily, and the kiln was hastily and unprofessionally excavated over a one-month period. At least four more kilns have been identified since then, and surface evidence and topography indicate at least one hundred more in the Ban Tao Hai (Village of the Jar Kilns) vicinity. Archaeologists have labeled the area Sisattanak Kiln Site.
Buddhist sculpture[edit]
Main article: Lao Buddhist sculpture
Lao artisans have, throughout the past, used a variety of media in their sculptural creations. Of the metals, bronze is probably the most common, but gold and silver images also exist. Typically, the precious metals are used only for smaller objects, but some large images have been cast in gold, most notably the Phra Say of the sixteenth century, which the Siamese carried home as booty in the late eighteenth century. It is in enshrined at Wat Po Chai in Nongkhai, Thailand, just across the Mekong River from Vientiane. The Phra Say's two companion images, the Phra Seum and Phra Souk, are also in Thailand. One is in Bangkok and the other is in Lopburi. Perhaps the most famous sculpture in Laos, the Phra Bang, is also cast in gold, but the craftsmanship is held to be of Sinhalese, rather than Lao, origin. Tradition maintains that relics of the Buddha are contained in the image.
External links[edit]
 Media related to Art of Laos at Wikimedia Commons

Laos Cultural Profile (Ministry of Information and Culture/Visiting Arts)




This art history-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.


v
t
e













v
t
e


Asian art






Sovereign states



Afghanistan
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei
Burma (Myanmar)
Cambodia
Chinese
East Timor (Timor-Leste)
Egypt
Georgia
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
North Korea
South Korea
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Lebanon
Malaysia
Maldives
Mongolia
Nepal
Oman
Pakistan
Philippines
Qatar
Russia
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Syria
Tajikistan
Thailand
Turkey
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen









States with limited
recognition




Abkhazia
Nagorno-Karabakh
Northern Cyprus
Palestine
South Ossetia
Taiwan









Dependencies and
other territories




Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Hong Kong
Macau















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lao_art&amp;oldid=611662953"					
				Categories: Art history stubsLaotian artArt by nationalityHidden categories: Wikipedia introduction cleanup from August 2013All pages needing cleanupArticles covered by WikiProject Wikify from August 2013All articles covered by WikiProject WikifyAll stub articlesRegion topic template using suffix				
							
		
		
			