


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Low culture
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				




This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2013)


Low culture is a derogatory term for some forms of popular culture that have mass appeal. Its contrast is high culture. It has been said by culture theorists that both high culture and low culture are subcultures. Today, this would mean things like 'take-away' meals, gossip magazines, and books that are current best-sellers.[1][2]



Contents


1 Manifestations
2 Standards and definitions of low culture
3 Culture as class
4 Mass media

4.1 Creators of culture
4.2 Audience

4.2.1 Stereotypes




5 See also
6 References



Manifestations[edit]
Reality television, escapist fiction, kitsch, slapstick, camp, toilet humor, yellow journalism, pornography, viral videos and exploitation films are often cited examples of low culture.[by whom?]
The boundaries of low culture and high culture blur, through convergence. Many people are "omnivores", making cultural choices from different menus.[3] The 1990s artwork of Jeff Koons appropriate low art tropes of kitsch and pornography. Rhys Chatham's musical piece Guitar Trio (1977) is an example of incorporating (low culture) primitive punk rock aesthetics into (high culture) contemporary classical music.
Romanticism was one of the first movements to reappraise "low culture," when previously maligned medieval romances were taken seriously and influenced literature.
Standards and definitions of low culture[edit]
In his book Popular Culture and High Culture, Herbert J. Gans gives a definition of how to identify and create low culture:

Aesthetic standards of low culture stress substance, form and being totally subservient; there is no explicit concern with abstract ideas or even with fictional forms of contemporary social problems and issues. ... Low culture emphasizes morality but limits itself to familial and individual problems and [the] values, which apply to such problems. Low culture is content to depict traditional working class values winning out over the temptation to give into conflicting impulses and behavior patterns.
— Herbert Gans, [4]

When applying that lens to mass media, it often includes shows that do not go too deeply into abstract ideas, or that do not address head-on contemporary social problems.
Culture as class[edit]
Herbert Gans states in his book Popular Culture and High Culture that the different classes of culture are linked correspondingly to socio-economic and educational classes.[5] For any given socio-economic class, there is a culture for that class. Hence the terms high and low culture and the manifestation of those terms as they appeal to their respective constituents.
Mass media[edit]
Creators of culture[edit]
When one watches television, someone else is in control of the content of the programming; one just has the choice in what one happens to be watching. Therefore, the content creators (media companies) are largely in charge of finding what it is people like, so they can make money from it. Media entertainment’s sole purpose for existing is profitability; they drive and are driven by consumer demand.[6]
Audience[edit]
All cultural products have a certain demographic to which they appeal most. Low culture appeals to very simple and basic human needs. Low culture offers a perceived return to innocence,[7] the escape from real world problems, or the experience of living vicariously through viewing someone else’s life on television.[8]
Stereotypes[edit]
Low culture is formulaic, often employing trope conventions, stock characters and character archetypes, which by nature are simplistic, crude, emotive, unbalanced, blunt instruments rather than subtle, balanced, and refined.
See also[edit]


Mass society
Kitsch
Culture industry
Bread and circuses
One-Dimensional Man
Primitive art
Prolefeed
Outsider art
Lowbrow (art movement)
Toilet humor
Off color humour
Bogan (Australia and New Zealand)
Dres (Poland)
Gopnik (Russia)
Chav (UK)
Redneck (United States)
Flaite (Chile)


References[edit]


^ Chris Livesey and Tony Lawson. "AS Sociology For AQA (2nd Edition)" (PDF). http://shortcutstv.com/. Retrieved August 6, 2015.&#160;
^ "Culture, Low and High)". encyclopedia.com. International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences. Retrieved August 6, 2015.&#160;
^ Gans, Herbert J. (2008). Popular culture and high culture. Basic Books. pp.&#160;8–10. ISBN&#160;0465026095.&#160;
^ Herbert Gans, Popular Culture and High Culture pg. 115.
^ Herbert Gans Popular Culture and High Culture pg. 7
^ , Anna Tomisino Discovering Pop Culture, pg. 210.
^ , Anna Tomisino Discovering Pop Culture, pg. 211.
^ , Anna Tomisino Discovering Pop Culture, pg. 225 (although this is an excerpt from "The Happiest Place On Earth: Disney" by Eric Mazur and Tara Koda.)










v
t
e


Culture







Outline






Sciences



Anthropology
Cultural astronomy
Cultural ecology
Cultural entomology
Cultural neuroscience
Cultural studies
Culturology
Culture theory
Neuroculture








Subfields



Cultural anthropology
Cultural economics
Cultural geography
Cultural history
Cultural psychology
Intercultural relations
Philosophy of culture
Popular culture studies
Semiotics of culture
Sociology of culture
Theology of culture


Sound culture
Visual culture








Types



Constructed culture
Dominant culture
Folk culture
High culture
Low culture
Official culture
Political culture

Civic


Popular culture

Urban


Primitive culture
Subculture

Alternative culture
list


Super culture
Vernacular culture
Culture by location








Aspects



Acculturation
Cultural appropriation
Cultural artifact
Cultural baggage
Cultural behavior
Cultural capital
Cultural communication
Cultural conflict
Cultural cringe
Cultural deprivation
Cultural dissonance
Cultural framework
Cultural heritage
Cultural icon
Cultural identity
Cultural industry
Cultural invention
Cultural landscape
Cultural learning
Cultural memory
Cultural pluralism
Cultural practice
Cultural property
Cultural area
Cultural reproduction
Cultural system
Cultural universal
Enculturation
High- and low-context cultures
Interculturality
Material culture
Non-material culture
Participatory culture
Trans-cultural diffusion
Transculturation








Politics



Colonial mentality
Consumer capitalism
Cultural assimilation
Cultural attaché
Cultural backwardness
Cultural Bolshevism
Cultural conservatism
Cultural diplomacy
Cultural environmentalism
Cultural exception
Cultural feminism
Cultural genocide
Cultural globalization
Cultural hegemony
Cultural imperialism
Cultural intelligence
Cultural liberalism
Cultural nationalism
Cultural pessimism
Cultural policy
Cultural Revolution
Cultural rights
Cultural safety
Cultural Zionism
Culture change
Culture minister
Culture of fear
Culture war
Interculturalism
Monoculturalism
Multiculturalism








Related



Animal culture
Bennett scale
Bullying culture
Coffee culture
Conformity
Cross-cultural
Cultural bias
Cultural center
Cultural competence
Cultural critic
Cultural diversity
Cultural encoding
Cultural evolutionism
Cultural institution
Cultural lag
Cultural literacy
Cultural mosaic
Cultural movement
Cultural relativism
Cultural tourism
Cultural turn
Cultural sensibility
Culture gap
Culture hero
Culture industry
Culture shock
Children's culture
Death and culture
Emotions and culture
Intercultural competence
Media culture
Oppositional culture
Organizational culture
Permission culture
Print culture
Rape culture
Remix culture
Safety culture
Security culture
Tea culture
Transformation of culture
Urban culture











Portal
Category
changes















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Low_culture&amp;oldid=682515478"					
				Categories: CultureMass mediaPopular cultureSocial class subculturesHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from July 2013All articles needing additional referencesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from December 2013				
							
		
		
			