


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Media (communication)
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				




This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. The specific problem is: for "medium" there are a lot of different concepts in media studies, see Google Books and discussion page. Please help improve this article if you can. (January 2014)


Media (the singular form of which is medium) is the collective communication outlets or tools that are used to store and deliver information or data.[1][2] It is either associated with communication media, or the specialized communication businesses such as: print media and the press, photography, advertising, cinema, broadcasting (radio and television), and/or publishing.[3]



Contents


1 Evolution

1.1 Electronic media
1.2 Social impacts


2 See also
3 References
4 Further reading



Evolution[edit]
The word media is defined as "one of the means or channels of general communication, information, or entertainment in society, as newspapers, radio, or television."[4]
The beginning of human communication through designed channels, i.e. not vocalization or gestures, dates back to ancient cave paintings, drawn maps, and writing.
The Persian Empire (centred on present-day Iran) played an important role in the field of communication. It as the first real mail or postal system, which is said to have been developed by the Persian emperor Cyrus the Great (c. 550 BC) after his conquest of Media. The role of the system as an intelligence gathering apparatus is well documented, and the service was (later) called angariae, a term that in time turned to indicate a tax system. The Old Testament (Esther, VIII) makes mention of this system: Ahasuerus, king of Medes, used couriers for communicating his decisions.[citation needed]
The word communication is derived from the Latin root communicare. This was due to the Roman Empire also devising what might be described as a mail or postal system, in order to centralize control of the empire from Rome. This allowed for personal letters and for Rome to gather knowledge about events in its many widespread provinces. More advanced postal systems later appeared in the Islamic Caliphate and the Mongol Empire during the Middle Ages.
The term "media" in its modern application relating to communication channels is traced back to its first use as such by Canadian communications theorist Marshall McLuhan, who stated in Counterblast (1954): "The media are not toys; they should not be in the hands of Mother Goose and Peter Pan executives. They can be entrusted only to new artists, because they are art forms." By the mid-1960s, the term had spread to general use in North America and the United Kingdom. ("Mass media", in contrast, was, according to H.L. Mencken, used as early as 1923 in the United States.)[5]
Electronic media[edit]
Main article: Electronic media
In the last century, a revolution in telecommunications has greatly altered communication by providing new media for long distance communication. The first transatlantic two-way radio broadcast occurred in 1906 and led to common communication via analogue and digital media:

Analog telecommunications include some radio systems, historical telephony systems, and historical TV broadcasts.
Digital telecommunications allow for computer-mediated communication, telegraphy, and computer networks.

Modern communication media now allow for intense long-distance exchanges between larger numbers of people (many-to-many communication via e-mail, Internet forums, and teleportation). On the other hand, many traditional broadcast media and mass media favor one-to-many communication (television, cinema, radio, newspaper, magazines, and also social media).
Electronic media is enjoying broader use every day and with an ever-increasing number of electronic devices continually being made, media consumption and technology use is increasingly being seen as a time consuming act that distracts youth from interacting personally with friends and family through face-to-face contact. Social disengagement is evident which can be associated with poor quality of life both physically and mentally. Wellman found that “33% of Internet users said that the Internet had improved their connections to friends ‘a lot’, and 23% said it had increased the quality of their communication with family members by a similar amount. Young people in particular took advantage of the social side of the Internet. Nearly half (49%) of the 18- to 29-year-olds said that the Internet had improved their connections to friends a lot. On the other hand, 19% of employed Internet users said that the Internet had increased the amount of time they spent working in home” (Lee, Leung, Lo, Xiong, &amp; Wu p.&#160;377 &amp; 378). Electronic media now comes in the forms tablets, laptops, desktops, cell phones, mp3 players, DVDs, game systems, radios, and television. Technology has spiked to record highs within the last decade, thus changing the dynamic of communication. The meaning of electronic media, as it is known in various spheres, has changed with the passage of time. The term media has achieved a broader meaning nowadays as compared to that given it a decade ago. Earlier, there was multimedia, once only a piece of software (application software) used to play audio (sound) and video (visual object with or without sound). Following this, it was CD (Compact Disc) and DVD (Digital Versatile Disc), then camera of 3G (Third Generation) applications in the field. In modern terms, the media includes all the software which are used in PC (Computer) or Laptop or Mobile Phone installed for normal or better performance of the system; today, however, hard discs (used to increase the installation capacity of data) of computer is an example of electronic media. This type of hard disc is becoming increasingly smaller in size. The latest inclusion in the field is magnetic media (magnetic stripe) whose application is common, in the fastest growing Information Technology field. Modern day IT media is commonly used in the banking sector and by the Income Tax Department for the purpose of providing the easiest and fastest possible services to the consumers. In this magnetic strip, account information linking to all the data relating to a particular consumer is stored. Credit card, Debit card, ATM card, High end travel card are comprised within the term Media as it is known today. The main features of these types of media are prepared unrecorded (blank form), and data is normally stored at a later stage as per the requirement of its user or consumer.
Social impacts[edit]
Media technology has made communicating increasingly easier as time has passed throughout history. Today, children are encouraged to use media tools in school and are expected to have a general understanding of the various technologies available. The internet is arguably one of the most effective tools in media for communication. Tools such as e-mail, Skype, Facebook etc., have brought people closer together and created new online communities. However, some may argue that certain types of media can hinder face-to-face communication and therefore can result in complications like identity fraud.
In a large consumer-driven society, electronic media (such as television) and print media (such as newspapers) are important for distributing advertisement media. More technologically advanced societies have access to goods and services through newer media than less technologically advanced societies.
In addition to this “advertizing” role, media is nowadays a tool to share knowledge all around the world. Analysing the evolution of medium within the society, Popkin [6] asses the important role of media, by building connection between politics, culture and economic life and the society: for instance periodical newspaper has been an opportunity to first advertize and second to be up-to-date with current foreign affairs or the nation economic situation. In the mean time, Willinsky [7] was promoting the role of modern technology as a way to come across cultural, gender, national barriers. He saw in internet an opportunity to establish a fair and equal system of knowledge: as internet may be accessible to anyone, any published information may be read and consulted by anyone. Therefore, internet is a sustainable solution to overcome the “gap” between developed and developing countries as both will get a chance to learn from each other. Canagarajah [8] is addressing the issue of unbalanced relations between the North and South countries, asserting that Western countries tend to impose their own ideas on developing countries.Therefore, internet is way to re-establish balance, by for instance enhance publication of newspaper, academic journal from developing countries. Christen [9] is the one who created a system that provide access to knowledge and protect people’s customs and culture. Indeed, in some traditional society, some gender cannot have access to a certain type of knowledge therefore respecting these customs limit the scope of dissemination but still allow the diffusion of knowledge. Within this process of dissemination, media would play a role of “intermediaries”, that is say translation an academic research into a journalistic format, accessible by lay audience ( Levin[10]). Consequently, media is a modern form of communication aiming at spreading knowledge within the whole world, regardless any form of discrimination.
Media, through media and communications psychology, has helped to connect diverse people from far and near geographical location. It has also helped in the aspect of on-line or internet businesses and other activities that have an on-line version. All media intended to affect human behavior is initiated through communication and the intended behavior is couched in psychology. Therefore, understanding media and communications psychology is fundamental in understanding the social and individual effects of media. The expanding field of media and communications psychology combines these established disciplines in a new way.
Timing change based on innovation and efficiency may not have a direct is correlation with technology. The information revolution is based on modern advancements. During the 19th century, the information "boom" rapidly advanced because of postal systems, increase in newspaper accessibility, as well as schools "modernizing". These advancements were made due to the increase of people becoming literate and educated.[citation needed] The methodology of communication although has changed and dispersed in numerous directions based on the source of its sociocultural impact. Biases in the media that affects religious or ethnic minorities takes the form of racism in the media and Islamophobia in the media.
See also[edit]




Media portal




Media manipulation
Media psychology
Communication

References[edit]


^ "What is media? definition and meaning". BusinessDictionary.com.&#160;
^ Cory Janssen. "i like donuts What is Communication Media? - Definition from Techopedia". Techopedia.com.&#160;
^ http://www.philol.msu.ru/~discours/images/stories/speckurs/New_media.pdf
^ "The definition of medium". Dictionary.com. Retrieved 2015-08-10.&#160;
^ Colombo's All-Time Great Canadian Quotations, 1994, John Robert Colombo, Stoddart Publishing, ISBN 0-7737-5639-6, p. 176.
^ Popkin, Dewald (2004). Journalism, Newspaper and newsheets. Europe 1450-1789: Encyclopedia of the Early Modern World.&#160;
^ Willinsky, Frank (2005). The Access Principle: The Case for Open Access to Research and Scholarship.&#160;
^ Canagarajah, Suresh (2010). "‘Internationalizing Knowledge Construction and Dissemination.’". The Modern Language Journal.&#160;
^ Christen, Kim (2012). "Does information really want to be free?". International Journal of Communication.&#160;
^ Levin, Ben (February 2013). "To know is not enough: research knowledge and its use".&#160;


Further reading[edit]



Look up media in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



McQuail, Denis (2000) McQuail’s Mass Communication Theory (fourth edition), Sage, London, pp.&#160;16–34. MAS
Biagi, S. (2004). Media Impact. Wadsworth Pub Co, 7th edition.
Caron, A. H. and Caronia, L. (2007). Moving cultures: mobile communication in everyday life. McGill-Queen's University Press.






Authority control



GND: 4169187-8















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Media_(communication)&amp;oldid=691587929"					
				Categories: CommunicationHidden categories: Articles needing cleanup from January 2014All articles needing cleanupCleanup tagged articles with a reason field from January 2014Wikipedia pages needing cleanup from January 2014All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from January 2014Articles with unsourced statements from October 2009Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers				
							
		
		
			