


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Menhir
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				"Standing stone" redirects here. For other uses, see Standing stone (disambiguation).




Large menhir located between Millstreet and Ballinagree, County Cork, Ireland.


A menhir (French, from Middle Breton: maen, "stone" and hir, "long"[1]), standing stone, orthostat, lith or masseba/matseva is a large upright standing stone. Menhirs may be found singly as monoliths, or as part of a group of similar stones. Their size can vary considerably, but their shape is generally uneven and squared, often tapering towards the top. Menhirs are widely distributed across Europe, Africa and Asia, but are most numerous in Western Europe; in particular in Ireland, Great Britain and Brittany. There are about 50,000 megaliths in these areas,[2] while there are 1,200 menhirs in northwest France alone.[3] Standing stones are usually difficult to date, but pottery found underneath some in Atlantic Europe connects them with the Beaker people. They were constructed during many different periods across pre-history as part of a larger megalithic culture that flourished in Europe and beyond.
Some menhirs have been erected next to buildings that often have an early or current religious significance. One example is the South Zeal Menhir in Devon, which formed the basis for a 12th-century monastery built by lay monks. The monastery later became the Oxenham Arms hotel, at South Zeal, and the standing stone remains in place in the ancient snug bar at the hotel.
Where menhirs appear in groups, often in a circular, oval, henge or horseshoe formation, they are sometimes called megalithic monuments. These are sites of ancient religious ceremonies, sometimes containing burial chambers.[4] The exact function of menhirs has provoked more debate than practically any other issue in European pre-history. Over the centuries, they have variously been thought to have been used by Druids for human sacrifice, used as territorial markers, or elements of a complex ideological system, or functioned as early calendars.[5] Until the nineteenth century, antiquarians did not have substantial knowledge of prehistory, and their only reference points were provided by classical literature. The developments of radiocarbon dating and dendrochronology have done much to further knowledge in this area.
The word menhir was adopted from French by 19th century archaeologists. It is a combination of two words of the Breton language: maen and hir. In modern Welsh, they are described as maen hir, or "long stone". In modern Breton, the word peulvan is used, with peul meaning stake or post and van which is a soft mutation of the word maen which means stone.



Contents


1 History
2 Geographical distribution

2.1 Scandinavia

2.1.1 Sweden


2.2 Ireland
2.3 Czech Republic
2.4 Switzerland
2.5 France
2.6 Italy
2.7 Portugal
2.8 Serbia
2.9 Armenia
2.10 Israel
2.11 Iran
2.12 India
2.13 Horn of Africa
2.14 South America


3 See also
4 Notes
5 References
6 External links



History[edit]




The Géant du Manio, a menhir in Carnac, Brittany.


Practically nothing is known of the social organization or religious beliefs of the people who erected the menhirs. There is not even any trace of these people's language; however we do know that they buried their dead and had the skills to grow cereal, farm and make pottery, stone tools and jewelry. Identifying their uses remains speculation. However, it is likely that many uses involved fertility rites and seasonal cycles. Until recently, menhirs were associated with the Beaker people, who inhabited Europe during the European late Neolithic and early Bronze Age — later third millennium BC, ca. 2800 – 1800 BC. However, recent research into the age of megaliths in Brittany strongly suggests a far older origin, perhaps back to six to seven thousand years ago.[6]
Many menhirs are engraved with megalithic art. This often turned them into anthropomorphic stelae, although images of objects such as stone axes, ploughs, shepherd crooks and yokes were common. With the exception of the stone axe, none of these motifs are definite, and the name used to describe them is largely for convenience. Some menhirs were broken up and incorporated into later passage graves, where they had new megalithic art carved with little regard for the previous pictures. It is not known if this re-use was deliberate or if the passage grave builders just saw menhirs as a convenient source of stone (Le Roux 1992).
During the Middle Ages, standing stones were believed to have been built by the giants who inhabited the earth before the biblical flood. Many of the megaliths were destroyed or defaced by early Christians, but it is estimated that some 50,000 megaliths once stood in Northern Europe, where almost 10,000 now remain.[7]
Geographical distribution[edit]



- Europe -



Scandinavia[edit]




Frostatinget bautasten


In Scandinavia, menhirs are called bautasteiner or bautastenar and continued to be erected during the Pre-Roman Iron Age and later, usually over the ashes of the dead. They were raised both as solitary stones and in formations, such as the stone ships and few stone circles. Sometimes, they were raised only as commemoration to great people, a tradition which was continued as the runestones.
Frostating, with its seat at Tinghaugen in Frosta municipality in the county of Nord-Trøndelag, was the site of an early Norwegian court. The site is represented by the Frostatinget bautasten.
The tradition was strongest in Bornholm, Gotland and Götaland and appears to have followed the Goths, during the 1st century, to the southern shore of the Baltic Sea, (now Northern Poland) where they are a characteristic of the Wielbark culture.[8][9]
Sweden[edit]
In Sweden by the 13th century menhirs were erected as markers for the graves of warriors. The following lines are taken from the introduction of the Heimskringla by Snorri Sturluson;

As to funeral rites, the earliest age is called the Age of Burning; because all the dead were consumed by fire, and over their ashes were raised standing stones.


For men of consequence a mound should be raised to their memory, and for all other warriors who had been distinguished for manhood a standing stone; which custom remained long after Odin's time.[10]

In the same work, Snorri wrote that the Swedes burnt their dead king Vanlade and raised a stone over his ashes by the River Skyt (one of the tributaries of the River Fyris):

The Swedes took his body and burnt it at a river called Skytaa, where a standing stone was raised over him.[10]

The tradition is also mentioned in Hávamál.
Ireland[edit]




Punchestown Longstone, Ireland


Ireland is rich in menhirs/ standing stones which are usually located in farmer's fields and are heavily worn due to poor weather conditions and exposure to livestock.
Czech Republic[edit]




The Menhir Kamenný pastýř (Stony shepherd) near Klobuky, Czech Republic.


A number of menhirs exist in the Czech Republic. These standing stones include the Menhir Kamenný pastýř (Stony shepherd) near Klobuky.
Switzerland[edit]
In the French-speaking canton of Vaud in Switzerland, several menhirs form linear patterns in Yverdon-les-Bains. These are situated in Clendy and date back to the third millennium BC.
France[edit]




The Kerloas menhir, the tallest standing menhir in Brittany[11])


Brittany stands out in the distribution of menhirs by virtue of both the density of monuments and the diversity of types. The largest surviving menhir in the world is located in Locmariaquer, Brittany, and it is known as the Grand Menhir Brisé (Great Broken Menhir). Once nearly 20.6m (67.6&#160;ft) high, today, it lies fractured into four pieces, but it would have weighed near 330 tons when intact. It is placed third after the Thunder Stone in St. Petersburg and the Western Stone in the Western Wall as the heaviest object moved by humans without powered machinery.
A 4.5 meter menhir can be seen on the side of Le Mans Cathedral. It was moved there in 1778 when the dolmen it was associated with was destroyed.
Alignments of menhirs are common, the most famous being the Carnac stones in Brittany, where more than 3000 individual menhirs are arranged in four groups and arrayed in rows stretching across four kilometres. Each set is organised with the tallest stones at the western end and shorter ones at the eastern end. Some end with a semicircular cromlech, but many have since fallen or been destroyed.[6]
The second largest concentration of menhirs in France is at the Cham des Bondons, which is located on high open limestone plain in the granitic Cévennes. Today, the site is protected by the Parc National des Cévennes. From the time pastoralism was established, the site was kept open by controlled burning and grazing.[12]
On the island of Corsica, menhirs are found in Filitosa, a megalithic site in southern Corsica. The period of occupation spans from the end of the Neolithic era and the beginning of the Bronze Age, until around the Roman times in Corsica.
Italy[edit]




Menhir in Sardinia


Menhirs are especially common in Sardinia.[13] It is possible to see at least 332 such standing stones on the island,[14] including especially elaborate "statue-menhirs" that show a human face at the top and other gendered symbols on the flat front sides. Over a hundred examples of this standardized type have been found, most of them around the village of Laconi.[14] In the Sardinian language they are known as perdas fittas or perdas lungas.[15]
Portugal[edit]




The great Almendres Menhir in Évora, Portugal.


In Portugal, there are also found several ancient menhirs. Among these megalithic structures is the great Almendres Menhir within the Almendres Cromlech complex near Évora.
Serbia[edit]
The graves of the "Latins" and the "Jidovs" near the village of Balwan (Bovan), north of Aleksinac in Serbia were marked by large boulders.[16]



- West Asia -



Armenia[edit]
Numerous menhirs dot the lands across Armenia, where they are called vishapakar (Armenian: Վիշապաքար). Vishap translates to "dragon" or "serpent" and kar translates to "stone". The stones are cigar-shaped, and are typically 10 to 20&#160;feet tall (3 to 6&#160;m). They are often found in the mountains near the sources of rivers or lakes. A large number of them have been carved in the shape of a fish. The earliest known vishapakar is thought to date from between the 18th to 16th centuries BC. An inscription in ancient Urartian cuneiform written upon a vishap at the temple of Garni shows that they were created prior to the Urartian Kingdom (pre-8th century).
Israel[edit]
The Hebrew term for "standing stone" is masseba, pl. massebot (also written matseva, matsevot). The most famous examples are from the Canaanite High Place at Tel Gezer, comprising a straight row of ten stone stelae and a square stone basin, all erected simultaneously during the Middle Bronze Age. [17]
Iran[edit]
Menhirs in Iran are found in different villages and areas of East Azarbaijan Province, and Amlash and Deylaman areas in Gilan. A double menhir is also situated on Kharg Island in the Persian Gulf.
Menhirs are called Sang-Afrāsht (سنگ‌افراشت) in Persian, and there are different studies published in Iranian periodicals about the details of the Iranian menhirs, specially in the periodical "Barrasiha-yi Tarikhi" (Historical studies).



- Southeast Asia -



India[edit]




Menhir at Dannanapeta Megalithic site, Srikakulam district, Andhra Pradesh


At Mudumala (Mahabubnagar District, Andhra Pradesh), an archeological site was dotted with about 80 big menhirs some as tall as 14 feet (over 4.2&#160;m) and several hundreds of smaller menhirs scattered all over the agricultural fields. Dr. Rao and his team visited the site on the days of summer and winter solstice and equinox and found that particular rows of stones were aligned to the rising and setting Sun on these days. "This suggests the megalithic community here was aware of the solar trajectories," he said.[18]



- Africa -



Horn of Africa[edit]




Pre-Axumite standing stones in Qohaito, Eritrea.


Ancient standing stones are found throughout the Horn of Africa. Several of these old menhirs exist in Qohaito, Eritrea, and date to a period before the founding of the Kingdom of Axum. The Axumites themselves also erected a number of large stelae, which served a religious purpose in pre-Christian times. One of these granite columns is the largest such structure in the world, standing at 90 feet.[19]
In northeastern Somalia, on the coastal plain 20&#160;km to Alula's east are found ruins of an ancient monument in a platform style. The structure is formed by a rectangular drystone wall that is low in height; the space in between is filled with rubble and manually covered with small stones. Relatively large standing stones are also positioned on the edifice's corners. Near the platform are graves, which are outlined in stones. 24&#160;m by 17&#160;m in dimension, the structure is the largest of a string of ancient platform and enclosed platform monuments exclusive to far northeastern Somalia.[20] Additionally, around 200 stone monuments (taalos) are found in the northeastern Botiala site, most of which consist of cairns. There are a number of rows of standing stones on the eastern side of the structures, which are similar to those at Salweyn, a great cairn-held situated close to Heis. Besides cairns, the Botiala area also features a few other drystone monuments. These include disc monuments with circular, ground-level features, as well as low, rectangular platform monuments.[21] Burial sites near Burao in the northwestern part of the country likewise feature a number of old stelae.[22]
Additionally, between Djibouti City and Loyada in Djibouti are a number of anthropomorphic and phallic stelae. The structures are associated with graves of rectangular shape flanked by vertical slabs, as also found in central Ethiopia. The Djibouti-Loyada stelae are of uncertain age, and some of them are adorned with a T-shaped emblem.[23]
In Ethiopia, the town of Tiya contains 36 menhirs (standing stones) or stelae. Of these, 32 are engraved with swords and other mysterious symbols. The ancient structures suggest the presence of a large, prehistoric burial complex.[24] The archaeological site was designated a World Heritage Site in 1980.



- Americas -



South America[edit]
Menhirs were erected by the U'wa people of Colombia in their ancestral territory. They believe that the menhirs are the ancients of the U'wa clans who were turned into the stone piers of the world. Menhirs can be found in Chita and Chiscas, Boyacá.[citation needed]
There are 114 menhirs in the Provincial Park Los Menhires in Argentina. The stones are approximately 4 to high and wide. They were erected by the Tafí people, an indigenous culture of Tucumán province, and were used in fertility rites.[citation needed]
See also[edit]

Carlin stone
Carnac stones
Cove (standing stones)
Cromlech
Deer stone
Dolmen
Fulacht fiadh
Gowk Stone
Henge
Ley Lines
List of megalithic sites
Moai
Nature worship
Obelisk
Orthostat
Statue menhir
Stone circle
Stone row
Stone ship

Notes[edit]


^ Anon. "Menhir". The Free Dictionary. Farlex, Inc. Retrieved 15 December 2010.&#160;
^ Greene, Janice (January 2006). Strange But True Stories. ISBN&#160;1-59905-010-2. Retrieved 25 August 2011.&#160;
^ Oliphant, Margaret "The Atlas Of The Ancient World" 1992 p. 81
^ Chris Roberts, Heavy Words Lightly Thrown: The Reason Behind Rhyme, Thorndike Press,2006 (ISBN 0-7862-8517-6)
^ Patton, Mark. "Statements in Stone: Monuments and Society in Neolithic Brittany". (New York), Routledge, 1993. P. 4.
^ a b Aviva, Elyn; White, Gary. "Mysterious Megaliths: The Standing Stones of Carnac, Brittany, France". World and I, Vol. 13, October 1998.
^ Olsen, Brad (February 2004). "Carbnac". Sacred Places Around the World: 108 Destinations By Brad Olsen. Consortium of Collective Consciousness. p.&#160;232. ISBN&#160;1-888729-10-4. Retrieved 21 February 2010.&#160;
^ The Goths in Greater Poland Retrieved on 2008-03-24
^ Poznan Archeological Museum: Jewellry of the Goths Retrieved on 2008-03-24
^ a b The Ynglinga Saga Retrieved on 2008-03-24
^ http://sophie-g.net/photo/bret/brest/kerloas01.htm
^ "Sentier du Pradal" (French language). Parc National des Cévennes. Retrieved 27 April 2007.
^ Stephen L. Dyson; Robert J. Rowland, Jr. (10 December 2007). Archaeology and History in Sardinia from the Stone Age to the Middle Ages: Shepherds, Sailors, and Conquerors. UPenn Museum of Archaeology. p.&#160;44. ISBN&#160;978-1-934536-02-5.&#160;
^ a b Luca Lai (2008). The Interplay of Economic, Climatic and Cultural Change Investigated Through Isotopic Analyses of Bone Tissue: The Case of Sardinia 4000--1900 BC. ProQuest. p.&#160;119. ISBN&#160;978-0-549-77286-6.&#160;
^ Robert Tennant (1885). Sardinia and Its Resources. Spithöver. p.&#160;48.&#160;
^ http://www.pelasgians.bigpondhosting.com/website1/09_01.htm
^ David Ussishkin (2006). Czerny E., Hein I., Hunger H., Melman D., Schwab A., eds. On the History of the High Place at Gezer. Studies in Honour of Manfred Bietak, Vol. II (Leuven: Peeters Publishers). pp.&#160;411–416. Retrieved February 2015.&#160;
^ "Signature of the sky in rock". The Hindu (Chennai, India). 2006-04-19.&#160;
^ Brockman, Norbert (2011). Encyclopedia of Sacred Places, Volume 1. ABC-CLIO. p.&#160;30. ISBN&#160;1-59884-654-X.&#160;
^ Chittick, Neville (1975). An Archaeological Reconnaissance of the Horn: The British-Somali Expedition. pp.&#160;117–133.&#160;
^ Chittick, Neville (1984). Newsletter of the Society of Africanist Archaeologists, Issues 24-32. Department of Archaeology, University of Calgary. Retrieved 4 September 2014.&#160;
^ "National Museums". Somali Heritage and Archaeology. Retrieved 13 October 2013.&#160;
^ Fattovich, Rodolfo (1987). "Some remarks on the origins of the Aksumite Stelae" (PDF). Annales d'Ethiopie 14 (14): 43–69. Retrieved 7 September 2014.&#160;
^ Gary R. Varner (1 January 2004). Menhirs, Dolmen, and Circles of Stone: The Folklore and Magic of Sacred Stone. Algora Publishing. p.&#160;15. ISBN&#160;978-0-87586-351-1.&#160;


References[edit]

Le Roux, C. T. 1992. "The Art of Gavrinis Presented in its Armorican Context and in Comparison with Ireland." in Journal of the Royal Society of Antiquaries of Ireland vol. 122, pp 79–108.
Mohen, Jean-Pierre. 2000. Standing Stones. Stonehenge, Carnac and the World of Megaliths. London: Thames &amp; Hudson. ISBN 0-500-30090-9.

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Menhirs.



Dolmens, Menhirs &amp; Stones-Circles in the South of France – Menhirs of the "Cham des Bondons"
New Theory – Henges – Engineering in Prehistory
Rows of Menhirs in Russia, South Ural
List of Menhirs and their related stories in Czech Republic
Ancient Europe Placemarks Google Earth file downloads.
Skela menhirs in Ukraine (Ukrainian)









v
t
e


Neolithic Europe (including the Chalcolithic)







↑ Mesolithic Europe ↑






Horizons



Cardial Ware
Corded Ware culture
First Temperate Neolithic
Linear Pottery culture (LBK)








Cultures



Baden
Beaker
Boian
Cernavodă
Cerny
Chasséen
Cortaillod
Coțofeni
Cucuteni-Trypillian
Decea Mureşului
Dudești
Funnelbeaker
Gaudo
Globular Amphora
Gorneşti
Gumelnița–Karanovo
Hamangia
Horgen
Karanovo
Körös
Lengyel
Narva
Petreşti
Pit–Comb Ware
Pitted Ware
Pfyn
Rössen
Seine-Oise-Marne
Sesklo
Starčevo-Kőrös-Criş
Tisza
Tiszapolgár
Varna
Vinča
Vučedol
Wartberg
Windmill Hill








Monumental
architecture



Bank barrow
Causewayed enclosure
Cursus
Dolmen
Dolmen entrance
Great dolmen
Guardian stones
Henge
Long barrow
Megalith
Menhir
Passage grave
Polygonal dolmen
Rectangular dolmen
Rondel
Round barrow
Simple dolmen
Standing stone
Statue menhir
Stone circle
Stone cist
Stone row
Timber circle
Tor enclosure
Unchambered long barrow








Technology



Grooved ware
Lithic industries
Metallurgy
Neolithic long house
Unstan ware








Concepts



Danubian culture
Secondary products revolution
Old Europe
Proto-Indo-Europeans









↓ Bronze Age Europe ↓














v
t
e


European megaliths






Armenia



Metsamor
Zorats Karer








Azerbaijan



Gobustan Rocks








England



Arbor Low
Avebury
Barbrook One
Birkrigg
Boscawen-Un
Boskednan
Brown Willy Cairns
The Bull Ring
Burnmoor stone circles
Castlerigg
Craddock Moor
Devil's Arrows
Doll Tor
Drizzlecombe
Duloe
Fernacre
Gardom's Edge
Goodaver
Grey Wethers
Hoarstones
Hordron Edge
Hurlers
Leper Stone
Long Meg and Her Daughters
Mên-an-Tol
The Merry Maidens
Mitchell's Fold
Nine Ladies
Nine Stones, Altarnun
Pipers
Rollright
Rudston Monolith
Scorhill
Stannon
Stanton Drew
Stonehenge
Stripple
Swinside
Trippet








France



Barnenez
Tumulus of Bougon
Caixa de Rotllan
Carnac
Menhir de Champ-Dolent
Dolmen de Bagneux
Broken Menhir of Er Grah
Filitosa
Gallardet Dolmen
Gavrinis
Harrespil
Kerzerho
Locmariaquer megaliths
Mane Braz
Paddaghju
Peyre-Brune
Tremeca
Verziau of Gargantua








Germany



Megaliths in Mecklenburg-Vorpommern
Lancken-Granitz dolmens








Ireland



Ardgroom
Beltany stone circle
Bohonagh
Brownshill Dolmen
Brú na Bóinne
Carrigagulla
Carrowmore
Castlestrange stone
Creevykeel Court Tomb
Drombeg
Gaulstown Portal Tomb
Glantane East
Grange stone circle
High cross
Knocknakilla
Meehambee Dolmen
Piper's Stones
Poulnabrone dolmen
Reask
Templebryan Stone Circle
Turoe stone
Uragh Stone Circle








Jersey



Jersey Dolmens
La Hougue Bie








Malta



Ġgantija
Ħaġar Qim
Ħal-Saflieni
Megalithic Temples of Malta
Mnajdra
Ta' Ħaġrat Temples
Skorba
Tarxien








Netherlands



Hunebed








Northern Ireland



Aughlish
Ballynoe
Beaghmore
Corick
Drumskinny
Legananny
Giant's Ring








Poland



Brąchnówko
Grzybnica
Odry
Węsiory








Portugal



Almendres Cromlech
Anta Grande do Zambujeiro
Cunha Baixa Dolmen








Russia



Dolmens of North Caucasus
Thunder Stone
Megaliths in the Urals
Russian Geoglyph








Scandinavia



Picture stones
Runestones
Stone circles
Stone ships








Scotland



Balquhain
Callanish

I
II
III
IV
VIII
X


Carlin
Cat Stane
Clach an Trushal
Colmeallie
Drybridge
Easter Aquhorthies
Lochmaben Stone
Pictish
Ring of Brodgar
Sheldon
Stenness
Steinacleit
Strichen
Yonder Bognie








Ukraine



Boundary stones








Wales



Barclodiad y Gawres
Bedd Arthur
Bedd Taliesin
Bodowyr
Bryn Cader Faner
Bryn Celli Ddu
Bryn Gwyn stones
Capel Garmon
Carreg Coetan Arthur
Carreg Samson
Coetan Arthur
Foel Chwern
Llanfechell
Lligwy Burial Chamber
Maen Llia
Maen Madoc
Meini Hirion
Moel Tŷ Uchaf
Parc Cwm long cairn
Pentre Ifan
St Lythans burial chamber
Tinkinswood
Tŷ Newydd Burial Chamber
Whetstones








General articles



Standing stone
Dolmen
Henge
Menhir
Stone circle
Stone row
Concentric stone circle
Recumbent stone circle
Chambered cairn
Harrespil
Photographs of stone circles
Middle Eastern megaliths
















v
t
e


Prehistoric technology









Prehistory

timeline
outline
Stone Age
subdivisions
New Stone Age
synoptic table


Technology

history














&#160;
Tools










Farming



Neolithic Revolution

founder crops
New World crops


Ard&#160;/ plough
Celt
Digging stick
Domestication
Goad
Irrigation
Secondary products
Sickle
Terracing








Food processing



Fire
Basket
Cooking

Earth oven


Granaries
Grinding slab
Ground stone
Hearth

Aşıklı Höyük
Qesem Cave


Manos
Metate
Mortar and pestle
Pottery
Quern-stone
Storage pit








Hunting







Arrow
Boomerang

throwing stick


Bow and arrow

history


Nets
Spear

Spear-thrower
baton
harpoon
woomera
Schöningen Spears










Projectile points



Arrowhead
Bare Island
Cascade
Clovis
Cresswell
Cumberland
Eden
Folsom
Lamoka
Manis Site
Plano
Transverse arrowhead











Toolmaking



Earliest toolmaking

Oldowan
Acheulean
Mousterian


Clovis culture
Cupstone
Fire hardening
Gravettian culture
Hafting
Hand axe

Grooves


Langdale axe industry
Levallois technique
Lithic core
Lithic reduction

analysis
debitage
flake


Lithic technology
Magdalenian culture
Metallurgy
Microblade technology
Mining
Prepared-core technique
Solutrean industry
Striking platform
Tool stone
Uniface
Yubetsu technique








Other tools



Adze
Awl

bone


Axe
Bannerstone
Blade

prismatic


Bone tool
Bow drill
Burin
Canoe

Oar
Pesse canoe


Chopper

tool


Cleaver
Denticulate tool
Fire plough
Fire-saw
Hammerstone
Knife
Microlith
Quern-stone
Racloir
Rope
Scraper

side


Stone tool
Tally stick
Weapons
Wheel

illustration




















&#160;
Architecture










Ceremonial



Göbekli Tepe
Kiva
Standing stones

megalith
row
Stonehenge


Pyramid








Dwellings



Neolithic architecture
British megalith architecture
Nordic megalith architecture
Burdei
Cave
Cliff dwelling
Dugout
Hut

Quiggly hole


Jacal
Longhouse
Mud brick

Mehrgarh


Neolithic long house
Pit-house
Pueblitos
Pueblo
Rock shelter

Blombos Cave
Abri de la Madeleine
Sibudu Cave


Stone roof
Roundhouse
Stilt house

Alp pile dwellings


Wattle and daub








Water management



Check dam
Cistern
Flush toilet
Reservoir
Water well








Other architecture



Archaeological features
Broch
Burnt mound

fulacht fiadh


Causewayed enclosure

Tor enclosure


Circular enclosure

Goseck


Cursus
Henge

Thornborough


Oldest buildings
Megalithic architectural elements
Midden
Timber circle
Timber trackway

Sweet Track




















&#160;
Arts and culture










Material goods



Baskets
Beadwork
Beds
Chalcolithic
Clothing/textiles

timeline


Cosmetics
Glue
Hides

shoes
Ötzi


Jewelry

amber use


Mirrors
Pottery

Cardium
Grooved ware
Linear
Jōmon
Unstan ware


Sewing needle
Weaving
Wine

Winery
wine press










Prehistoric art



Art of the Upper Paleolithic
Art of the Middle Paleolithic

Blombos Cave


List of Stone Age art
Bird stone
Bradshaw rock paintings
Cairn
Carved Stone Balls
Cave paintings

painting
pigment


Cup and ring mark
Geoglyph
Golden hats
Guardian stones
Megalithic art
Petroform
Petroglyph
Petrosomatoglyph
Pictogram
Rock art

Stone carving


Sculpture
Statue menhir
Stone circle

list
British Isles and Brittany


Venus figurines








Burial



Burial mounds

Bowl barrow
Round barrow


Mound Builders culture

U.S. sites


Chamber tomb

Severn-Cotswold


Cist

Dartmoor kistvaens


Clava cairn
Court tomb
Cremation
Dolmen

Great dolmen


Funeral pyre
Gallery grave

transepted
wedge-shaped


Grave goods
Jar burial
Long barrow

unchambered
Grønsalen


Megalithic tomb
Mummy
Passage grave
Rectangular dolmen
Ring cairn
Simple dolmen
Stone box grave
Tor cairn
Tumulus
Unchambered long cairn








Other cultural



Astronomy

sites
lunar calendar


Behavioral modernity
Origin of language
Prehistoric medicine

trepanning


Evolutionary musicology

music archaeology


Prehistoric music

Alligator drum
flutes
Divje Babe flute
gudi


Prehistoric numerals
Origin of religion

Paleolithic religion
Prehistoric religion
Spiritual drug use


Prehistoric warfare
Symbols

symbolism





















Authority control



GND: 4140069-0















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Menhir&amp;oldid=690816403"					
				Categories: Megalithic monumentsSacred rocksStone monuments and memorialsStone Age EuropeHidden categories: Use dmy dates from June 2012Articles containing Armenian-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from December 2009Commons category with local link same as on WikidataArticles with Ukrainian-language external linksWikipedia articles with GND identifiers				
							
		
		
			