


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Modern art
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				For other uses, see Modern art (disambiguation). Not to be confused with art moderne.







Pablo Picasso, Dejeuner sur l'Herbe






Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec, At the Moulin Rouge: Two Women Waltzing, 1892






Vincent van Gogh, Country road in Provence by Night, 1889, May 1890, Kröller-Müller Museum






Paul Cézanne, The Large Bathers, 1898–1905






Paul Gauguin, Spirit of the Dead Watching 1892, Albright-Knox Art Gallery






Georges Seurat, The Models, 1888, Barnes Foundation






The Scream by Edvard Munch, 1893






Pablo Picasso, Family of Saltimbanques, 1905, National Gallery of Art, Washington, DC.






Jean Metzinger, 1907, Paysage coloré aux oiseaux aquatique, oil on canvas, 74 x 99 cm, Musée d’Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris






Klimt in a light Blue Smock by Egon Schiele, 1913






I and the Village by Marc Chagall, 1911






Black Square by Kasimir Malevich, 1915






Marcel Duchamp, Fountain, 1917. Photograph by Alfred Stieglitz






Wassily Kandinsky, On White II, 1923





Modern art includes artistic works produced during the period extending roughly from the 1860s to the 1970s, and denotes the style and philosophy of the art produced during that era.[1] The term is usually associated with art in which the traditions of the past have been thrown aside in a spirit of experimentation.[2] Modern artists experimented with new ways of seeing and with fresh ideas about the nature of materials and functions of art. A tendency away from the narrative, which was characteristic for the traditional arts, toward abstraction is characteristic of much modern art. More recent artistic production is often called Contemporary art or Postmodern art.
Modern art begins with the heritage of painters like Vincent van Gogh, Paul Cézanne, Paul Gauguin, Georges Seurat and Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec all of whom were essential for the development of modern art. At the beginning of the 20th century Henri Matisse and several other young artists including the pre-cubists Georges Braque, André Derain, Raoul Dufy, Jean Metzinger and Maurice de Vlaminck revolutionized the Paris art world with "wild", multi-colored, expressive landscapes and figure paintings that the critics called Fauvism. Henri Matisse's two versions of The Dance signified a key point in his career and in the development of modern painting.[3] It reflected Matisse's incipient fascination with primitive art: the intense warm color of the figures against the cool blue-green background and the rhythmical succession of the dancing nudes convey the feelings of emotional liberation and hedonism.
Initially influenced by Toulouse-Lautrec, Gauguin and other late 19th century innovators, Pablo Picasso made his first cubist paintings based on Cézanne's idea that all depiction of nature can be reduced to three solids: cube, sphere and cone. With the painting Les Demoiselles d'Avignon (1907), Picasso dramatically created a new and radical picture depicting a raw and primitive brothel scene with five prostitutes, violently painted women, reminiscent of African tribal masks and his own new Cubist inventions. Analytic cubism was jointly developed by Pablo Picasso and Georges Braque, exemplified by Violin and Candlestick, Paris, from about 1908 through 1912. Analytic cubism, the first clear manifestation of cubism, was followed by Synthetic cubism, practiced by Braque, Picasso, Fernand Léger, Juan Gris, Albert Gleizes, Marcel Duchamp and several other artists into the 1920s. Synthetic cubism is characterized by the introduction of different textures, surfaces, collage elements, papier collé and a large variety of merged subject matter.[citation needed]
The notion of modern art is closely related to Modernism.[4]



Contents


1 History of modern art

1.1 Roots in the 19th century
1.2 Early 20th century
1.3 After World War II


2 Art movements and artist groups

2.1 19th century
2.2 Early 20th century (before World War I)
2.3 World War I to World War II
2.4 After World War II


3 Important modern art exhibitions and museums

3.1 Belgium
3.2 Brazil
3.3 Colombia
3.4 Croatia
3.5 Ecuador
3.6 Finland
3.7 France
3.8 Germany
3.9 India
3.10 Iran
3.11 Italy
3.12 Mexico
3.13 Netherlands
3.14 Norway
3.15 Qatar
3.16 Romania
3.17 Russia
3.18 Serbia
3.19 Spain
3.20 Sweden
3.21 UK
3.22 USA


4 See also
5 Notes
6 References
7 Further reading
8 External links



History of modern art[edit]




Édouard Manet, The Luncheon on the Grass (Le déjeuner sur l'herbe), 1863, Musée d'Orsay, Paris


Roots in the 19th century[edit]




Vincent van Gogh, Courtesan (after Eisen) (1887), Van Gogh Museum



Vincent van Gogh, The Blooming Plumtree (after Hiroshige) (1887), Van Gogh Museum



Vincent van Gogh, Portrait of Père Tanguy (1887), Musée Rodin




Although modern sculpture and architecture are reckoned to have emerged at the end of the 19th century, the beginnings of modern painting can be located earlier.[5] The date perhaps most commonly identified as marking the birth of modern art is 1863,[6] the year that Édouard Manet showed his painting Le déjeuner sur l'herbe in the Salon des Refusés in Paris. Earlier dates have also been proposed, among them 1855 (the year Gustave Courbet exhibited The Artist's Studio) and 1784 (the year Jacques-Louis David completed his painting The Oath of the Horatii).[6] In the words of art historian H. Harvard Arnason: "Each of these dates has significance for the development of modern art, but none categorically marks a completely new beginning .... A gradual metamorphosis took place in the course of a hundred years."[6]
The strands of thought that eventually led to modern art can be traced back to the Enlightenment, and even to the 17th century.[7] The important modern art critic Clement Greenberg, for instance, called Immanuel Kant "the first real Modernist" but also drew a distinction: "The Enlightenment criticized from the outside ... . Modernism criticizes from the inside."[8] The French Revolution of 1789 uprooted assumptions and institutions that had for centuries been accepted with little question and accustomed the public to vigorous political and social debate. This gave rise to what art historian Ernst Gombrich called a "self-consciousness that made people select the style of their building as one selects the pattern of a wallpaper."[9]
The pioneers of modern art were Romantics, Realists and Impressionists.[10] By the late 19th century, additional movements which were to be influential in modern art had begun to emerge: post-Impressionism as well as Symbolism.
Influences upon these movements were varied: from exposure to Eastern decorative arts, particularly Japanese printmaking, to the coloristic innovations of Turner and Delacroix, to a search for more realism in the depiction of common life, as found in the work of painters such as Jean-François Millet. The advocates of realism stood against the idealism of the tradition-bound academic art that enjoyed public and official favor.[11] The most successful painters of the day worked either through commissions or through large public exhibitions of their own work. There were official, government-sponsored painters' unions, while governments regularly held public exhibitions of new fine and decorative arts.
The Impressionists argued that people do not see objects but only the light which they reflect, and therefore painters should paint in natural light (en plein air) rather than in studios and should capture the effects of light in their work.[12] Impressionist artists formed a group, Société Anonyme Coopérative des Artistes Peintres, Sculpteurs, Graveurs ("Association of Painters, Sculptors, and Engravers") which, despite internal tensions, mounted a series of independent exhibitions.[13] The style was adopted by artists in different nations, in preference to a "national" style. These factors established the view that it was a "movement". These traits—establishment of a working method integral to the art, establishment of a movement or visible active core of support, and international adoption—would be repeated by artistic movements in the Modern period in art.
Early 20th century[edit]




Pablo Picasso Les Demoiselles d'Avignon 1907, Museum of Modern Art, New York






Henri Matisse, The Dance I, 1909, Museum of Modern Art, New York


Among the movements which flowered in the first decade of the 20th century were Fauvism, Cubism, Expressionism, and Futurism.
During the years between 1910 and the end of World War I and after the heyday of cubism, several movements emerged in Paris. Giorgio de Chirico moved to Paris in July 1911, where he joined his brother Andrea (the poet and painter known as Alberto Savinio). Through his brother he met Pierre Laprade, a member of the jury at the Salon d'Automne where he exhibited three of his dreamlike works: Enigma of the Oracle, Enigma of an Afternoon and Self-Portrait. During 1913 he exhibited his work at the Salon des Indépendants and Salon d’Automne, and his work was noticed by Pablo Picasso, Guillaume Apollinaire, and several others. His compelling and mysterious paintings are considered instrumental to the early beginnings of Surrealism. Song of Love (1914) is one of the most famous works by de Chirico and is an early example of the surrealist style, though it was painted ten years before the movement was "founded" by André Breton in 1924.
World War I brought an end to this phase but indicated the beginning of a number of anti-art movements, such as Dada, including the work of Marcel Duchamp, and of Surrealism. Artist groups like de Stijl and Bauhaus developed new ideas about the interrelation of the arts, architecture, design, and art education.
Modern art was introduced to the United States with the Armory Show in 1913 and through European artists who moved to the U.S. during World War I.
After World War II[edit]
It was only after World War II, however, that the U.S. became the focal point of new artistic movements.[14] The 1950s and 1960s saw the emergence of Abstract Expressionism, Color field painting, Pop art, Op art, Hard-edge painting, Minimal art, Lyrical Abstraction, Fluxus, Happening, Video art, Postminimalism, Photorealism and various other movements. In the late 1960s and the 1970s, Land art, Performance art, Conceptual art, and other new art forms had attracted the attention of curators and critics, at the expense of more traditional media.[15] Larger installations and performances became widespread.
By the end of the 1970s, when cultural critics began speaking of "the end of painting" (the title of a provocative essay written in 1981 by Douglas Crimp), new media art had become a category in itself, with a growing number of artists experimenting with technological means such as video art.[16] Painting assumed renewed importance in the 1980s and 1990s, as evidenced by the rise of neo-expressionism and the revival of figurative painting.[17]
Towards the end of the 20th century, a number of artists and architects started questioning the idea of "the modern" and created typically Postmodern works.[18]
Art movements and artist groups[edit]
(Roughly chronological with representative artists listed.)
19th century[edit]

Romanticism and the Romantic movement – Francisco de Goya, J. M. W. Turner, Eugène Delacroix
Realism – Gustave Courbet, Camille Corot, Jean-François Millet
Impressionism – Frédéric Bazille, Gustave Caillebotte, Mary Cassatt, Edgar Degas, Armand Guillaumin, Édouard Manet, Claude Monet, Berthe Morisot, Pierre-Auguste Renoir, Camille Pissarro, Alfred Sisley
Post-impressionism – Georges Seurat, Paul Cézanne, Paul Gauguin, Vincent van Gogh, Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec, Henri Rousseau, Henri-Jean Guillaume Martin, Albert Lebourg, Robert Antoine Pinchon
Symbolism – Gustave Moreau, Odilon Redon, Edvard Munch, James Whistler, James Ensor
Les Nabis – Pierre Bonnard, Édouard Vuillard, Félix Vallotton, Maurice Denis, Paul Serusier
Art Nouveau and variants – Jugendstil, Modern Style, Modernisme – Aubrey Beardsley, Alphonse Mucha, Gustav Klimt,
Art Nouveau architecture and design – Antoni Gaudí, Otto Wagner, Wiener Werkstätte, Josef Hoffmann, Adolf Loos, Koloman Moser
Divisionism – Jean Metzinger, Robert Delaunay, Paul Signac, Henri-Edmond Cross
Early Modernist sculptors – Aristide Maillol, Auguste Rodin

Early 20th century (before World War I)[edit]

Abstract art – Francis Picabia, Wassily Kandinsky, František Kupka, Robert Delaunay, Léopold Survage, Piet Mondrian
Fauvism – André Derain, Henri Matisse, Maurice de Vlaminck, Georges Braque
Expressionism and related – Die Brücke, Der Blaue Reiter - Ernst Ludwig Kirchner, Wassily Kandinsky, Franz Marc, Egon Schiele, Oskar Kokoschka, Emil Nolde, Axel Törneman, Karl Schmidt-Rottluff, Max Pechstein
Futurism – Giacomo Balla, Umberto Boccioni, Carlo Carrà, Gino Severini, Natalia Goncharova, Mikhail Larionov
Cubism – Pablo Picasso, Georges Braque, Jean Metzinger, Albert Gleizes, Fernand Léger, Robert Delaunay, Henri Le Fauconnier, Marcel Duchamp, Jacques Villon, Francis Picabia, Juan Gris
Sculpture – Pablo Picasso, Henri Matisse, Constantin Brâncuși, Joseph Csaky, Alexander Archipenko, Raymond Duchamp-Villon, Jacques Lipchitz, Ossip Zadkine
Orphism – Robert Delaunay, Sonia Delaunay, František Kupka
Photography – Pictorialism, Straight photography
Suprematism – Kasimir Malevich, Alexander Rodchenko, El Lissitzky
Synchromism – Stanton MacDonald-Wright, Morgan Russell
Vorticism – Wyndham Lewis
Dada – Jean Arp, Marcel Duchamp, Max Ernst, Francis Picabia, Kurt Schwitters

World War I to World War II[edit]

Pittura Metafisica – Giorgio de Chirico, Carlo Carrà, Giorgio Morandi
De Stijl – Theo van Doesburg, Piet Mondrian
Expressionism – Egon Schiele, Amedeo Modigliani, Chaim Soutine
New Objectivity – Max Beckmann, Otto Dix, George Grosz
Figurative painting – Henri Matisse, Pierre Bonnard
American Modernism – Stuart Davis, Arthur G. Dove, Marsden Hartley, Georgia O'Keeffe
Constructivism – Naum Gabo, Gustav Klutsis, László Moholy-Nagy, El Lissitzky, Kasimir Malevich, Vadim Meller, Alexander Rodchenko, Vladimir Tatlin
Surrealism – Marc Chagall, René Magritte, Jean Arp, Salvador Dalí, Max Ernst, Giorgio de Chirico, André Masson, Joan Miró
Bauhaus – Wassily Kandinsky, Paul Klee, Josef Albers
Sculpture – Alexander Calder, Alberto Giacometti, Gaston Lachaise, Henry Moore, Pablo Picasso, Julio Gonzalez
Scottish Colourists – Francis Cadell, Samuel Peploe, Leslie Hunter, John Duncan Fergusson
Suprematism – Kazimir Malevich, Aleksandra Ekster, Olga Rozanova, Nadezhda Udaltsova, Ivan Kliun, Lyubov Popova, Nikolai Suetin, Nina Genke-Meller, Ivan Puni, Ksenia Boguslavskaya
Precisionism – Charles Sheeler, Charles Demuth

After World War II[edit]

Figuratifs – Bernard Buffet, Jean Carzou, Maurice Boitel, Daniel du Janerand, Claude-Max Lochu
Sculpture – Henry Moore, David Smith, Tony Smith, Alexander Calder, Isamu Noguchi,[19] Alberto Giacometti, Sir Anthony Caro, Jean Dubuffet, Isaac Witkin, René Iché, Marino Marini, Louise Nevelson, Albert Vrana
Abstract expressionism – Willem de Kooning, Jackson Pollock, Hans Hofmann, Franz Kline, Robert Motherwell, Clyfford Still, Lee Krasner, Joan Mitchell
American Abstract Artists – Ilya Bolotowsky, Ibram Lassaw, Ad Reinhardt, Josef Albers, Burgoyne Diller
Art Brut – Adolf Wölfli, August Natterer, Ferdinand Cheval, Madge Gill, Paul Salvator Goldengreen
Arte Povera – Jannis Kounellis, Luciano Fabro, Mario Merz, Piero Manzoni, Alighiero Boetti
Color field painting – Barnett Newman, Mark Rothko, Adolph Gottlieb, Sam Francis, Morris Louis, Kenneth Noland, Jules Olitski, Helen Frankenthaler
Tachisme – Jean Dubuffet, Pierre Soulages, Hans Hartung, Ludwig Merwart
COBRA – Pierre Alechinsky, Karel Appel, Asger Jorn
De-collage – Wolf Vostell, Mimmo Rotella
Neo-Dada – Robert Rauschenberg, Jasper Johns, John Chamberlain, Joseph Beuys, Lee Bontecou, Edward Kienholz
Figurative Expressionism - Larry Rivers, Grace Hartigan, Elaine de Kooning, Robert De Niro, Sr., Lester Johnson, George McNeil, Earle M. Pilgrim, Jan Müller, Robert Beauchamp, Bob Thompson
Fluxus – George Maciunas, Joseph Beuys, Wolf Vostell, Nam June Paik, Daniel Spoerri, Dieter Roth, Carolee Schneeman, Alison Knowles, Charlotte Moorman, Dick Higgins
Happening – Allan Kaprow, Joseph Beuys, Wolf Vostell, Claes Oldenburg, Jim Dine, Red Grooms, Nam June Paik, Charlotte Moorman, Robert Whitman, Yoko Ono
Dau-al-Set – founded in Barcelona by poet/artist Joan Brossa, – Antoni Tàpies
Grupo El Paso – founded in Madrid by artists Antonio Saura, Pablo Serrano
Geometric abstraction – Wassily Kandinsky, Kazimir Malevich, Nadir Afonso, Manlio Rho, Mario Radice, Mino Argento
Hard-edge painting – John McLaughlin, Ellsworth Kelly, Frank Stella, Al Held, Ronald Davis
Kinetic art – George Rickey, Getulio Alviani
Land art – Christo, Richard Long, Robert Smithson, Michael Heizer
Les Automatistes – Claude Gauvreau, Jean-Paul Riopelle, Pierre Gauvreau, Fernand Leduc, Jean-Paul Mousseau, Marcelle Ferron
Minimal art – Sol LeWitt, Donald Judd, Dan Flavin, Richard Serra, Agnes Martin
Postminimalism – Eva Hesse, Bruce Nauman, Lynda Benglis
Lyrical abstraction – Ronnie Landfield, Sam Gilliam, Larry Zox, Dan Christensen, Natvar Bhavsar, Larry Poons
Neo-figurative art – Fernando Botero, Antonio Berni
Neo-expressionism – Georg Baselitz, Anselm Kiefer, Jörg Immendorff, Jean-Michel Basquiat
Transavanguardia – Francesco Clemente, Mimmo Paladino, Sandro Chia, Enzo Cucchi
Figuration libre – Hervé Di Rosa, François Boisrond, Robert Combas
New realism – Yves Klein, Pierre Restany, Arman
Op art – Victor Vasarely, Bridget Riley, Richard Anuszkiewicz, Jeffrey Steele
Outsider art – Howard Finster, Grandma Moses, Bob Justin
Photorealism – Audrey Flack, Chuck Close, Duane Hanson, Richard Estes, Malcolm Morley
Pop art – Richard Hamilton, Robert Indiana, Jasper Johns, Roy Lichtenstein, Robert Rauschenberg, Andy Warhol, Ed Ruscha, David Hockney
Postwar European figurative painting – Lucian Freud, Francis Bacon, Frank Auerbach, Gerhard Richter
New European Painting – Luc Tuymans, Marlene Dumas, Neo Rauch, Bracha Ettinger, Michaël Borremans, Chris Ofili
Shaped canvas – Frank Stella, Kenneth Noland, Ron Davis, Robert Mangold.
Soviet art – Aleksandr Deyneka, Aleksandr Gerasimov, Ilya Kabakov, Komar &amp; Melamid, Alexandr Zhdanov, Leonid Sokov
Spatialism – Lucio Fontana
Video art – Nam June Paik, Wolf Vostell, Joseph Beuys, Bill Viola
Visionary art – Ernst Fuchs, Paul Laffoley, Michael Bowen

Important modern art exhibitions and museums[edit]
For a comprehensive list, see Museums of modern art.

Belgium[edit]

SMAK, Ghent

Brazil[edit]

MASP, São Paulo, SP
MAM/SP, São Paulo, SP
MAM/RJ, Rio de Janeiro, RJ
MAM/BA, Salvador, Bahia

Colombia[edit]

MAMBO, Bogotá

Croatia[edit]

Ivan Meštrović Gallery, Split
Modern Gallery, Zagreb
Museum of Contemporary Art, Zagreb

Ecuador[edit]

Museo Antropologico y de Arte Contemporaneo, Guayaquil
La Capilla del Hombre, Quito

Finland[edit]

EMMA, Espoo

France[edit]

Lille Métropole Museum of Modern, Contemporary and Outsider Art, Villeneuve d'Ascq
Musée d'Orsay, Paris
Musée d'Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris, Paris
Musée National d'Art Moderne, Paris
Musée Picasso, Paris
Museum of Modern and Contemporary Art, Strasbourg

Germany[edit]

documenta, Kassel (Germany), a five-yearly exhibition of modern and contemporary art
Museum Ludwig, Cologne
Pinakothek der Moderne, Munich

India[edit]

National Gallery of Modern Art - New Delhi,
National Gallery of Modern Art - Mumbai,
National Gallery of Modern Art - Bangalore,

Iran[edit]

Museum of Contemporary Art, Tehran

Italy[edit]

Palazzo delle Esposizioni
Galleria Nazionale d'Arte Moderna
Venice Biennial, Venice

Mexico[edit]

Museo de Arte Moderno, México D.F.

Netherlands[edit]

Van Gogh Museum, Amsterdam
Stedelijk Museum, Amsterdam

Norway[edit]

Astrup Fearnley Museum of Modern Art, Oslo
Henie-Onstad Art Centre, Oslo

Qatar[edit]

Mathaf: Arab Museum of Modern Art, Doha

Romania[edit]

National Museum of Contemporary Art, Bucharest

Russia[edit]

Hermitage Museum, Saint Petersburg
Pushkin Museum, Moscow
Tretyakov Gallery, Moscow

Serbia[edit]

Museum of Contemporary Art, Belgrade

Spain[edit]

Museu d'Art Contemporani de Barcelona, Barcelona
Museo Nacional Centro de Arte Reina Sofía, Madrid
Thyssen-Bornemisza Museum, Madrid
Institut Valencià d'Art Modern, Valencia
Centro Atlántico de Arte Moderno, Las Palmas de Gran Canaria

Sweden[edit]

Moderna Museet, Stockholm

UK[edit]

Tate Modern, London

USA[edit]

Albright-Knox Art Gallery, Buffalo, New York
Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois
Guggenheim Museum, New York City, New York, and Venice, Italy&#160;; more recently in Berlin, Germany, Bilbao, Spain, and Las Vegas, Nevada
High Museum, Atlanta, Georgia
Los Angeles County Museum of Art, Los Angeles, California
McNay Art Museum, San Antonio, Texas
Menil Collection, Houston, Texas
Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, Massachusetts
Museum of Modern Art, New York City, New York
San Francisco Museum of Modern Art, San Francisco, California
The Baker Museum, Naples, Florida
Walker Art Center, Minneapolis, Minnesota
Whitney Museum of American Art, New York City, New York


See also[edit]


Modernism
List of modern artists
List of 20th-century women artists
20th century art
20th-century Western painting
Art manifesto
Art movements
Art periods
Contemporary art
History of painting
Modern architecture
Postmodern art
Western painting


Notes[edit]


^ Atkins 1990, p. 102.
^ Gombrich 1958, p. 419.
^ Russell T. Clement. Four French Symbolists. Greenwood Press, 1996. Page 114.
^ "One way of understanding the relation of the terms 'modern,' 'modernity,' and 'modernism' is that aesthetic modernism is a form of art characteristic of high or actualized late modernity, that is, of that period in which social, economic, and cultural life in the widest sense [was] revolutionized by modernity ... [this means] that modernist art is scarcely thinkable outside the context of the modernized society of the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Social modernity is the home of modernist art, even where that art rebels against it." Cahoone 1996, p. 13.
^ Arnason 1998, p. 10.
^ a b c Arnason 1998, p. 17.
^ "In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries momentum began to gather behind a new view of the world, which would eventually create a new world, the modern world". Cahoone 1996, p. 27.
^ Frascina and Harrison 1982, p. 5.
^ Gombrich 1958, pp. 358-359.
^ Arnason 1998, p. 22.
^ Corinth, Schuster, Brauner, Vitali, and Butts 1996, p.25.
^ Cogniat 1975, p. 61.
^ Cogniat 1975, pp. 43–49.
^ CIA and AbEx Retrieved November 7, 2010
^ Mullins 2006, p. 14.
^ Mullins 2006, p. 9.
^ Mullins 2006, pp. 14–15.
^ Post-Modernism: The New Classicism in Art and Architecture Charles Jencks
^ David Lander "Fifties Furniture: The Side Table as Sculpture," American Heritage, Nov./Dec. 2006.


References[edit]


Arnason, H. Harvard. 1998. History of Modern Art: Painting, Sculpture, Architecture, Photography. Fourth Edition, rev. by Marla F. Prather, after the third edition, revised by Daniel Wheeler. New York: Harry N. Abrams, Inc. ISBN 0-8109-3439-6; Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall. ISBN 0-13-183313-8; London: Thames &amp; Hudson. ISBN 0-500-23757-3 [Fifth edition, revised by Peter Kalb, Upper Saddle River, N.J.: Prentice Hall; London: Pearson/Prentice Hall, 2004. ISBN 0-13-184069-X]
Atkins, Robert. 1990. Artspeak: A Guide to Contemporary Ideas, Movements, and Buzzwords. New York: Abbeville Press. ISBN 1-55859-127-3
Cahoone, Lawrence E. 1996. From Modernism to Postmodernism: An Anthology. Cambridge, Mass: Blackwell. ISBN 1-55786-603-1
Cogniat, Raymond. 1975. Pissarro. New York: Crown. ISBN 0-517-52477-5.
Corinth, Lovis, Peter-Klaus Schuster, Lothar Brauner, Christoph Vitali, and Barbara Butts. 1996. Lovis Corinth. Munich and New York: Prestel. ISBN 3-7913-1682-6
Frascina, Francis, and Charles Harrison (eds.) 1982. Modern Art and Modernism: A Critical Anthology. Published in association with The Open University. London: Harper and Row, Ltd. Reprinted, London: Paul Chapman Publishing, Ltd.
Frazier, Nancy. 2001. The Penguin Concise Dictionary of Art History. New York: Penguin Books. ISBN 0-14-051420-1
Gombrich, E. H. 1958. The Story of Art. London: Phaidon. OCLC&#160;220078463
Mullins, Charlotte. 2006. Painting People: Figure Painting Today. New York: D.A.P. ISBN 978-1-933045-38-2


Further reading[edit]


Adams, Hugh. 1979. Modern Painting. [Oxford]: Phaidon Press. ISBN 0-7148-1984-0 (cloth) ISBN 0-7148-1920-4 (pbk)
Childs, Peter. 2000. Modernism. London and New York: Routledge. ISBN 0-415-19647-7 (cloth) ISBN 0-415-19648-5 (pbk)
Crouch, Christopher. 2000. Modernism in Art Design and Architecture. New York: St. Martins Press. ISBN 0-312-21830-3 (cloth) ISBN 0-312-21832-X (pbk)
Dempsey, Amy. 2002. Art in the Modern Era: A Guide to Schools and Movements. New York: Harry A. Abrams. ISBN 0-8109-4172-4
Hunter, Sam, John Jacobus, and Daniel Wheeler. 2004. Modern Art. Revised and Updated 3rd Edition. New York: The Vendome Press [Pearson/Prentice Hall]. ISBN 0-13-189565-6 (cloth) 0-13-150519-X (pbk)
Kolocotroni, Vassiliki, Jane Goldman, and Olga Taxidou (eds.). 1998. Modernism: An Anthology of Sources and Documents. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-45073-2 (cloth) ISBN 0-226-45074-0 (pbk)
Ozenfant, Amédée. 1952. Foundations of Modern Art. New York: Dover Publications. OCLC&#160;536109
Read, Herbert and Benedict. 1975. A Concise History of Modern Painting. Thames and Hudson. ISBN 978-0-500-20141-1


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Modern art.





Wikiquote has quotations related to: Modern art



Tate Modern
The Museum of Modern Art
Modern artists and art
A TIME Archives Collection of Modern Art's perception
National Gallery of Modern Art - Govt. of India









v
t
e


Modernism






Milestones



Le Déjeuner sur l’herbe (1862-63)
Olympia (1863)
A Sunday Afternoon on the Island of La Grande Jatte (1886)
Mont Sainte-Victoir) (1887)
The Starry Night (1889)
Ubu Roi (1896)
Verklärte Nacht (1899)
Le bonheur de vivre (1905-1906)
Les Demoiselles d'Avignon (1907)
The Firebird (1910)
Afternoon of a Faun (1912)
Nude Descending a Staircase, No. 2 (1912)
In Search of Lost Time (1913–1927)
The Metamorphosis (1915)
Fountain (1917)
The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari (1920)
Six Characters in Search of an Author (1921)
Ulysses (1922)
The Waste Land (1922)
The Magic Mountain (1924)
Battleship Potemkin (1925)
The Sun Also Rises (1926)
The Threepenny Opera (1928)
Un Chien Andalou (1929)
Villa Savoye (1931)
The Blue Lotus (1936)
Fallingwater (1936)
Waiting for Godot (1953)








Literature



Guillaume Apollinaire
Djuna Barnes
Tadeusz Borowski
André Breton
Mikhail Bulgakov
Anton Chekhov
Joseph Conrad
Alfred Döblin
E. M. Forster
William Faulkner
Gustave Flaubert
Ford Madox Ford
André Gide
Knut Hamsun
Jaroslav Hašek
Ernest Hemingway
Hermann Hesse
James Joyce
Franz Kafka
Arthur Koestler
D. H. Lawrence
Wyndham Lewis
Thomas Mann
Katherine Mansfield
Filippo Tommaso Marinetti
Guy de Maupassant
Robert Musil
Katherine Anne Porter
Marcel Proust
Gertrude Stein
Italo Svevo
Virginia Woolf








Poetry



Anna Akhmatova
Richard Aldington
W. H. Auden
Charles Baudelaire
Luca Caragiale
Constantine P. Cavafy
Blaise Cendrars
Hart Crane
H.D.
Robert Desnos
T. S. Eliot
Paul Éluard
Odysseas Elytis
F. S. Flint
Stefan George
Max Jacob
Federico García Lorca
Amy Lowell
Robert Lowell
Mina Loy
Stéphane Mallarmé
Marianne Moore
Wilfred Owen
Octavio Paz
Fernando Pessoa
Ezra Pound
Lionel Richard
Rainer Maria Rilke
Arthur Rimbaud
Giorgos Seferis
Wallace Stevens
Dylan Thomas
Tristan Tzara
Paul Valéry
William Carlos Williams
W. B. Yeats








Visual art



Josef Albers
Jean Arp
Balthus
George Bellows
Umberto Boccioni
Pierre Bonnard
Georges Braque
Constantin Brâncuși
Alexander Calder
Charles Camoin
Mary Cassatt
Paul Cézanne
Marc Chagall
Giorgio de Chirico
Camille Claudel
Joseph Cornell
Joseph Csaky
Salvador Dalí
Edgar Degas
Raoul Dufy
Othon Friesz
Willem de Kooning
Robert Delaunay
Charles Demuth
Otto Dix
Theo van Doesburg
Marcel Duchamp
James Ensor
Max Ernst
Jacob Epstein
Paul Gauguin
Alberto Giacometti
Vincent van Gogh
Natalia Goncharova
Julio González
Juan Gris
George Grosz
Raoul Hausmann
Hannah Höch
Edward Hopper
Frida Kahlo
Wassily Kandinsky
Ernst Ludwig Kirchner
Paul Klee
Oskar Kokoschka
Pyotr Konchalovsky
Aristarkh Lentulov
André Lhote
Fernand Léger
Franz Marc
Albert Marque
Ilya Mashkov
Jean Marchand
René Magritte
Kazimir Malevich
Édouard Manet
Henri Matisse
Colin McCahon
Jean Metzinger
Joan Miró
Amedeo Modigliani
Piet Mondrian
Claude Monet
Henry Moore
Edvard Munch
Emil Nolde
Georgia O'Keeffe
Méret Oppenheim
Henri Ottmann
Francis Picabia
Pablo Picasso
Camille Pissarro
Man Ray
Odilon Redon
Pierre-Auguste Renoir
Auguste Rodin
Henri Rousseau
Egon Schiele
René Schützenberger
Georges Seurat
Paul Signac
Alfred Sisley
Edward Steichen
Alfred Stieglitz
Henriette Tirman
Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec
Louis Valtat
Édouard Vuillard
Grant Wood








Music



George Antheil
Milton Babbitt
Jean Barraqué
Alban Berg
Luciano Berio
Nadia Boulanger
Pierre Boulez
John Cage
Elliott Carter
Aaron Copland
Henry Cowell
Henri Dutilleux
Morton Feldman
Henryk Gorecki
Josef Matthias Hauer
Paul Hindemith
Arthur Honegger
Charles Ives
Leoš Janáček
György Ligeti
Witold Lutosławski
Olivier Messiaen
Luigi Nono
Harry Partch
Krzysztof Penderecki
Sergei Prokofiev
Luigi Russolo
Erik Satie
Pierre Schaeffer
Arnold Schoenberg
Dmitri Shostakovich
Richard Strauss
Igor Stravinsky
Edgard Varèse
Anton Webern
Kurt Weill
Iannis Xenakis








Theatre



Edward Albee
Maxwell Anderson
Jean Anouilh
Antonin Artaud
Samuel Beckett
Bertolt Brecht
Anton Chekhov
Friedrich Dürrenmatt
Jean Genet
Maxim Gorky
Walter Hasenclever
Henrik Ibsen
William Inge
Eugène Ionesco
Alfred Jarry
Georg Kaiser
Maurice Maeterlinck
Vladimir Mayakovsky
Arthur Miller
Seán O'Casey
Eugene O'Neill
John Osborne
Luigi Pirandello
Erwin Piscator
George Bernard Shaw
August Strindberg
John Millington Synge
Ernst Toller
Frank Wedekind
Thornton Wilder
Stanisław Ignacy Witkiewicz








Film



Ingmar Bergman
Anton Giulio Bragaglia
Luis Buñuel
Marcel Carné
Charlie Chaplin
René Clair
Jean Cocteau
Maya Deren
Alexander Dovzhenko
Carl Theodor Dreyer
Viking Eggeling
Sergei Eisenstein
Jean Epstein
Robert J. Flaherty
Abel Gance
Isidore Isou
Buster Keaton
Lev Kuleshov
Fritz Lang
Marcel L'Herbier
Georges Méliès
F. W. Murnau
Georg Wilhelm Pabst
Vsevolod Pudovkin
Jean Renoir
Walter Ruttmann
Victor Sjöström
Josef von Sternberg
Dziga Vertov
Jean Vigo
Robert Wiene








Dance



George Balanchine
Merce Cunningham
Clotilde von Derp
Sergei Diaghilev
Isadora Duncan
Michel Fokine
Loie Fuller
Martha Graham
Hanya Holm
Doris Humphrey
Léonide Massine
Vaslav Nijinsky
Alwin Nikolais
Alexander Sakharoff
Ted Shawn
Anna Sokolow
Ruth St. Denis
Helen Tamiris
Charles Weidman
Mary Wigman








Architecture



Alvar Aalto
Marcel Breuer
Gordon Bunshaft
Antoni Gaudí
Walter Gropius
Hector Guimard
Raymond Hood
Victor Horta
Friedensreich Hundertwasser
Philip Johnson
Louis Kahn
Le Corbusier
Adolf Loos
Konstantin Melnikov
Erich Mendelsohn
Pier Luigi Nervi
Richard Neutra
Oscar Niemeyer
Hans Poelzig
Antonin Raymond
Gerrit Rietveld
Eero Saarinen
Rudolf Steiner
Edward Durell Stone
Louis Sullivan
Vladimir Tatlin
Paul Troost
Jørn Utzon
Ludwig Mies van der Rohe
Frank Lloyd Wright








Related articles



American modernism
Armory Show
Art Deco
Art Nouveau
Ashcan School
Avant-garde
Ballets Russes
Bauhaus
Buddhist modernism
Constructivism
Cubism
Dada
Degenerate art
De Stijl
Der Blaue Reiter
Die Brücke
Expressionism
Expressionist music
Fauvism
Fourth dimension in art
Fourth dimension in literature
Futurism
Imagism
Impressionism
International Style
Late modernism
Late modernity
Lettrism
List of art movements
List of avant-garde artists
List of modernist poets
Lyrical abstraction
Minimalism
Modern art
Modernity
Neo-Dada
Neo-primitivism
New Objectivity
Orphism
Post-Impressionism
Postminimalism
Postmodernism
Reactionary modernism
Metamodernism
Remodernism
Romanticism
Second Viennese School
Structural film
Surrealism
Symbolism
Synchromism
Tonalism
















v
t
e


Art movements






Medieval



Byzantine
Merovingian
Carolingian
Ottonian
Romanesque
Gothic (International Gothic)








Renaissance



Early Netherlandish
High Renaissance
Mannerism








17th century



Baroque
Caravaggisti
Classicism
Dutch Golden Age








18th century



Rococo
Neoclassicism
Romanticism








19th century



Nazarene
Realism / Realism
Historicism
Biedermeier
Gründerzeit
Barbizon school
Pre-Raphaelites
Academic
Aestheticism
Decadent
Macchiaioli
Art Nouveau
Peredvizhniki
Impressionism
Post-Impressionism
Neo-impressionism
Divisionism
Pointillism
Cloisonnism
Les Nabis
Synthetism
Kalighat painting
Symbolism
Hudson River School








20th century



Bengal School of Art
Amazonian pop art
Cubism
Orphism
Purism
Synchromism
Expressionism
Scuola Romana
Abstract expressionism
Kinetic art
Neue Künstlervereinigung München
Der Blaue Reiter
Die Brücke
New Objectivity
Dada
Fauvism
Neo-Fauvism
Precisionism
Bauhaus
De Stijl
Art Deco
Op art
Vienna School of Fantastic Realism
Pop art
Photorealism
Futurism
Metaphysical art
Rayonism
Vorticism
Suprematism
Surrealism
Color Field
Minimalism
Minimalism (visual arts)
Nouveau réalisme
Social realism
Lyrical abstraction
Tachisme
COBRA
Action painting
International Typographic Style
Fluxus
Lettrism
Letterist International
Situationist International
Conceptual art
Installation art
Land art
Performance art
Endurance art
Systems art
Video art
Neo-expressionism
Neo-Dada
Outsider art
Lowbrow
New media art
Young British Artists








21st century



Art intervention
Hyperrealism
Neo-futurism
Stuckism International
Remodernism
Sound art
Superstroke
Superflat
Relational art
Video game art








Related articles



List of art movements
Modern art
Modernism
Late modernism
Postmodern art
Avant-garde















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Modern_art&amp;oldid=678555687"					
				Categories: Modern artHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from October 2011Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata				
							
		
		
			