


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Moral
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				This article is about the use of the moral in storytelling.  For other uses, see morality.
For the township in Indiana, see Moral Township, Shelby County, Indiana.
A moral (from Latin morālis) is a message conveyed or a lesson to be learned from a story or event. The moral may be left to the hearer, reader or viewer to determine for themselves, or may be explicitly encapsulated in a maxim.



Contents


1 Finding morals
2 Arts and morals
3 Morals in moral tales
4 See also
5 References
6 External links



Finding morals[edit]
As an example of an explicit maxim, at the end of Aesop's fable of the Tortoise and the Hare, in which the plodding and determined tortoise wins a race against the much-faster yet extremely arrogant hare, the stated moral is "slow and steady wins the race". However, other morals can often be taken from the story itself; for instance, that arrogance or overconfidence in one's abilities may lead to failure or the loss of an event, race, or contest.
The use of stock characters is a means of conveying the moral of the story by eliminating complexity of personality and depicting the issues arising in the interplay between the characters, enables the writer to generate a clear message. With more rounded characters, such as those typically found in Shakespeare's plays, the moral may be more nuanced but no less present, and the writer may point it out in other ways (see, for example, the Prologue to Romeo and Juliet).
Arts and morals[edit]
Throughout the history of recorded literature, the majority of fictional writing has served not only to entertain but also to instruct, inform or improve their audiences or readership. In classical drama, for example, the role of the chorus was to comment on the proceedings and draw out a message for the audience to take away with them; while the novels of Charles Dickens are a vehicle for morals regarding the social and economic system of Victorian Britain.
Morals have typically been more obvious in children's literature, sometimes even being introduced with the phrase: "The moral of the story is …". Such explicit techniques have grown increasingly out of fashion in modern storytelling, and are now usually only included for ironic purposes.
Some examples are: "Better to be safe than sorry", "The evil deserves no aid", "Be friends with whom you don't like", "Don't judge people by the way they look", "Slow and steady wins the race", "Once started down the dark path, forever will it hold your destiny", and "Your overconfidence is your weakness".[1] Aesop's Fables are the most famous of stories with strong moral conclusions.
Morals in moral tales[edit]
Morals were one of the main purposes of literature during 1780-1830, especially in children's literature. Part of the reason for this was the writings of John Locke and Jean-Jacques Rousseau in the 18th century, which brought attention to children as an audience for literature. Following in their line of thought, Thomas Day (1748-1789) wrote Sandford and Merton, elevating the outstanding morals of one young boy above the rapscallion nature of another. Maria Edgeworth (1776-1849) was another prominent author of moral tales, writing about how a wise adult can educate a child; one of her more famous stories is "The Purple Jar". During this time, the theme of "a young heroine or hero gaining wisdom and maturity was taken up by many other writers" (p.&#160;93).[2]
See also[edit]

Allegory

References[edit]


^ "Aesop's Fables: Online Collection - Selected Fables". Retrieved 18 March 2013.&#160;
^ Dennis Butts (2006). Jack Zipes, ed. Children's Literature. New York: Oxford University Press. pp.&#160;93–96. ISBN&#160;0195146565.&#160;


External links[edit]



Look up moral in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.










v
t
e


Narrative






Character



Antagonist
Antihero
Archenemy
Characterization
Deuteragonist
False protagonist
Focal character
Foil
Protagonist
Stock character
Supporting character
Tritagonist
Narrator
Character arc








Plot



Cliché
Climax
Conflict
Dialogue
Dramatic structure
Exposition
Plot device
Plot twist
Reveal
Subplot
Trope
Kishōtenketsu








Setting



Utopia
Dystopia
Alternate history
Fictional location

city
country
universe










Theme



Leitmotif
Moral
Motif








Style



Diction
Figure of speech
Imagery
Narrative technique
Narration
Stylistic device
Suspension of disbelief
Symbolism
Tone
Mode
Mood








Form



Epic
Fable
Fabliau
Fairy tale
Folktale
Hypertext
Flash fiction
Legend
Nonlinear
Novella
Novel
Parable
Play
Poem
Screenplay
Short story
List of narrative forms








Genre



Adventure
Comic
Crime
Docufiction
Epistolary
Erotic
Fiction
Fantasy
Historical
Horror
Magic realism
Mystery
Nautical
Paranoid
Philosophical
Political
Romance
Saga
Satire
Science
Speculative
Superhero
Thriller
Urban
Western
List of literary genres








Narrator



First-person
Second-person
Third-person
Stream of consciousness
Stream of unconsciousness
Unreliable








Tense



Past
Present
Future








Related



Audience
Author
Creative nonfiction
Fiction writing
Literary theory
Narrative structure
Narratology
Monomyth
Rhetoric
Screenwriting
Storytelling









Literature portal













					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Moral&amp;oldid=683089248"					
				Categories: LiteratureNarratology				
							
		
		
			