


		
		
		
			

							
						



			Napoleon
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								  (Redirected from Napoleonic)
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				This article is about Napoleon I.  For other uses, see Napoleon (disambiguation).


Napoleon



The Emperor Napoleon in His Study at the Tuileries, by Jacques-Louis David, 1812



Emperor of the French


1st reign
18 May 1804 – 11 April 1814


Coronation
2 December 1804


Predecessor
Position created
Napoleon was previously First Consul of the French Republic (1799–1804)


Successor
Position abolished
Louis XVIII (Bourbon Restoration)


2nd reign
20 March 1815 – 22 June 1815


Predecessor
Position re-created
Louis XVIII


Successor
Position abolished
Louis XVIII (Bourbon Restoration)


King of Italy


Reign
17 March 1805 – 11 April 1814


Coronation
26 May 1805


Predecessor
Charles V (King in 1556)
Napoleon was previously President of the Italian Republic (1802–1805)


Successor
Victor Emmanuel II (King in 1861)


Protector of the Confederation of the Rhine


Reign
6 August 1806 –
4 November 1813


Predecessor
Francis II (Held equivalent post as Holy Roman Emperor)


Successor
Francis I (Came on to hold equivalent post as President of the German Confederation)







Born
(1769-08-15)15 August 1769
Ajaccio, Corsica, France


Died
5 May 1821(1821-05-05) (aged&#160;51)
Longwood, Saint Helena


Burial
Les Invalides, Paris, France


Spouse
Joséphine de Beauharnais
Marie Louise of Austria


Issue
Napoleon II





Full name


Napoleon Bonaparte





House
House of Bonaparte


Father
Carlo Buonaparte


Mother
Letizia Ramolino


Religion
Roman Catholicism[1] – (see Religions section)


Signature







Imperial coat of arms


Napoléon Bonaparte (/nəˈpoʊliən, -ˈpoʊljən/;[2] French:&#160;[napɔleɔ̃ bɔnapaʁt], born Napoleone di Buonaparte; 15 August 1769 – 5 May 1821) was a French military and political leader who rose to prominence during the French Revolution and led several successful campaigns during the Revolutionary Wars. As Napoleon I, he was Emperor of the French from 1804 until 1814, and again in 1815. Napoleon dominated European affairs for over a decade while leading France against a series of coalitions in the Napoleonic Wars. He won most of these wars and the vast majority of his battles, rapidly gaining control of continental Europe before his ultimate defeat in 1815. One of the greatest commanders in history, his campaigns are studied at military schools worldwide and he remains one of the most celebrated and controversial political figures in Western history.[3][4] In civil affairs, Napoleon had a major long-term impact by bringing liberal reforms to the countries that he conquered, especially the Low Countries, Switzerland, Italy, and large parts of Germany. He implemented fundamental liberal policies in France and throughout Western Europe.[note 1] His lasting legal achievement was the Napoleonic Code, which has been adopted in various forms by a quarter of the world's legal systems, from Japan to Quebec.[10][11][12]
Napoleon was born in Corsica to a relatively modest family of noble Tuscan ancestry. Serving in the French army, Napoleon supported the Revolution from the outset in 1789 and tried to spread its ideals to Corsica, but was banished from the island in 1793. Two years later, he saved the French government from collapse by firing on the Parisian mobs with cannons. After the Directory rewarded Napoleon by giving him command of Army of Italy at age 26, he began his first military campaign against the Austrians and their Italian allies, scoring a series of decisive victories that made him famous all across Europe. He followed the defeat of the Allies in Europe by commanding a military expedition to Egypt in 1798, conquering the Ottoman province after defeating the Mamelukes and launching modern Egyptology through the discoveries made by his army.
After returning from Egypt, Napoleon engineered a coup in November 1799 and became First Consul of the Republic. With the Concordat of 1801, Napoleon restored the religious powers of the Catholic Church but kept the lands seized by the Revolution. The state nominated the bishops and controlled church finances. He extended his political control over France until the Senate declared him Emperor of the French in 1804, launching the French Empire. Intractable differences with the British meant that the French were facing a Third Coalition by 1805. Napoleon shattered this coalition with decisive victories in the Ulm Campaign and a historic triumph at the Battle of Austerlitz, which led to the elimination of the Holy Roman Empire. In October 1805, however, a Franco-Spanish fleet was destroyed at the Battle of Trafalgar, allowing Britain to impose a naval blockade of the French coasts. In retaliation, Napoleon established the Continental System in 1806 to cut off European trade with Britain. The Fourth Coalition took up arms against him the same year because Prussia became worried about growing French influence on the continent. After quickly knocking out Prussia at the battles of Jena and Auerstedt, Napoleon turned his attention towards the Russians and annihilated them in 1807 at Friedland, which forced the Russians to accept the Treaties of Tilsit.
Hoping to extend the Continental System, Napoleon invaded Iberia and declared his brother Joseph the King of Spain in 1808. The Spanish and the Portuguese revolted with British support. The Peninsular War, noted for its brutal guerrilla warfare, lasted six years and culminated in an Allied victory. Fighting also erupted in Central Europe, as the Austrians launched another attack against the French in 1809. Napoleon defeated them at the Battle of Wagram, dissolving the Fifth Coalition formed against France. By 1811, Napoleon ruled over 70 million people across an empire that had domination in Europe, which had not witnessed this level of political consolidation since the days of the Roman Empire.[13] He maintained his strategic status through a series of alliances and family appointments. He created a new aristocracy in France while allowing the return of nobles who had been forced into exile by the Revolution.
Tensions over rising Polish nationalism and the economic effects of the Continental System led to renewed confrontation with Russia. To enforce his blockade, Napoleon launched an invasion of Russia in 1812 that ended in catastrophic failure for the French. In 1813, Prussia and Austria joined Russian forces in a Sixth Coalition against France. A chaotic military campaign eventually culminated in a large Allied army defeating Napoleon at the Battle of Leipzig in October. The next year, the Allies invaded France and captured Paris, forcing Napoleon to abdicate in April 1814. He was exiled to the island of Elba. The Bourbons were restored to power and the French lost most of the territories that they had conquered since the Revolution. However, Napoleon escaped from Elba in February 1815 and took control of the government once again. The Allies formed a Seventh Coalition, which ultimately defeated Napoleon at the Battle of Waterloo in June. He was then captured by the British and imprisoned on the remote island of Saint Helena. His death in 1821 at the age of 51 was received by shock and grief throughout Europe. In 1840, a million people witnessed his remains returning to Paris, where they still reside at Les Invalides.[14]



Contents


1 Origins and education
2 Early career

2.1 Siege of Toulon
2.2 13 Vendémiaire
2.3 First Italian campaign
2.4 Egyptian expedition


3 Ruler of France

3.1 French Consulate

3.1.1 Temporary peace in Europe


3.2 French Empire

3.2.1 War of the Third Coalition
3.2.2 Middle-Eastern alliances
3.2.3 War of the Fourth Coalition and Tilsit
3.2.4 Peninsular War and Erfurt
3.2.5 War of the Fifth Coalition and Marie Louise
3.2.6 Invasion of Russia
3.2.7 War of the Sixth Coalition
3.2.8 Exile to Elba
3.2.9 Hundred Days




4 Exile on Saint Helena

4.1 Death

4.1.1 Cause of death




5 Religions

5.1 Concordat
5.2 Religious emancipation


6 Personality
7 Image
8 Reforms

8.1 Napoleonic Code
8.2 Warfare
8.3 Metric system
8.4 Education


9 Memory and evaluation

9.1 Criticism
9.2 Propaganda and memory
9.3 Long-term impact outside France


10 Marriages and children
11 Titles, styles, honours, and arms
12 Ancestry
13 Notes
14 Citations
15 References

15.1 Biographical studies
15.2 Specialty studies
15.3 Historiography and memory


16 External links



Origins and education




Napoleon's father Carlo Buonaparte was Corsica's representative to the court of Louis XVI of France.


Napoleon was born on 15 August 1769, to Carlo Maria di Buonaparte and Maria Letizia Ramolino, in his family's ancestral home Casa Buonaparte in Ajaccio, the capital of the island of Corsica. He was their fourth child and third son. This was a year after the island was transferred to France by the Republic of Genoa.[15] He was christened Napoleone di Buonaparte, probably named after an uncle (an older brother who did not survive infancy was the first of the sons to be called Napoleone). In his 20s, he adopted the more French-sounding Napoléon Bonaparte.[16][note 2]
The Corsican Buonapartes were descended from minor Italian nobility of Tuscan origin, who had come to Corsica from Liguria in the 16th century.[17][18]




The nationalist Corsican leader Pasquale Paoli; portrait by Richard Cosway, 1798


His father Nobile Carlo Buonaparte was an attorney, and was named Corsica's representative to the court of Louis XVI in 1777. The dominant influence of Napoleon's childhood was his mother, Letizia Ramolino, whose firm discipline restrained a rambunctious child.[19] Napoleon's maternal grandmother had married into the Swiss Fesch family in her second marriage, and Napoleon's uncle, the later cardinal Joseph Fesch, would fulfill the role as protector of the Bonaparte family for some years.
He had an elder brother Joseph, and younger siblings: Lucien, Elisa, Louis, Pauline, Caroline, and Jérôme. A boy and girl were born before Joseph but died in infancy. Napoleon was baptised as a Catholic.[20]
Napoleon's noble, moderately affluent background afforded him greater opportunities to study than were available to a typical Corsican of the time.[21] In January 1779, he was enrolled at a religious school in Autun. In May, he was admitted to a military academy at Brienne-le-Château.[22] His mother language was Corsican, and he always spoke French with a marked Corsican accent and never learned to spell French properly.[23] He was teased by other students for his accent and applied himself to reading.[24] An examiner observed that Napoleon "has always been distinguished for his application in mathematics. He is fairly well acquainted with history and geography... This boy would make an excellent sailor."[25][note 3]
On completion of his studies at Brienne in 1784, Napoleon was admitted to the elite École Militaire in Paris. He trained to become an artillery officer and, when his father's death reduced his income, was forced to complete the two-year course in one year.[27] He was the first Corsican to graduate from the École Militaire.[27] He was examined by the famed scientist Pierre-Simon Laplace.[28]
Early career




Napoleon Bonaparte, aged 23, Lieutenant-Colonel of a battalion of Corsican Republican volunteers


Upon graduating in September 1785, Bonaparte was commissioned a second lieutenant in La Fère artillery regiment.[22][note 4] He served in Valence and Auxonne until after the outbreak of the Revolution in 1789, and took nearly two years' leave in Corsica and Paris during this period. He was a fervent Corsican nationalist, and wrote to Corsican leader Pasquale Paoli in May 1789, "As the nation was perishing I was born. Thirty thousand Frenchmen were vomited on to our shores, drowning the throne of liberty in waves of blood. Such was the odious sight which was the first to strike me."[30]
He spent the early years of the Revolution in Corsica, fighting in a complex three-way struggle among royalists, revolutionaries, and Corsican nationalists. He supported the Jacobin faction and gained command over a battalion of volunteers. He was promoted to captain in the regular army in July 1792, despite exceeding his leave of absence and leading a riot against a French army in Corsica.[31]
He returned to Corsica and came into conflict with Paoli, who had decided to split with France and sabotage the French assault on the Sardinian island of La Maddalena.[32] Bonaparte and his family fled to the French mainland in June 1793 because of the split with Paoli.[33]
Siege of Toulon
Main article: Siege of Toulon




Bonaparte at the Siege of Toulon


In July 1793, Bonaparte published a pro-republican pamphlet entitled Le souper de Beaucaire (Supper at Beaucaire) which gained him the support of Augustin Robespierre, younger brother of the Revolutionary leader Maximilien Robespierre. With the help of his fellow Corsican Antoine Christophe Saliceti, Bonaparte was appointed artillery commander of the republican forces at the siege of Toulon.[34]
He adopted a plan to capture a hill where republican guns could dominate the city's harbour and force the British to evacuate. The assault on the position led to the capture of the city, but during it Bonaparte was wounded in the thigh. He was promoted to brigadier general at the age of 24. Catching the attention of the Committee of Public Safety, he was put in charge of the artillery of France's Army of Italy.[35]
Napoleon spent time as inspector of coastal fortifications on the Mediterranean coast near Marseille while he was waiting for confirmation of the Army of Italy post. He devised plans for attacking the Kingdom of Sardinia as part of France's campaign against the First Coalition.[36] Augustin Robespierre and Saliceti were ready to listen to the freshly promoted artillery general.[37]
The French army carried out Bonaparte's plan in the Battle of Saorgio in April 1794, and then advanced to seize Ormea in the mountains. From Ormea, they thrust west to outflank the Austro-Sardinian positions around Saorge. Later, Augustin Robespierre sent Bonaparte on a mission to the Republic of Genoa to determine that country's intentions towards France.[36]
13 Vendémiaire
Main article: 13 Vendémiaire
Some contemporaries alleged that Bonaparte was put under house arrest at Nice for his association with the Robespierres following their fall in the Thermidorian Reaction in July 1794, but Napoleon's secretary Bourrienne disputed the allegation in his memoirs. According to Bourrienne, jealousy was responsible, between the Army of the Alps and the Army of Italy (with whom Napoleon was seconded at the time).[38] Bonaparte dispatched an impassioned defense in a letter to representants Salicetti and Albitte, and subsequently he was acquitted of any wrongdoing.[39]
He was released within two weeks and, due to his technical skills, was asked to draw up plans to attack Italian positions in the context of France's war with Austria. He also took part in an expedition to take back Corsica from the British, but the French were repulsed by the Royal Navy.[40]
By 1795, Bonaparte had become engaged to Désirée Clary, daughter of François Clary. Désirée's sister Julie Clary had married Bonaparte's elder brother Joseph.[41] In April 1795, he was assigned to the Army of the West, which was engaged in the War in the Vendée—a civil war and royalist counter-revolution in Vendée, a region in west central France on the Atlantic Ocean. As an infantry command, it was a demotion from artillery general—for which the army already had a full quota—and he pleaded poor health to avoid the posting.[42]




Journée du 13 Vendémiaire. Artillery fire in front of the Church of Saint-Roch, Paris, Rue Saint-Honoré


He was moved to the Bureau of Topography of the Committee of Public Safety and sought unsuccessfully to be transferred to Constantinople in order to offer his services to the Sultan.[43] During this period, he wrote the romantic novella Clisson et Eugénie, about a soldier and his lover, in a clear parallel to Bonaparte's own relationship with Désirée.[44] On 15 September, Bonaparte was removed from the list of generals in regular service for his refusal to serve in the Vendée campaign. He faced a difficult financial situation and reduced career prospects.[45]
On 3 October, royalists in Paris declared a rebellion against the National Convention.[46] Paul Barras, a leader of the Thermidorian Reaction, knew of Bonaparte's military exploits at Toulon and gave him command of the improvised forces in defence of the Convention in the Tuileries Palace. Napoleon had seen the massacre of the King's Swiss Guard there three years earlier and realised that artillery would be the key to its defence.[22]
He ordered a young cavalry officer named Joachim Murat to seize large cannons and used them to repel the attackers on 5 October 1795—13 Vendémiaire An IV in the French Republican Calendar. 1,400 royalists died and the rest fled.[46] He had cleared the streets with "a whiff of grapeshot", according to 19th-century historian Thomas Carlyle in The French Revolution: A History.[47][48]
The defeat of the royalist insurrection extinguished the threat to the Convention and earned Bonaparte sudden fame, wealth, and the patronage of the new government, the Directory. Murat married one of Napoleon's sisters and became his brother-in-law; he also served under Napoleon as one of his generals. Bonaparte was promoted to Commander of the Interior and given command of the Army of Italy.[33]
Within weeks, he was romantically attached to Joséphine de Beauharnais, the former mistress of Barras. The couple married on 9 March 1796 in a civil ceremony.[49]
First Italian campaign
Main article: Italian campaigns of the French Revolutionary Wars




Bonaparte at the Pont d'Arcole, by Baron Antoine-Jean Gros, (ca. 1801), Musée du Louvre, Paris


Two days after the marriage, Bonaparte left Paris to take command of the Army of Italy. He immediately went on the offensive, hoping to defeat the forces of Piedmont before their Austrian allies could intervene. In a series of rapid victories during the Montenotte Campaign, he knocked Piedmont out of the war in two weeks. The French then focused on the Austrians for the remainder of the war, the highlight of which became the protracted struggle for Mantua. The Austrians launched a series of offensives against the French to break the siege, but Napoleon defeated every relief effort, scoring notable victories at the battles of Castiglione, Bassano, Arcole, and Rivoli. The decisive French triumph at Rivoli in January 1797 led to the collapse of the Austrian position in Italy.
The next phase of the campaign featured the French invasion of the Habsburg heartlands. French forces in Southern Germany had been defeated by the Archduke Charles in 1796, but the Archduke withdrew his forces to protect Vienna after learning about Napoleon's assault. In the first notable encounter between the two commanders, Napoleon pushed back his opponent and advanced deep into Austrian territory after winning at the Battle of Tarvis in March 1797. The Austrians were alarmed by the French thrust that reached all the way to Leoben, about 100&#160;km from Vienna, and finally decided to sue for peace.[50] The Treaty of Leoben, followed by the more comprehensive Treaty of Campo Formio, gave France control of most of northern Italy and the Low Countries, and a secret clause promised the Republic of Venice to Austria. Bonaparte marched on Venice and forced its surrender, ending 1,100 years of independence. He also authorized the French to loot treasures such as the Horses of Saint Mark.[51]
His application of conventional military ideas to real-world situations enabled his military triumphs, such as creative use of artillery as a mobile force to support his infantry. He remarked later in life: "I have fought sixty battles and I have learned nothing which I did not know at the beginning. Look at Caesar; he fought the first like the last."[52]
Bonaparte could win battles by concealment of troop deployments and concentration of his forces on the 'hinge' of an enemy's weakened front. If he could not use his favourite envelopment strategy, he would take up the central position and attack two co-operating forces at their hinge, swing round to fight one until it fled, then turn to face the other.[53] In this Italian campaign, Bonaparte's army captured 150,000 prisoners, 540 cannons, and 170 standards.[54] The French army fought 67 actions and won 18 pitched battles through superior artillery technology and Bonaparte's tactics.[55]
During the campaign, Bonaparte became increasingly influential in French politics. He founded two newspapers: one for the troops in his army and another for circulation in France.[56] The royalists attacked Bonaparte for looting Italy and warned that he might become a dictator.[57] Bonaparte sent General Pierre Augereau to Paris to lead a coup d'état and purge the royalists on 4 September—Coup of 18 Fructidor. This left Barras and his Republican allies in control again but dependent on Bonaparte, who proceeded to peace negotiations with Austria. These negotiations resulted in the Treaty of Campo Formio, and Bonaparte returned to Paris in December as a hero.[58] He met Talleyrand, France's new Foreign Minister—who later served in the same capacity for Emperor Napoleon—and they began to prepare for an invasion of Britain.[33]
Egyptian expedition
Main article: French campaign in Egypt and Syria




Napoleon Bonaparte Before the Sphinx, (ca. 1868) by Jean-Léon Gérôme, Hearst Castle






Battle of the Pyramids on 21 July 1798 by Louis-François, Baron Lejeune, 1808


After two months of planning, Bonaparte decided that France's naval power was not yet strong enough to confront the Royal Navy. He decided on a military expedition to seize Egypt and thereby undermine Britain's access to its trade interests in India.[33] Bonaparte wished to establish a French presence in the Middle East, with the ultimate dream of linking with Tipu Sultan, a Muslim enemy of the British in India.[59]
Napoleon assured the Directory that "as soon as he had conquered Egypt, he will establish relations with the Indian princes and, together with them, attack the English in their possessions."[60] The Directory agreed in order to secure a trade route to India.[61]
In May 1798, Bonaparte was elected a member of the French Academy of Sciences. His Egyptian expedition included a group of 167 scientists, with mathematicians, naturalists, chemists, and geodesists among them. Their discoveries included the Rosetta Stone, and their work was published in the Description de l'Égypte in 1809.[62]
En route to Egypt, Bonaparte reached Malta on 9 June 1798, then controlled by the Knights Hospitaller. Grand Master Ferdinand von Hompesch zu Bolheim surrendered after token resistance, and Bonaparte captured an important naval base with the loss of only three men.[63] Napoleon resided at Palazzo Parisio in Valletta for a couple of days.[64][65]
General Bonaparte and his expedition eluded pursuit by the Royal Navy and landed at Alexandria on 1 July.[33] He fought the Battle of Shubra Khit against the Mamluks, Egypt's ruling military caste. This helped the French practice their defensive tactic for the Battle of the Pyramids, fought on 21 July, about 24&#160;km (15&#160;mi) from the pyramids. General Bonaparte's forces of 25,000 roughly equalled those of the Mamluks' Egyptian cavalry. Twenty-nine French[66] and approximately 2,000 Egyptians were killed. The victory boosted the morale of the French army.[67]
On 1 August, the British fleet under Horatio Nelson captured or destroyed all but two French vessels in the Battle of the Nile, defeating Bonaparte's goal to strengthen the French position in the Mediterranean.[68] His army had succeeded in a temporary increase of French power in Egypt, though it faced repeated uprisings.[69] In early 1799, he moved an army into the Ottoman province of Damascus (Syria and Galilee). Bonaparte led these 13,000 French soldiers in the conquest of the coastal towns of Arish, Gaza, Jaffa, and Haifa.[70] The attack on Jaffa was particularly brutal. Bonaparte discovered that many of the defenders were former prisoners of war, ostensibly on parole, so he ordered the garrison and 1,400 prisoners to be executed by bayonet or drowning to save bullets.[68] Men, women, and children were robbed and murdered for three days.[71]
Bonaparte's army was weakened by disease—mostly bubonic plague—and poor supplies, and was unable to reduce the fortress of Acre, so they returned to Egypt in May.[68] To speed up the retreat, Bonaparte ordered plague-stricken men to be poisoned.[72] Back in Egypt on 25 July, Bonaparte defeated an Ottoman amphibious invasion at Abukir.[73]
Ruler of France
Main articles: 18 Brumaire and Napoleonic era




General Bonaparte surrounded by members of the Council of Five Hundred during the Coup of 18 Brumaire, by François Bouchot


While in Egypt, Bonaparte stayed informed of European affairs. He learned that France had suffered a series of defeats in the War of the Second Coalition.[74] On 24 August 1799, he took advantage of the temporary departure of British ships from French coastal ports and set sail for France, despite the fact that he had received no explicit orders from Paris.[68] The army was left in the charge of Jean Baptiste Kléber.[75]
Unknown to Bonaparte, the Directory had sent him orders to return to ward off possible invasions of French soil, but poor lines of communication prevented the delivery of these messages.[74] By the time that he reached Paris in October, France's situation had been improved by a series of victories. The Republic, however, was bankrupt and the ineffective Directory was unpopular with the French population.[76] The Directory discussed Bonaparte's "desertion" but was too weak to punish him.[74]
Despite the failures in Egypt, Napoleon returned to a hero's welcome. He drew together an alliance with director Emmanuel Joseph Sieyès, his brother Lucien, speaker of the Council of Five Hundred Roger Ducos, director Joseph Fouché, and Talleyrand, and they overthrew the Directory by a coup d'état on 9 November 1799 ("the 18th Brumaire" according to the revolutionary calendar), closing down the council of five hundred. Napoleon became "first consul" for ten years, with two consuls appointed by him who had consultative voices only. His power was confirmed by the new "Constitution of the Year VIII", originally devised by Sieyès to give Napoleon a minor role, but rewritten by Napoleon, and accepted by direct popular vote (3,000,000 in favor, 1,567 opposed). The constitution preserved the appearance of a republic but in reality established a dictatorship.[77][78]
French Consulate
Main articles: French Consulate and War of the Second Coalition




Bonaparte, First Consul, by Ingres. Posing the hand inside the waistcoat was often used in portraits of rulers to indicate calm and stable leadership.


Napoleon immediately set up a dictatorship. He drafted the Constitution of the Year VIII and secured his own election as First Consul, and he took up residence at the Tuileries. The constitution was approved in a rigged plebiscite held the following January, with 99.94 percent officially listed as voting "yes."[79]
In 1800, Bonaparte and his troops crossed the Alps into Italy.[note 5] The campaign began badly for the French after Bonaparte made strategic errors; one force was left besieged at Genoa but managed to hold out and thereby occupy Austrian resources.[81] This effort and French general Louis Desaix's timely reinforcements allowed Bonaparte to narrowly avoid defeat and to triumph over the Austrians in June at the significant Battle of Marengo.[82]
Bonaparte's brother Joseph led the peace negotiations in Lunéville and reported that Austria, emboldened by British support, would not recognise France's newly gained territory. As negotiations became increasingly fractious, Bonaparte gave orders to his general Moreau to strike Austria once more. Moreau led France to victory at Hohenlinden. As a result, the Treaty of Lunéville was signed in February 1801; the French gains of the Treaty of Campo Formio were reaffirmed and increased.[82] In 1801, Napoleon became President of the French Academy of Sciences and appointed Jean Baptiste Joseph Delambre its Permanent Secretary.[83]
Temporary peace in Europe
See also: Haitian Revolution
France and Britain signed the Treaty of Amiens in March 1802. This called for the withdrawal of British troops from most colonial territories that it had recently occupied.[81] Bolstered by this treaty, Napoleon was made First Consul for life in a 10 May plebiscite, with an implausible 99.8% voting in favour. His powers were increased by the Constitution of the Year X including: Article 1. The French people name, and the Senate proclaims Napoleon-Bonaparte First Consul for Life.[84] After this, he was generally referred to as Napoleon rather than Bonaparte.[29]
The peace with Britain proved to be uneasy and short-lived.[85] Britain did not evacuate Malta as promised and protested against Bonaparte's annexation of Piedmont and his Act of Mediation, which established a new Swiss Confederation, though neither of these territories were covered by the treaty.[86] The dispute culminated in a declaration of war by Britain in May 1803, and he reassembled the invasion camp at Boulogne.[68]
Saint-Domingue had managed to acquire a high level of political autonomy during the Revolutionary Wars, with Toussaint Louverture installing himself as de facto dictator by 1801. Napoleon saw his chance to recuperate the formerly wealthy colony when he signed the Treaty of Amiens. Under the terms of the treaty, Napoleon agreed to appease British demands by not abolishing slavery in any colonies where the 1794 decree had never been implemented. The resulting Law of 20 May never applied to colonies like Guadeloupe or Guyane, even though rogue generals and other officials used the pretext of peace as an opportunity to reinstate slavery in some of these places. The Law of 20 May officially restored the slave trade to the Caribbean colonies, not slavery itself.[87] Napoleon sent an expedition under General Leclerc designed to reassert control over Sainte-Domingue. Although the French managed to capture Toussaint Louverture, the expedition failed when high rates of disease crippled the French army. In May 1803, the last 8,000 French troops left the island and the slaves proclaimed an independent republic that they called Haïti in 1804.[88] Seeing the failure of his colonial efforts, Napoleon decided in 1803 to sell the Louisiana Territory to the United States, instantly doubling the size of the U.S. The selling price in the Louisiana Purchase was less than three cents per acre, a total of $15 million.[3][89]
French Empire
Main article: First French Empire
See also: Coronation of Napoleon I and Napoleonic Wars
Napoleon faced royalist and Jacobin plots as France's ruler, including the Conspiration des poignards (Dagger plot) in October 1800 and the Plot of the Rue Saint-Nicaise (also known as the infernal machine) two months later.[90] In January 1804, his police uncovered an assassination plot against him which involved Moreau and which was ostensibly sponsored by the Bourbon former rulers of France. On the advice of Talleyrand, Napoleon ordered the kidnapping of Louis Antoine, Duke of Enghien, in violation of neighbouring Baden's sovereignty. After a secret trial the Duke was executed, even though he had not been involved in the plot.[91]




The Coronation of Napoleon by Jacques-Louis David in 1804


Napoleon used the plot to justify the re-creation of a hereditary monarchy in France with himself as emperor. He believed that a Bourbon restoration would be more difficult if the Bonapartist succession was entrenched in the constitution.[92] Napoleon was elected as "Emperor of the French" in a plebiscite held in November. Since there would be an heir, it would also make it all but impossible to change the regime by assassinating Napoleon. As before, this vote was implausibly lopsided, with 99.93 percent officially voting yes.
He was crowned by Pope Pius VII as Napoleon I on 2 December 1804 at Notre Dame de Paris, and Joséphine was then crowned Empress. According to legend, Napoleon seized the crown out of the hands of the pope at the last minute and crowned himself to avoid being subject to papal authority. However, this story is apocryphal; the coronation procedure had been agreed in advance.[note 6][93] Ludwig van Beethoven, a long-time admirer, was disappointed at this turn towards imperialism and scratched his dedication to Napoleon from his 3rd Symphony.[92]
Napoleon was crowned King of Italy at Milan Cathedral on 26 May 1805, with the Iron Crown of Lombardy. He created eighteen Marshals of the Empire from amongst his top generals to secure the allegiance of the army.
War of the Third Coalition
Main article: War of the Third Coalition




Napoleon and the Grande Armée receive the surrender of Austrian General Mack after the Battle of Ulm in October 1805. The decisive finale of the Ulm Campaign raised the tally of captured Austrian soldiers to 60,000. With the Austrian army destroyed, Vienna would fall to the French in November.


Great Britain broke the Peace of Amiens and declared war on France in May 1803.[94] In December 1804, an Anglo-Swedish agreement became the first step towards the creation of the Third Coalition. By April 1805, Britain had also signed an alliance with Russia.[95] Austria had been defeated by France twice in recent memory and wanted revenge, so they joined the coalition a few months later.[96]
Before the formation of the Third Coalition, Napoleon had assembled an invasion force, the Armée d'Angleterre, around six camps at Boulogne in Northern France. He intended to use this invasion force to strike at England. They never invaded, but Napoleon's troops received careful and invaluable training for future military operations.[97] The men at Boulogne formed the core for what Napoleon later called La Grande Armée. At the start, this French army had about 200,000 men organized into seven corps, which were large field units that contained 36 to 40 cannons each and were capable of independent action until other corps could come to the rescue.[98] A single corps properly situated in a strong defensive position could survive at least a day without support, giving the Grande Armée countless strategic and tactical options on every campaign. On top of these forces, Napoleon created a cavalry reserve of 22,000 organized into two cuirassier divisions, four mounted dragoon divisions, one division of dismounted dragoons, and one of light cavalry, all supported by 24 artillery pieces.[99] By 1805, the Grande Armée had grown to a force of 350,000 men,[99] who were well equipped, well trained, and led by competent officers.
Napoleon knew that the French fleet could not defeat the Royal Navy in a head-to-head battle, so he planned to lure it away from the English Channel through diversionary tactics.[100] The main strategic idea involved the French Navy escaping from the British blockades of Toulon and Brest and threatening to attack the West Indies. In the face of this attack, it was hoped, the British would weaken their defense of the Western Approaches by sending ships to the Caribbean, allowing a combined Franco-Spanish fleet to take control of the channel long enough for French armies to cross and invade.[100] However, the plan unraveled after the British victory at the Battle of Cape Finisterre in July 1805. French Admiral Villeneuve then retreated to Cádiz instead of linking up with French naval forces at Brest for an attack on the English Channel.[101]
By August 1805, Napoleon had realized that the strategic situation had changed fundamentally. Facing a potential invasion from his continental enemies, he decided to strike first and turned his army's sights from the English Channel to the Rhine. His basic objective was to destroy the isolated Austrian armies in Southern Germany before their Russian allies could arrive. On 25 September, after great secrecy and feverish marching, 200,000 French troops began to cross the Rhine on a front of 260&#160;km (160&#160;mi).[102][103] Austrian commander Karl Mack had gathered the greater part of the Austrian army at the fortress of Ulm in Swabia. Napoleon swung his forces to the southeast and the Grande Armée performed an elaborate wheeling movement that outflanked the Austrian positions. The Ulm Maneuver completely surprised General Mack, who belatedly understood that his army had been cut off. After some minor engagements that culminated in the Battle of Ulm, Mack finally surrendered after realizing that there was no way to break out of the French encirclement. For just 2,000 French casualties, Napoleon had managed to capture a total of 60,000 Austrian soldiers through his army's rapid marching.[104] The Ulm Campaign is generally regarded as a strategic masterpiece and was influential in the development of the Schlieffen Plan in the late 19th century.[105] For the French, this spectacular victory on land was soured by the decisive victory that the Royal Navy attained at the Battle of Trafalgar on 21 October. After Trafalgar, Britain had total domination of the seas for the duration of the Napoleonic Wars.




Napoleon at the Battle of Austerlitz, by François Gérard 1805. The Battle of Austerlitz, also known as the Battle of the Three Emperors, was Napoleon's greatest victory, where the French Empire effectively crushed the Third Coalition.


Following the Ulm Campaign, French forces managed to capture Vienna in November. The fall of Vienna provided the French a huge bounty as they captured 100,000 muskets, 500 cannons, and the intact bridges across the Danube.[106] At this critical juncture, both Tsar Alexander I and Holy Roman Emperor Francis II decided to engage Napoleon in battle, despite reservations from some of their subordinates. Napoleon sent his army north in pursuit of the Allies, but then ordered his forces to retreat so that he could feign a grave weakness. Desperate to lure the Allies into battle, Napoleon gave every indication in the days preceding the engagement that the French army was in a pitiful state, even abandoning the dominant Pratzen Heights near the village of Austerlitz. At the Battle of Austerlitz on 2 December, he deployed the French army below the Pratzen Heights and deliberately weakened his right flank, enticing the Allies to launch a major assault there in the hopes of rolling up the whole French line. A forced march from Vienna by Marshal Davout and his III Corps plugged the gap left by Napoleon just in time. Meanwhile, the heavy Allied deployment against the French right weakened their center on the Pratzen Heights, which was viciously attacked by the IV Corps of Marshal Soult. With the Allied center demolished, the French swept through both enemy flanks and sent the Allies fleeing chaotically, capturing thousands of prisoners in the process. The battle is often seen as a tactical masterpiece because of the near-perfect execution of a calibrated but dangerous plan — of the same stature as Cannae, the celebrated triumph by Hannibal some 2,000 years before.[107]
The Allied disaster at Austerlitz significantly shook the faith of Emperor Francis in the British-led war effort. France and Austria agreed to an armistice immediately and the Treaty of Pressburg followed shortly after on 26 December. Pressburg took Austria out of both the war and the Coalition while reinforcing the earlier treaties of Campo Formio and of Lunéville between the two powers. The treaty confirmed the Austrian loss of lands to France in Italy and Bavaria, and lands in Germany to Napoleon's German allies. It also imposed an indemnity of 40 million francs on the defeated Habsburgs and allowed the fleeing Russian troops free passage through hostile territories and back to their home soil. Napoleon went on to say, "The battle of Austerlitz is the finest of all I have fought."[108] Frank McLynn suggests that Napoleon was so successful at Austerlitz that he lost touch with reality, and what used to be French foreign policy became a "personal Napoleonic one".[109] Vincent Cronin disagrees, stating that Napoleon was not overly ambitious for himself, "he embodied the ambitions of thirty million Frenchmen".[110]
Middle-Eastern alliances
Main articles: Franco-Ottoman alliance and Franco-Persian alliance




The Iranian Envoy Mirza Mohammed Reza-Qazvini meeting with Napoleon I at the Finckenstein Palace, 27 April 1807, to sign the Treaty of Finckenstein.


Napoleon continued to entertain a grand scheme to establish a French presence in the Middle East in order to put pressure on Britain and Russia, and perhaps form an alliance with the Ottoman Empire.[59] In February 1806, Ottoman Emperor Selim III finally recognized Napoleon as Emperor. He also opted for an alliance with France, calling France "our sincere and natural ally."[111] That decision brought the Ottoman Empire into a losing war against Russia and Britain. A Franco-Persian alliance was also formed between Napoleon and the Persian Empire of Fat′h-Ali Shah Qajar. It collapsed in 1807, when France and Russia themselves formed an unexpected alliance.[59] In the end, Napoleon had made no effective alliances in the Middle East.
War of the Fourth Coalition and Tilsit
Main article: War of the Fourth Coalition
After Austerlitz, Napoleon established the Confederation of the Rhine in 1806. A collection of German states intended to serve as a buffer zone between France and Central Europe, the creation of the Confederation spelled the end of the Holy Roman Empire and significantly alarmed the Prussians. The brazen reorganization of German territory by the French risked threatening Prussian influence in the region, if not eliminating it outright. War fever in Berlin rose steadily throughout the summer of 1806. At the insistence of his court, especially his wife Queen Louise, Frederick William III decided to challenge the French domination of Central Europe by going to war.




Napoleon reviews the Imperial Guard before the Battle of Jena.


The initial military maneuvers began in September 1806. In a notable letter to Marshal Soult detailing the plan for the campaign, Napoleon described the essential features of Napoleonic warfare and introduced the phrase le bataillon-carré ('square battalion').[112] In the bataillon-carré system, the various corps of the Grande Armée would march uniformly together in close supporting distance.[112] If any single corps was attacked, the others could quickly spring into action and arrive to help. Napoleon invaded Prussia with 180,000 troops, rapidly marching on the right bank of the River Saale. As in previous campaigns, his fundamental objective was to destroy one opponent before reinforcements from another could tip the balance of the war. Upon learning the whereabouts of the Prussian army, the French swung westwards and crossed the Saale with overwhelming force. At the twin battles of Jena and Auerstedt, fought on 14 October, the French convincingly defeated the Prussians and inflicted heavy casualties. With several major commanders dead or incapacitated, the Prussian king proved incapable of effectively commanding the army, which began to quickly disintegrate. In a vaunted pursuit that epitomized the "peak of Napoleonic warfare," according to historian Richard Brooks,[113] the French managed to capture 140,000 soldiers, over 2,000 cannons and hundreds of ammunition wagons, all in a single month. Historian David Chandler wrote of the Prussian forces: "Never has the morale of any army been more completely shattered."[112] Despite their overwhelming defeat, the Prussians refused to negotiate with the French until the Russians had an opportunity to enter the fight.




The Treaties of Tilsit: Napoleon meeting with Alexander I of Russia on a raft in the middle of the Neman River


Following his triumph, Napoleon imposed the first elements of the Continental System through the Berlin Decree issued in November 1806. The Continental System, which prohibited European nations from trading with Britain, was widely violated throughout his reign.[114][115] In the next few months, Napoleon marched against the advancing Russian armies through Poland and was involved in the bloody stalemate at the Battle of Eylau in February 1807.[116] After a period of rest and consolidation on both sides, the war restarted in June with an initial struggle at Heilsberg that proved indecisive. On 14 June, however, Napoleon finally obtained an overwhelming victory over the Russians at the Battle of Friedland, wiping out the majority of the Russian army in a very bloody struggle. The scale of their defeat convinced the Russians to make peace with the French. On 19 June, Czar Alexander sent an envoy to seek an armistice with Napoleon. The latter assured the envoy that the Vistula River represented the natural borders between French and Russian influence in Europe. On that basis, the two emperors began peace negotiations at the town of Tilsit after meeting on an iconic raft on the River Niemen. The very first thing Alexander said to Napoleon was probably well-calibrated: "I hate the English as much as you do."[117]
Alexander faced pressure from his brother, Duke Constantine, to make peace with Napoleon. Given the victory he had just achieved, the French emperor offered the Russians relatively lenient terms–demanding that Russia join the Continental System, withdraw its forces from Wallachia and Moldavia, and hand over the Ionian Islands to France.[118] By contrast, Napoleon dictated very harsh peace terms for Prussia, despite the ceaseless exhortations of Queen Louise. Wiping out half of Prussian territories from the map, Napoleon created a new kingdom of 1,100 square miles called Westphalia. He then appointed his young brother Jérôme as the new monarch of this kingdom. Prussia's humiliating treatment at Tilsit caused a deep and bitter antagonism which festered as the Napoleonic era progressed. Moreover, Alexander's pretensions at friendship with Napoleon led the latter to seriously misjudge the true intentions of his Russian counterpart, who would violate numerous provisions of the treaty in the next few years. Despite these problems, the Treaties of Tilsit at last gave Napoleon a respite from war and allowed him to return to France, which he had not seen in over 300 days.[119]
Peninsular War and Erfurt
Main article: Peninsular War
The settlements at Tilsit gave Napoleon time to organize his empire. One of his major objectives became enforcing the Continental System against the British. He decided to focus his attention on the Kingdom of Portugal, which consistently violated his trade prohibitions. After defeat in the War of the Oranges in 1801, Portugal adopted a double-sided policy. At first, John VI agreed to close his ports to British trade. The situation changed dramatically after the Franco-Spanish defeat at Trafalgar; John grew bolder and officially resumed diplomatic and trade relations with Britain.




Joseph Bonaparte, Napoleon's brother, as King of Spain


Unhappy with this change of policy by the Portuguese government, Napoleon sent an army to invade Portugal. On 17 October 1807, 24,000 French troops under General Junot crossed the Pyrenees with Spanish cooperation and headed towards Portugal to enforce Napoleon's orders.[120] This attack was the first step in what would eventually become the Peninsular War, a six-year struggle that significantly sapped French strength. Throughout the winter of 1808, French agents became increasingly involved in Spanish internal affairs, attempting to incite discord between members of the Spanish royal family. On 16 February 1808, secret French machinations finally materialized when Napoleon announced that he would intervene to mediate between the rival political factions in the country.[121] Marshal Murat led 120,000 troops into Spain and the French arrived in Madrid on 24 March,[122] where wild riots against the occupation erupted just a few weeks later. Napoleon appointed his brother, Joseph Bonaparte, as the new King of Spain in the summer of 1808. The appointment enraged a heavily religious and conservative Spanish population. Resistance to French aggression soon spread throughout the country. The shocking French defeat at the Battle of Bailén in July gave hope to Napoleon's enemies and partly persuaded the French emperor to intervene in person.
Before going to Iberia, Napoleon decided to address several lingering issues with the Russians. At the Congress of Erfurt in October 1808, Napoleon hoped to keep Russia on his side during the upcoming struggle in Spain and during any potential conflict against Austria. The two sides reached an agreement, the Erfurt Convention, that called upon Britain to cease its war against France, that recognized the Russian conquest of Finland from Sweden, and that affirmed Russian support for France in a possible war against Austria "to the best of its ability."[123] Napoleon then returned to France and prepared for war. The Grande Armée, under the Emperor's personal command, rapidly crossed the Ebro River in November 1808 and inflicted a series of crushing defeats against the Spanish forces. After clearing the last Spanish force guarding the capital at Somosierra, Napoleon entered Madrid on 4 December with 80,000 troops.[124] He then unleashed his soldiers against Moore and the British forces. The British were swiftly driven to the coast, and they withdrew from Spain entirely after a last stand at the Battle of Corunna in January 1809.
Napoleon would end up leaving Iberia in order to deal with the Austrians in Central Europe, but the Peninsular War continued on long after his absence. He never returned to Spain after the 1808 campaign. Several months after Corunna, the British sent another army to the peninsula under the future Duke of Wellington. The war then settled into a complex and asymmetric strategic deadlock where all sides struggled to gain the upper hand. The highlight of the conflict became the brutal guerrilla warfare that engulfed much of the Spanish countryside. Both sides committed the worst atrocities of the Napoleonic Wars during this phase of the conflict. The vicious guerrilla fighting in Spain, largely absent from the French campaigns in Central Europe, severely disrupted the French lines of supply and communication. Although France maintained roughly 300,000 troops in Iberia during the Peninsular War, the vast majority were tied down to garrison duty and to intelligence operations.[125] The French were never able to concentrate all of their forces effectively, prolonging the war until events elsewhere in Europe finally turned the tide in favor of the Allies. After the invasion of Russia in 1812, the number of French troops in Spain vastly declined as Napoleon needed reinforcements to conserve his strategic position in Europe. By 1814, after scores of battles and sieges throughout Iberia, the Allies had managed to push the French out of the peninsula.
War of the Fifth Coalition and Marie Louise
Main article: War of the Fifth Coalition




Napoleon at the Battle of Wagram, painted by Horace Vernet.


After four years on the sidelines, Austria sought another war with France to avenge its recent defeats. Austria could not count on Russian support because the latter was at war with Britain, Sweden, and the Ottoman Empire in 1809. Frederick William of Prussia initially promised to help the Austrians, but reneged before conflict began.[126] A report from the Austrian finance minister suggested that the treasury would run out of money by the middle of 1809 if the large army that the Austrians had formed since the Third Coalition remained mobilized.[126] Although Archduke Charles warned that the Austrians were not ready for another showdown with Napoleon, a stance that landed him in the so-called "peace party," he did not want to see the army demobilized either.[126] On 8 February 1809, the advocates for war finally succeeded when the Imperial Government secretly decided on another confrontation against the French.
In the early morning of 10 April, leading elements of the Austrian army crossed the Inn River and invaded Bavaria. The early Austrian attack surprised the French; Napoleon himself was still in Paris when he heard about the invasion. He arrived at Donauwörth on the 17th to find the Grande Armée in a dangerous position, with its two wings separated by 75 miles (121&#160;km) and joined together by a thin cordon of Bavarian troops. Charles pressed the left wing of the French army and hurled his men towards the III Corps of Marshal Davout. In response, Napoleon came up with a plan to cut off the Austrians in the celebrated Landshut Maneuver.[127] He realigned the axis of his army and marched his soldiers towards the town of Eckmühl. The French scored a convincing win in the resulting Battle of Eckmühl, forcing Charles to withdraw his forces over the Danube and into Bohemia. On 13 May, Vienna fell for the second time in four years, although the war continued since most of the Austrian army had survived the initial engagements in Southern Germany.
By 17 May, the main Austrian army under Charles had arrived on the Marchfeld. Charles kept the bulk of his troops several miles away from the river bank in hopes of concentrating them at the point where Napoleon decided to cross. On 21 May, the French made their first major effort to cross the Danube, precipitating the Battle of Aspern-Essling. The Austrians enjoyed a comfortable numerical superiority over the French throughout the battle; on the first day, Charles disposed of 110,000 soldiers against only 31,000 commanded by Napoleon.[128] By the second day, reinforcements had boosted French numbers up to 70,000.[129] The battle was characterized by a vicious back-and-forth struggle for the two villages of Aspern and Essling, the focal points of the French bridgehead. By the end of the fighting, the French had lost Aspern but still controlled Essling. A sustained Austrian artillery bombardment eventually convinced Napoleon to withdraw his forces back onto Lobau Island. Both sides inflicted about 23,000 casualties on each other.[130] It was the first defeat Napoleon suffered in a major set-piece battle, and it caused excitement throughout many parts of Europe because it proved that he could be beaten on the battlefield.[131]
After the setback at Aspern-Essling, Napoleon took more than six weeks in planning and preparing for contingencies before he made another attempt at crossing the Danube.[132] From 30 June to the early days of July, the French recrossed the Danube in strength, with more than 180,000 troops marching across the Marchfeld towards the Austrians.[132] Charles received the French with 150,000 of his own men.[133] In the ensuing Battle of Wagram, which also lasted two days, Napoleon commanded his forces in what was the largest battle of his career up until then. Neither side made much progress on 5 July, but the 6th produced a definitive outcome. Both sides launched major assaults on their flanks. Austrian attacks against the French left wing looked dangerous initially, but they were all beaten back. Meanwhile, a steady French attack against the Austrian left wing eventually compromised the entire position for Charles. Napoleon finished off the battle with a concentrated central thrust that punctured a hole in the Austrian army and forced Charles to retreat. Austrian losses were very heavy, reaching well over 40,000 casualties.[134] The French were too exhausted to pursue the Austrians immediately, but Napoleon eventually caught up with Charles at Znaim and the latter signed an armistice on 12 July.




First French Empire at its greatest extent in 1811
&#160;&#160;French Empire
&#160;&#160;French satellite states
&#160;&#160;Allied states



In the Kingdom of Holland, the British launched the Walcheren Campaign to open up a second front in the war and to relieve the pressure on the Austrians. The British army only landed at Walcheren on 30 July, by which point the Austrians had already been defeated. The Walcheren Campaign was characterized by little fighting but heavy casualties thanks to the popularly dubbed "Walcheren Fever." Over 4,000 British troops were lost in a bungled campaign, and the rest withdrew in December 1809.[135] The main strategic result from the campaign became the delayed political settlement between the French and the Austrians. Emperor Francis wanted to wait and see how the British performed in their theater before entering into negotiations with Napoleon. Once it became apparent that the British were going nowhere, the Austrians agreed to peace talks.
The resulting Treaty of Schönbrunn in October 1809 was the harshest that France had imposed on Austria in recent memory. Metternich and Archduke Charles had the preservation of the Habsburg Empire as their fundamental goal, and to this end they succeeded by making Napoleon seek more modest goals in return for promises of friendship between the two powers.[136] Nevertheless, while most of the hereditary lands remained a part of the Habsburg realm, France received Carinthia, Carniola, and the Adriatic ports, while Galicia was given to the Poles and the Salzburg area of the Tyrol went to the Bavarians.[136] Austria lost over three million subjects, about one-fifth of her total population, as a result of these territorial changes.[137] Although fighting in Iberia continued, the War of the Fifth Coalition would be the last major conflict on the European continent for the next three years.
Napoleon turned his focus to domestic affairs after the war. Empress Joséphine had still not given birth to a child from Napoleon, who became worried about the future of his empire following his death. Desperate for a legitimate heir, Napoleon divorced Joséphine in January 1810 and started looking for a new wife. Hoping to cement the recent alliance with Austria through a family connection, Napoleon married the Archduchess Marie Louise, who was 18 years old at the time. On 20 March 1811, Marie Louise gave birth to a baby boy, whom Napoleon made heir apparent and bestowed the title of King of Rome. His son never actually ruled the empire, but historians still refer to him as Napoleon II.
Invasion of Russia
Main article: French invasion of Russia




The Moscow fire depicted by an unknown German artist


The Congress of Erfurt sought to preserve the Russo-French alliance, and the leaders had a friendly personal relationship after their first meeting at Tilsit in 1807.[138] By 1811, however, tensions had increased and Alexander was under pressure from the Russian nobility to break off the alliance. An early sign the relationship had deteriorated was the Russian's virtual abandonment of the Continental System, which led Napoleon to threaten Alexander with serious consequences if he formed an alliance with Britain.[139]
By 1812, advisers to Alexander suggested the possibility of an invasion of the French Empire and the recapture of Poland. On receipt of intelligence reports on Russia's war preparations, Napoleon expanded his Grande Armée to more than 450,000 men.[140] He ignored repeated advice against an invasion of the Russian heartland and prepared for an offensive campaign; on 23 June 1812 the invasion commenced.[141]




Napoleon's withdrawal from Russia, a painting by Adolph Northen


In an attempt to gain increased support from Polish nationalists and patriots, Napoleon termed the war the Second Polish War—the First Polish War had been the Bar Confederation uprising by Polish nobles against Russia in 1768. Polish patriots wanted the Russian part of Poland to be joined with the Duchy of Warsaw and an independent Poland created. This was rejected by Napoleon, who stated he had promised his ally Austria this would not happen. Napoleon refused to manumit the Russian serfs because of concerns this might provoke a reaction in his army's rear. The serfs later committed atrocities against French soldiers during France's retreat.[142]
The Russians avoided Napoleon's objective of a decisive engagement and instead retreated deeper into Russia. A brief attempt at resistance was made at Smolensk in August; the Russians were defeated in a series of battles, and Napoleon resumed his advance. The Russians again avoided battle, although in a few cases this was only achieved because Napoleon uncharacteristically hesitated to attack when the opportunity arose. Owing to the Russian army's scorched earth tactics, the French found it increasingly difficult to forage food for themselves and their horses.[143]
The Russians eventually offered battle outside Moscow on 7 September: the Battle of Borodino resulted in approximately 44,000 Russian and 35,000 French dead, wounded or captured, and may have been the bloodiest day of battle in history up to that point in time.[144] Although the French had won, the Russian army had accepted, and withstood, the major battle Napoleon had hoped would be decisive. Napoleon's own account was: "The most terrible of all my battles was the one before Moscow. The French showed themselves to be worthy of victory, but the Russians showed themselves worthy of being invincible."[145]
The Russian army withdrew and retreated past Moscow. Napoleon entered the city, assuming its fall would end the war and Alexander would negotiate peace. However, on orders of the city's governor Feodor Rostopchin, rather than capitulation, Moscow was burned. After five weeks, Napoleon and his army left. Early November Napoleon got concerned about loss of control back in France after the Malet coup of 1812. His army walked through snow up to their knees and nearly 10,000 men and horses froze to death on the night of 8/9 November alone. After Battle of Berezina Napoleon succeeded to escape but had to abandon much of the remaining artillery and baggage train. On 5 December, shortly before arriving in Vilnius, Napoleon left the army in a sledge.[146]
The French suffered greatly in the course of a ruinous retreat, including from the harshness of the Russian Winter. The Armée had begun as over 400,000 frontline troops, but in the end fewer than 40,000 crossed the Berezina River in November 1812.[147] The Russians had lost 150,000 in battle and hundreds of thousands of civilians.[148]
War of the Sixth Coalition
Main article: War of the Sixth Coalition




Napoleon's farewell to his Imperial Guard, 20 April 1814


There was a lull in fighting over the winter of 1812–13 while both the Russians and the French rebuilt their forces; Napoleon was then able to field 350,000 troops.[149] Heartened by France's loss in Russia, Prussia joined with Austria, Sweden, Russia, Great Britain, Spain, and Portugal in a new coalition. Napoleon assumed command in Germany and inflicted a series of defeats on the Coalition culminating in the Battle of Dresden in August 1813.[150]
Despite these successes, the numbers continued to mount against Napoleon, and the French army was pinned down by a force twice its size and lost at the Battle of Leipzig. This was by far the largest battle of the Napoleonic Wars and cost more than 90,000 casualties in total.[151]
The Allies offered peace terms in the Frankfurt proposals in November 1813. Napoleon would remain as Emperor of France, but it would be reduced to its "natural frontiers." That meant that France could retain control of Belgium, Savoy and the Rhineland (the west bank of the Rhine River), while giving up control of all the rest, including all of Spain and the Netherlands, and most of Italy and Germany. Metternich told Napoleon these were the best terms the Allies were likely to offer; after further victories, the terms would be harsher and harsher. Metternich's motivation was to maintain France as a balance against Russian threats, while ending the highly destabilizing series of wars.[152]
Napoleon, expecting to win the war, delayed too long and lost this opportunity; by December the Allies had withdrawn the offer. When his back was to the wall in 1814 he tried to reopen peace negotiations on the basis of accepting the Frankfurt proposals. The Allies now had new, harsher terms that included the retreat of France to its 1791 boundaries, which meant the loss of Belgium. Napoleon would remain Emperor, however he rejected the term. The British wanted Napoleon permanently removed; they prevailed. Napoleon adamantly refused.[152][153]
Napoleon withdrew back into France, his army reduced to 70,000 soldiers, and little cavalry; he faced more than three times as many Allied troops.[154] The French were surrounded: British armies pressed from the south, and other Coalition forces positioned to attack from the German states. Napoleon won a series of victories in the Six Days' Campaign, though these were not significant enough to turn the tide. The leaders of Paris surrendered to the Coalition in March 1814.[155]
On 1 April, Alexander addressed the Sénat conservateur. Long docile to Napoleon, under Talleyrand's prodding it had turned against him. Alexander told the Sénat that the Allies were fighting against Napoleon, not France, and they were prepared to offer honorable peace terms if Napoleon were removed from power. The next day, the Sénat passed the Acte de déchéance de l'Empereur ("Emperor's Demise Act"), which declared Napoleon deposed. Napoleon had advanced as far as Fontainebleau when he learned that Paris was lost. When Napoleon proposed the army march on the capital, his senior officers and marshals mutinied.[156] On 4 April, led by Ney, they confronted Napoleon. Napoleon asserted the army would follow him, and Ney replied the army would follow its generals. While the ordinary soldiers and regimental officers wanted to fight on, without any senior officers or marshals any prospective invasion of Paris would have been impossible. Bowing to the inevitable, on 4 April Napoleon abdicated in favour of his son, with Marie-Louise as regent. However, the Allies refused to accept this under prodding from Alexander, who feared that Napoleon might find an excuse to retake the throne.[157] Napoleon was then forced to announce his unconditional abdication only two days later.
Exile to Elba




British etching from 1814 in celebration of Napoleon's first exile to Elba at the close of the War of the Sixth Coalition



The Allied Powers having declared that Emperor Napoleon was the sole obstacle to the restoration of peace in Europe, Emperor Napoleon, faithful to his oath, declares that he renounces, for himself and his heirs, the thrones of France and Italy, and that there is no personal sacrifice, even that of his life, which he is not ready to do in the interests of France.
Done in the palace of Fontainebleau, 11 April 1814.
— Act of abdication of Napoleon[158]

In the Treaty of Fontainebleau, the victors exiled him to Elba, an island of 12,000 inhabitants in the Mediterranean, 20&#160;km (12&#160;mi) off the Tuscan coast. They gave him sovereignty over the island and allowed him to retain his title of emperor. Napoleon attempted suicide with a pill he had carried since a near-capture by Russians on the retreat from Moscow. Its potency had weakened with age, and he survived to be exiled while his wife and son took refuge in Austria.[159] In the first few months on Elba he created a small navy and army, developed the iron mines, and issued decrees on modern agricultural methods.[160]
Hundred Days
Main article: Hundred Days




Napoleon returned from Elba, by Karl Stenben, 19th century


Separated from his wife and son, who had returned to Austria, cut off from the allowance guaranteed to him by the Treaty of Fontainebleau, and aware of rumours he was about to be banished to a remote island in the Atlantic Ocean,[161] Napoleon escaped from Elba in the brig Inconstant on 26 February 1815.[161][162][163] He landed at Golfe-Juan on the French mainland, two days later.[161]
The 5th Regiment was sent to intercept him and made contact just south of Grenoble on 7 March 1815. Napoleon approached the regiment alone, dismounted his horse and, when he was within gunshot range, shouted, "Here I am. Kill your Emperor, if you wish."[164]
The soldiers responded with, "Vive L'Empereur!" and marched with Napoleon to Paris; Louis XVIII fled. On 13 March, the powers at the Congress of Vienna declared Napoleon an outlaw, and four days later Great Britain, Russia, Austria, and Prussia bound themselves to each put 150,000 men into the field to end his rule.[165]
Napoleon arrived in Paris on 20 March and governed for a period now called the Hundred Days. By the start of June the armed forces available to him had reached 200,000, and he decided to go on the offensive to attempt to drive a wedge between the oncoming British and Prussian armies. The French Army of the North crossed the frontier into the United Kingdom of the Netherlands, in modern-day Belgium.[166]
Napoleon's forces fought the Coalition armies, commanded by the Duke of Wellington and Gebhard Leberecht von Blücher, at the Battle of Waterloo on 18 June 1815. Wellington's army withstood repeated attacks by the French and drove them from the field while the Prussians arrived in force and broke through Napoleon's right flank.
Napoleon returned to Paris and found that both the legislature and the people had turned against him. Realizing his position was untenable, he abdicated on 22 June in favour of his son. He left Paris three days later and settled at Josephine's former palace in Malmaison (on the western bank of the Seine about 17 kilometres (11&#160;mi) west of Paris). Even as Napoleon travelled to Paris, the Coalition forces crossed the frontier swept through France (arriving in the vicinity of Paris on 29 June), with the stated intent on restoring Louis XVIII to the French throne.
When Napoleon heard that Prussian troops had orders to capture him dead or alive, he fled to Rochefort, considering an escape to the United States. However, British ships were blocking every port. Finally, Napoleon demanded asylum from the British Captain Frederick Maitland on HMS&#160;Bellerophon on 15 July 1815.[167]
Exile on Saint Helena




Napoleon on Saint Helena


Britain kept Napoleon on the island of Saint Helena in the Atlantic Ocean, 1,870&#160;km (1,162&#160;mi) from the west coast of Africa. Napoleon was moved to Longwood House there in December 1815; it had fallen into disrepair, and the location was damp, windswept and unhealthy. The Times published articles insinuating the British government was trying to hasten his death, and he often complained of the living conditions in letters to the governor and his custodian, Hudson Lowe.[168]
With a small cadre of followers, Napoleon dictated his memoirs and grumbled about conditions. Lowe cut Napoleon's expenditure, ruled that no gifts were allowed if they mentioned his imperial status, and made his supporters sign a guarantee they would stay with the prisoner indefinitely.[169]




Longwood House, Saint Helena: site of Napoleon's captivity


There were rumors of plots and even of his escape, but in reality no serious attempts were made.[170] For English poet Lord Byron, Napoleon was the epitome of the Romantic hero, the persecuted, lonely, and flawed genius.[171]
Death
Further information: Napoleon's Death Mask and Retour des cendres
His personal physician, Barry O'Meara, warned London that his declining state of health was mainly caused by the harsh treatment. Napoleon confined himself for months on end in his damp and wretched habitation of Longwood.[172]
In February 1821, Napoleon's health began to deteriorate rapidly. He reconciled with the Catholic Church. He died on 5 May 1821, after confession, Extreme Unction and Viaticum in the presence of Father Ange Vignali. His last words were, "France, l'armée, tête d'armée, Joséphine" ("France, army, head of the army, Joséphine").[173][174]
Napoleon's original death mask was created around 6 May, although it is not clear which doctor created it.[175][note 7] In his will, he had asked to be buried on the banks of the Seine, but the British governor said he should be buried on Saint Helena, in the Valley of the Willows.[177]




Napoleon's tomb at Les Invalides


In 1840, Louis Philippe I obtained permission from the British to return Napoleon's remains to France. On 15 December 1840, a state funeral was held. The hearse proceeded from the Arc de Triomphe down the Champs-Élysées, across the Place de la Concorde to the Esplanade des Invalides and then to the cupola in St Jérôme's Chapel, where it remained until the tomb designed by Louis Visconti was completed. In 1861, Napoleon's remains were entombed in a porphyry sarcophagus in the crypt under the dome at Les Invalides.[178]
Cause of death
The cause of his death has been debated. Napoleon's physician, François Carlo Antommarchi, led the autopsy, which found the cause of death to be stomach cancer. Antommarchi did not, however, sign the official report.[179] Napoleon's father had died of stomach cancer, although this was seemingly unknown at the time of the autopsy.[180] Antommarchi found evidence of a stomach ulcer; this was the most convenient explanation for the British, who wanted to avoid criticism over their care of Napoleon.[177]




Napoleon on his death bed, by Horace Vernet, 1826


In 1955, the diaries of Napoleon's valet, Louis Marchand, were published. His description of Napoleon in the months before his death led Sten Forshufvud in a 1961 paper in Nature to put forward other causes for his death, including deliberate arsenic poisoning.[181] Arsenic was used as a poison during the era because it was undetectable when administered over a long period. Forshufvud, in a 1978 book with Ben Weider, noted that Napoleon's body was found to be remarkably well preserved when moved in 1840. Arsenic is a strong preservative, and therefore this supported the poisoning hypothesis. Forshufvud and Weider observed that Napoleon had attempted to quench abnormal thirst by drinking large amounts of orgeat syrup that contained cyanide compounds in the almonds used for flavouring.[181]
They maintained that the potassium tartrate used in his treatment prevented his stomach from expelling these compounds and that his thirst was a symptom of the poison. Their hypothesis was that the calomel given to Napoleon became an overdose, which killed him and left extensive tissue damage behind.[181] According to a 2007 article, the type of arsenic found in Napoleon's hair shafts was mineral, the most toxic, and according to toxicologist Patrick Kintz, this supported the conclusion that he was murdered.[182]
There have been modern studies that have supported the original autopsy finding.[182] In a 2008 study, researchers analysed samples of Napoleon's hair from throughout his life, as well as samples from his family and other contemporaries. All samples had high levels of arsenic, approximately 100 times higher than the current average. According to these researchers, Napoleon's body was already heavily contaminated with arsenic as a boy, and the high arsenic concentration in his hair was not caused by intentional poisoning; people were constantly exposed to arsenic from glues and dyes throughout their lives.[note 8] Studies published in 2007 and 2008 dismissed evidence of arsenic poisoning, and confirmed evidence of peptic ulcer and gastric cancer as the cause of death.[184]
Religions
Further information: Napoleon and the Catholic Church




Reorganisation of the religious geography: France is divided into 59 dioceses and 10 ecclesiastical provinces.


Napoleon's baptism took place in Ajaccio on 21 July 1771; he was piously raised as a Catholic but he never developed much faith.[185] As an adult, Napoleon was a deist, and showed more interest in Muhammad than in Jesus.[186] Napoleon's deity was an absent and distant God. However he had a keen appreciation of the power of organized religion in social and political affairs, and paid a great deal of attention to bending it to his purposes. He noted the influence of Catholicism's rituals and splendors.[185]
Napoleon had a civil marriage with Joséphine de Beauharnais, without religious ceremony. During the campaign in Egypt, Napoleon showed much tolerance towards religion for a revolutionary general, holding discussions with Muslim scholars and ordering religious celebrations, but General Dupuy, who accompanied Napoleon, revealed, shortly after Pope Pius VI's death, the political reasons for such behaviour: "We are fooling Egyptians with our pretended interest for their religion; neither Bonaparte nor we believe in this religion more than we did in Pius the Defunct's one".[note 9] In his memoirs, Bonaparte's secretary Bourienne wrote about Napoleon's religious interests in the same vein.[188] His religious opportunism is epitomized in his famous quote: "It is by making myself Catholic that I brought peace to Brittany and Vendée. It is by making myself Italian that I won minds in Italy. It is by making myself a Moslem that I established myself in Egypt. If I governed a nation of Jews, I should reestablish the Temple of Solomon."[189] However, according to Juan Cole, "Bonaparte's admiration for the Prophet Muhammad, in contrast, was genuine"[190] and during his captivity on St Helena he defended him against Voltaire's critical play Mahomet.
Napoleon was crowned Emperor Napoleon I on 2 December 1804 at Notre Dame de Paris by Pope Pius VII. On 1 April 1810, Napoleon religiously married the Austrian princess Marie Louise. During his brother's rule in Spain, he abolished the Spanish Inquisition in 1813. In a private discussion with general Gourgaud during his exile on Saint Helena, Napoleon expressed materialistic views on the origin of man,[note 10]and doubted the divinity of Jesus, stating that it is absurd to believe that Socrates, Plato, Muslims, and the Anglicans should be damned for not being Roman Catholics.[note 11] He also said to Gourgaud in 1817 "I like the Mohammedan religion best. It has fewer incredible things in it than ours."[193] and that "the Mohammedan religion is the finest of all".[194] However, Napoleon was anointed by a priest before his death.[195]
Concordat
Further information: Concordat of 1801




Leaders of the Catholic Church taking the civil oath required by the Concordat


Seeking national reconciliation between revolutionaries and Catholics, the Concordat of 1801 was signed on 15 July 1801 between Napoleon and Pope Pius VII. It solidified the Roman Catholic Church as the majority church of France and brought back most of its civil status. The hostility of devout Catholics against the state had now largely been resolved. It did not restore the vast church lands and endowments that had been seized during the revolution and sold off. As a part of the Concordat, he presented another set of laws called the Organic Articles.[196][197]
While the Concordat restored much power to the papacy, the balance of church-state relations had tilted firmly in Napoleon's favour. He selected the bishops and supervised church finances. Napoleon and the pope both found the Concordat useful. Similar arrangements were made with the Church in territories controlled by Napoleon, especially Italy and Germany.[198] Now, Napoleon could win favor with the Catholics while also controlling Rome in a political sense. Napoleon said in April 1801, "Skillful conquerors have not got entangled with priests. They can both contain them and use them." French children were issued a catechism that taught them to love and respect Napoleon.[199]
Religious emancipation
Further information: Napoleon and the Jews
Napoleon emancipated Jews, as well as Protestants in Catholic countries and Catholics in Protestant countries, from laws which restricted them to ghettos, and he expanded their rights to property, worship, and careers. Despite the anti-semitic reaction to Napoleon's policies from foreign governments and within France, he believed emancipation would benefit France by attracting Jews to the country given the restrictions they faced elsewhere.[200]
He stated, "I will never accept any proposals that will obligate the Jewish people to leave France, because to me the Jews are the same as any other citizen in our country. It takes weakness to chase them out of the country, but it takes strength to assimilate them."[201] He was seen as so favourable to the Jews that the Russian Orthodox Church formally condemned him as "Antichrist and the Enemy of God".[202]
Personality




Napoleon visiting the Palais Royal for the opening of the 8th session of the Tribunat in 1807, by Merry-Joseph Blondel


Historians agree that Napoleon's remarkable personality was one key to his influence. They emphasize the strength of his ambition that took him from an obscure village to command of most of Europe.[203] George F. E. Rudé stresses his "rare combination of will, intellect and physical vigour."[204] At 5&#160;ft 6&#160;in (168&#160;cm),[205] he was not physically imposing but in one-on-one situations he typically had a hypnotic impact on people and seemingly bent the strongest leaders to his will.[206] He understood military technology, but was not an innovator in that regard.[207] He was an innovator in using the financial, bureaucratic, and diplomatic resources of France. He could rapidly dictate a series of complex commands to his subordinates, keeping in mind where major units were expected to be at each future point, and like a chess master, "seeing" the best plays moves ahead.[208]
Napoleon maintained strict, efficient work habits, prioritizing what needed to be done. He cheated at cards, but repaid the losses; he had to win at everything he attempted.[209] He kept relays of staff and secretaries at work. Unlike many generals, Napoleon did not examine history to ask what Hannibal or Alexander or anyone else did in a similar situation. Critics said he won many battles simply because of luck; Napoleon responded, "Give me lucky generals," aware that "luck" comes to leaders who recognize opportunity, and seize it.[210] Dwyer argues that Napoleon's victories at Austerlitz and Jena in 1805-06 heightened his sense of self-grandiosity, leaving him even more certain of his destiny and invincibility.[211] By the Russian campaign in 1812, however, Napoleon seems to have lost his verve. With crisis after crisis at hand, he rarely rose to the occasion. Some historians have suggested a physical deterioration, but others note that an impaired Napoleon was still a brilliant general.[208]
In terms of impact on events, it was more than Napoleon's personality that took effect. He reorganized France itself to supply the men and money needed for great wars.[212] Above all he inspired his men—Wellington said his presence on the battlefield was worth 40,000 soldiers, for he inspired confidence from privates to field marshals.[213] He also unnerved the enemy. At the Battle of Auerstadt in 1806, King Frederick William III of Prussia outnumbered the French by 63,000 to 27,000; however, when he mistakenly was told that Napoleon was in command, he ordered a hasty retreat that turned into a rout.[214] The force of his personality neutralized material difficulties as his soldiers fought with the confidence that with Napoleon in charge they would surely win.[215]
Image
Further information: Cultural depictions of Napoleon




Napoleon is often represented in his green colonel uniform of the Chasseur à Cheval of the Imperial Guard, the regiment that often served as his personal escort, with a large bicorne and a hand-in-waistcoat gesture.


Napoleon has become a worldwide cultural icon who symbolises military genius and political power. Martin van Creveld described him as "the most competent human being who ever lived".[216] Since his death, many towns, streets, ships, and even cartoon characters have been named after him. He has been portrayed in hundreds of films and discussed in hundreds of thousands of books and articles.[217]
During the Napoleonic Wars he was taken seriously by the British press as a dangerous tyrant, poised to invade. He was often referred to by the British as Boney. A nursery rhyme warned children that Bonaparte ravenously ate naughty people; the "bogeyman".[218] The British Tory press sometimes depicted Napoleon as much smaller than average height, and this image persists. Confusion about his height also results from the difference between the French pouce and British inch—2.71&#160;cm and 2.54&#160;cm, respectively. The myth of the "Napoleon Complex” — named after him to describe men who have an inferiority complex — stems primarily from the fact that he was listed, incorrectly, as 5 feet 2 inches (in French units) at the time of his death.[219] In fact, he was 1.68 metres (5&#160;ft 6&#160;in) tall, an average height for a man in that period.[note 12]
In 1908 Alfred Adler, a psychologist, cited Napoleon to describe an inferiority complex in which short people adopt an over-aggressive behaviour to compensate for lack of height; this inspired the term Napoleon complex.[221] The stock character of Napoleon is a comically short "petty tyrant" and this has become a cliché in popular culture. He is often portrayed wearing a large bicorne hat with a hand-in-waistcoat gesture—a reference to the painting produced in 1812 by Jacques-Louis David.[222]
When he became First Consul and later Emperor, Napoleon eschewed his general's uniform and habitually wore the simple green colonel uniform (non-Hussar) of a colonel of the Chasseur à Cheval of the Imperial Guard, the regiment that often served as his personal escort, with a large bicorne. He also habitually wore (usually on Sundays) the blue uniform of a colonel of the Imperial Guard Foot Grenadiers (blue with white facings and red cuffs). He also wore his Légion d'honneur star, medal and ribbon, and the Order of the Iron Crown decorations, white French-style culottes and white stockings. This was in contrast the gorgeous and complex uniforms with many decorations of his marshals and those around him.
Reforms




First remittance of the Légion d'Honneur, 15 July 1804, at Saint-Louis des Invalides, by Jean-Baptiste Debret (1812).


Napoleon instituted lasting reforms, including higher education, a tax code, road and sewer systems, and established the Banque de France, the first central bank in French history. He negotiated the Concordat of 1801 with the Catholic Church, which sought to reconcile the mostly Catholic population to his regime. It was presented alongside the Organic Articles, which regulated public worship in France. His dissolution of the Holy Roman Empire paved the way to German Unification later in the 19th century. The sale of the Louisiana Territory to the United States doubled the size of the country and was a major event in American history.[223]
In May 1802, he instituted the Legion of Honour, a substitute for the old royalist decorations and orders of chivalry, to encourage civilian and military achievements; the order is still the highest decoration in France.[224]
Napoleonic Code
Main article: Napoleonic Code




First page of the 1804 original edition of the Code Civil


Napoleon's set of civil laws, the Code Civil—now often known as the Napoleonic Code—was prepared by committees of legal experts under the supervision of Jean Jacques Régis de Cambacérès, the Second Consul. Napoleon participated actively in the sessions of the Council of State that revised the drafts. The development of the code was a fundamental change in the nature of the civil law legal system with its stress on clearly written and accessible law. Other codes ("Les cinq codes") were commissioned by Napoleon to codify criminal and commerce law; a Code of Criminal Instruction was published, which enacted rules of due process.[225]
The Napoleonic code was adopted throughout much of Europe, though only in the lands he conquered, and remained in force after Napoleon's defeat. Napoleon said: "My true glory is not to have won forty battles...Waterloo will erase the memory of so many victories. … But...what will live forever, is my Civil Code."[226] The Code still has importance today in a quarter of the world's jurisdictions including in Europe, the Americas and Africa.[227]
Dieter Langewiesche described the code as a "revolutionary project" which spurred the development of bourgeois society in Germany by the extension of the right to own property and an acceleration towards the end of feudalism. Napoleon reorganised what had been the Holy Roman Empire, made up of more than a thousand entities, into a more streamlined forty-state Confederation of the Rhine; this provided the basis for the German Confederation and the unification of Germany in 1871.[228]
The movement toward national unification in Italy was similarly precipitated by Napoleonic rule.[229] These changes contributed to the development of nationalism and the nation state.[230]
Napoleon implemented a wide array of liberal reforms in France and across Europe, especially in Italy and Germany, as summarized by British historian Andrew Roberts:

The ideas that underpin our modern world–meritocracy, equality before the law, property rights, religious toleration, modern secular education, sound finances, and so on–were championed, consolidated, codified and geographically extended by Napoleon. To them he added a rational and efficient local administration, an end to rural banditry, the encouragement of science and the arts, the abolition of feudalism and the greatest codification of laws since the fall of the Roman Empire.[231]

Napoleon directly overthrew feudal remains in much of western Europe. He liberalised property laws, ended seigneurial dues, abolished the guild of merchants and craftsmen to facilitate entrepreneurship, legalised divorce, closed the Jewish ghettos and made Jews equal to everyone else. The Inquisition ended as did the Holy Roman Empire. The power of church courts and religious authority was sharply reduced and equality under the law was proclaimed for all men.[232]
Warfare
Further information: Napoleonic weaponry and warfare and Military career of Napoleon Bonaparte




Statue in Cherbourg-Octeville unveiled by Napoleon III in 1858. Napoleon I strengthened the town's defences to prevent British naval incursions.


In the field of military organisation, Napoleon borrowed from previous theorists such as Jacques Antoine Hippolyte, Comte de Guibert, and from the reforms of preceding French governments, and then developed much of what was already in place. He continued the policy, which emerged from the Revolution, of promotion based primarily on merit.[233]
Corps replaced divisions as the largest army units, mobile artillery was integrated into reserve batteries, the staff system became more fluid and cavalry returned as an important formation in French military doctrine. These methods are now referred to as essential features of Napoleonic warfare.[233] Though he consolidated the practice of modern conscription introduced by the Directory, one of the restored monarchy's first acts was to end it.[234]
His opponents learned from Napoleon's innovations. The increased importance of artillery after 1807 stemmed from his creation of a highly mobile artillery force, the growth in artillery numbers, and changes in artillery practices. As a result of these factors, Napoleon, rather than relying on infantry to wear away the enemy's defenses, now could use massed artillery as a spearhead to pound a break in the enemy's line that was then exploited by supporting infantry and cavalry. McConachy rejects the alternative theory that growing reliance on artillery by the French army beginning in 1807 was an outgrowth of the declining quality of the French infantry and, later, France's inferiority in cavalry numbers.[235] Weapons and other kinds of military technology remained largely static through the Revolutionary and Napoleonic eras, but 18th-century operational mobility underwent significant change.[236]
Napoleon's biggest influence was in the conduct of warfare. Antoine-Henri Jomini explained Napoleon's methods in a widely used textbook that influenced all European and American armies.[237] Napoleon was regarded by the influential military theorist Carl von Clausewitz as a genius in the operational art of war, and historians rank him as a great military commander.[238] Wellington, when asked who was the greatest general of the day, answered: "In this age, in past ages, in any age, Napoleon."[239]
Under Napoleon, a new emphasis towards the destruction, not just outmanoeuvring, of enemy armies emerged. Invasions of enemy territory occurred over broader fronts which made wars costlier and more decisive. The political impact of war increased significantly; defeat for a European power meant more than the loss of isolated enclaves. Near-Carthaginian peaces intertwined whole national efforts, intensifying the Revolutionary phenomenon of total war.[240]
Metric system






File:France 1803-04-A 20 Francs.jpg
Depicted as First Consul on the 1803 20 gold Napoléon gold coin.


Main articles: History of the metric system, Mesures usuelles and Units of measurement in France
The official introduction of the metric system in September 1799 was unpopular in large sections of French society. Napoleon's rule greatly aided adoption of the new standard not only across France but also across the French sphere of influence. Napoleon ultimately took a retrograde step in 1812 when he passed legislation to introduce the mesures usuelles (traditional units of measurement) for retail trade[241]—a system of measure that resembled the pre-revolutionary units but were based on the kilogram and the metre; for example the livre metrique (metric pound) was 500&#160;g[242] instead of 489.5 g—the value of the livre du roi (the king's pound).[243] Other units of measure were rounded in a similar manner. This however laid the foundations for the definitive introduction of the metric system across Europe in the middle of the 19th century.[244]
Education
Napoleon's educational reforms laid the foundation of a modern system of education in France and throughout much of Europe.[245] Napoleon synthesized the best academic elements from the Ancien Régime, The Enlightenment, and the Revolution, with the aim of establishing a stable, well-educated and prosperous society. He made French the only official language. He left some primary education in the hands of religious orders, but he offered public support to secondary education. Napoleon founded a number of state secondary schools (lycées) designed to produce a standardized education that was uniform across France. All students were taught the sciences along with modern and classical languages. Unlike the system during the Ancien Régime, religious topics did not dominate the curriculum, although they were present in addition to teachers from the clergy. Napoleon simply hoped to use religion to produce social stability.[246] He gave special attention to the advanced centers, notably the Ecole Polytechnique, that provided both military expertise and state-of-the-art research in science.[247] Napoleon made some of the first major efforts at establishing a system of secular and public education. The system featured scholarships and strict discipline, with the result being a French educational system that outperformed its European counterparts, many of which borrowed from the French system.[248]
Memory and evaluation
Criticism




The Third of May 1808 by Francisco Goya, showing Spanish resisters being executed by Napoleon's troops.


In the political realm, historians debate whether Napoleon was "an enlightened despot who laid the foundations of modern Europe or, instead, a megalomaniac who wrought greater misery than any man before the coming of Hitler."[249] Many historians have concluded that he had grandiose foreign policy ambitions. The Continental powers as late as 1808 were willing to give him nearly all of his remarkable gains and titles, but some scholars maintain he was overly aggressive and pushed for too much, until his empire collapsed.[250][251]
Napoleon ended lawlessness and disorder in post-Revolutionary France.[252] He was, however, considered a tyrant and usurper by his opponents.[253] His critics charge that he was not significantly troubled when faced with the prospect of war and death for thousands, turned his search for undisputed rule into a series of conflicts throughout Europe and ignored treaties and conventions alike. His role in the Haitian Revolution and decision to reinstate slavery in France's oversea colonies are controversial and have an impact on his reputation.[254]
Napoleon institutionalised plunder of conquered territories: French museums contain art stolen by Napoleon's forces from across Europe. Artefacts were brought to the Musée du Louvre for a grand central museum; his example would later serve as inspiration for more notorious imitators.[255] He was compared to Adolf Hitler most famously by the historian Pieter Geyl in 1947[256] and Claude Ribbe in 2005.[257] David G. Chandler, a foremost historian of Napoleonic warfare, wrote in 1973 that, "Nothing could be more degrading to the former [Napoleon] and more flattering to the latter [Hitler]."[258]
Critics argue Napoleon's true legacy must reflect the loss of status for France and needless deaths brought by his rule: historian Victor Davis Hanson writes, "After all, the military record is unquestioned—17 years of wars, perhaps six million Europeans dead, France bankrupt, her overseas colonies lost."[259] McLynn notes that, "He can be viewed as the man who set back European economic life for a generation by the dislocating impact of his wars."[253] However, Vincent Cronin replies that such criticism relies on the flawed premise that Napoleon was responsible for the wars which bear his name, when in fact France was the victim of a series of coalitions which aimed to destroy the ideals of the Revolution.[260]
Propaganda and memory
Main article: Napoleonic propaganda




Napoleon Crossing the Alps, romantic version by Jacques-Louis David in 1805



Bonaparte Crossing the Alps, realist version by Paul Delaroche in 1848




Napoleon's use of propaganda contributed to his rise to power, legitimated his régime, and established his image for posterity. Strict censorship, controlling aspects of the press, books, theater, and art, was part of his propaganda scheme, aimed at portraying him as bringing desperately wanted peace and stability to France. The propagandistic rhetoric changed in relation to events and to the atmosphere of Napoleon's reign, focusing first on his role as a general in the army and identification as a soldier, and moving to his role as emperor and a civil leader. Specifically targeting his civilian audience, Napoleon fostered an important, though uneasy, relationship with the contemporary art community, taking an active role in commissioning and controlling different forms of art production to suit his propaganda goals.[261]
Hazareesingh (2004) explores how Napoleon's image and memory are best understood. They played a key role in collective political defiance of the Bourbon restoration monarchy in 1815–1830. People from different walks of life and areas of France, particularly Napoleonic veterans, drew on the Napoleonic legacy and its connections with the ideals of the 1789 revolution.[262]
Widespread rumors of Napoleon's return from St. Helena and Napoleon as an inspiration for patriotism, individual and collective liberties, and political mobilization manifested themselves in seditious materials, displaying the tricolor and rosettes. There were also subversive activities celebrating anniversaries of Napoleon's life and reign and disrupting royal celebrations—they demonstrated the prevailing and successful goal of the varied supporters of Napoleon to constantly destabilize the Bourbon regime.[262]
Datta (2005) shows that, following the collapse of militaristic Boulangism in the late 1880s, the Napoleonic legend was divorced from party politics and revived in popular culture. Concentrating on two plays and two novels from the period—Victorien Sardou's Madame Sans-Gêne (1893), Maurice Barrès's Les Déracinés (1897), Edmond Rostand's L'Aiglon (1900), and André de Lorde and Gyp's Napoléonette (1913) Datta examines how writers and critics of the Belle Époque exploited the Napoleonic legend for diverse political and cultural ends.[263]
Reduced to a minor character, the new fictional Napoleon became not a world historical figure but an intimate one – fashioned by individuals' needs and consumed as popular entertainment. In their attempts to represent the emperor as a figure of national unity, proponents and detractors of the Third Republic used the legend as a vehicle for exploring anxieties about gender and fears about the processes of democratization that accompanied this new era of mass politics and culture.[263]
International Napoleonic Congresses take place regularly, with participation by members of the French and American military, French politicians and scholars from different countries.[264] In January 2012, the mayor of Montereau-Fault-Yonne, near Paris—the site of a late victory of Napoleon—proposed development of Napoleon's Bivouac, a commemorative theme park at a projected cost of 200 million euros.[265]
Long-term impact outside France
Main article: Influence of the French Revolution




Bas-relief of Napoleon I in the chamber of the United States House of Representatives


Napoleon was responsible for spreading the values of the French Revolution to other countries, especially in legal reform and the abolition of serfdom.[266]
After the fall of Napoleon, not only was Napoleonic Code retained by conquered countries including the Netherlands, Belgium, parts of Italy and Germany, but has been used as the basis of certain parts of law outside Europe including the Dominican Republic, the US state of Louisiana and the Canadian province of Quebec.[267] The memory of Napoleon in Poland is favorable, for his support for independence and opposition to Russia, his legal code, the abolition of serfdom, and the introduction of modern middle class bureaucracies.[268]
Napoleon could be considered one of the founders of modern Germany. After dissolving the Holy Roman Empire, he reduced the number of German states from 300 to less than 50, paving the way to German Unification. A byproduct of the French occupation was a strong development in German nationalism. Napoleon also significantly aided the United States when he agreed to sell the territory of Louisiana for 15 million dollars during the presidency of Thomas Jefferson. That territory almost doubled the size of the United States, adding the equivalent of 13 states to the Union.[269]
Marriages and children




Napoleon's first wife, Joséphine, Empress of the French



Napoleon's second wife, Marie-Louise, Empress of the French




Napoleon married Joséphine de Beauharnais in 1796, when he was 26; she was a 32-year-old widow whose first husband had been executed during the Revolution. Until she met Bonaparte, she had been known as "Rose", a name which he disliked. He called her "Joséphine" instead, and she went by this name henceforth. Bonaparte often sent her love letters while on his campaigns.[270] He formally adopted her son Eugène and cousin Stéphanie and arranged dynastic marriages for them. Joséphine had her daughter Hortense marry Napoleon's brother Louis.[271]
Joséphine had lovers, including lieutenant Hippolyte Charles, during Napoleon's Italian campaign.[272] Napoleon learnt of that affair and a letter he wrote about it was intercepted by the British and published widely, to embarrass Napoleon. Napoleon had his own affairs too: during the Egyptian campaign he took Pauline Bellisle Foures, the wife of a junior officer, as his mistress. She became known as "Cleopatra."[273][note 13]
While Napoleon's mistresses had children by him, Joséphine did not produce an heir, possibly because of either the stresses of her imprisonment during the Reign of Terror or an abortion she may have had in her twenties.[275] Napoleon ultimately chose divorce so he could remarry in search of an heir. In March 1810, he married Marie Louise, Archduchess of Austria, and a great niece of Marie Antoinette by proxy; thus he had married into a German royal and imperial family.[276]
They remained married until his death, though she did not join him in exile on Elba and thereafter never saw her husband again. The couple had one child, Napoleon Francis Joseph Charles (1811–1832), known from birth as the King of Rome. He became Napoleon II in 1814 and reigned for only two weeks. He was awarded the title of the Duke of Reichstadt in 1818 and died of tuberculosis aged 21, with no children.[276]
Napoleon acknowledged one illegitimate son: Charles Léon (1806–1881) by Eléonore Denuelle de La Plaigne.[277] Alexandre Colonna-Walewski (1810–1868), the son of his mistress Maria Walewska, although acknowledged by Walewska's husband, was also widely known to be his child, and the DNA of his direct male descendant has been used to help confirm Napoleon's Y-chromosome haplotype.[278] He may have had further unacknowledged illegitimate offspring as well, such as Eugen Megerle von Mühlfeld by Emilie Victoria Kraus[279] and Hélène Napoleone Bonaparte (1816–1907) by Albine de Montholon.
Titles, styles, honours, and arms
Main article: Titles and styles of Napoleon
Ancestry




&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;







&#160;

16. Giuseppe Maria Buonaparte
(1663–1703)



&#160;




&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;







&#160;

8. Sebastiano Nicola Buonaparte
(1683–1720/60)

&#160;




&#160;




&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;







&#160;

17. Maria Colonna Bozzi
(1668–1704)



&#160;




&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;







&#160;

4. Giuseppe Maria Buonaparte
(1713–1763)

&#160;




&#160;




&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;







&#160;

18. Carlo Tusoli



&#160;




&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;







&#160;

9. Maria Anna Tusoli
(1690–1760)

&#160;




&#160;




&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;







&#160;

19. Isabella



&#160;




&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;







&#160;

2. Carlo Maria Buonaparte
(1746–1785)

&#160;




&#160;




&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;



















&#160;

10. Giuseppe Maria Paravicini

&#160;




&#160;




&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;



















&#160;

5. Maria Saveria Paravicini
(1715–bef. 1750)

&#160;




&#160;




&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;







&#160;

22. Angelo Agostino Salineri



&#160;




&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;







&#160;

11. Maria Angela Salineri

&#160;




&#160;




&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;







&#160;

23. Francetta Merezano



&#160;




&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;







&#160;

1. Napoleon I, Emperor of the French and King of Italy
(1769–1821)

&#160;




&#160;




&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;







&#160;

24. Giovanni Girolamo Ramolino
(1645–?)



&#160;




&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;







&#160;

12. Giovanni Agostino Ramolino

&#160;




&#160;




&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;







&#160;

25. Maria Laetitia Boggiano



&#160;




&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;







&#160;

6. Giovanni Geronimo Ramolino (1723–1755)

&#160;




&#160;




&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;







&#160;

26. Andrea Peri
(1669–?)



&#160;




&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;







&#160;

13. Angela Maria Peri

&#160;




&#160;




&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;







&#160;

27. Maria Maddalena Colonna d'Istria



&#160;




&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;







&#160;

3. Maria Letizia Ramolino
(1750–1836)

&#160;




&#160;




&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;







&#160;

28. Giovanni Antonio Pietrasanta



&#160;




&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;







&#160;

14. Giuseppe Maria Pietrasanta

&#160;




&#160;




&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;







&#160;

29. Paola Brigida Sorba



&#160;




&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;







&#160;

7. Angela Maria Pietrasanta (1725–1790)

&#160;




&#160;




&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;



















&#160;

15. Maria Giuseppa Malerba

&#160;




&#160;




&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;


&#160;



















Notes


^ He established a system of public education,[5] abolished the vestiges of feudalism,[6] emancipated Jews and other religious minorities,[7] enacted legal protections for an emerging middle class,[8] and centralized state power at the expense of religious authorities.[9] The Napoleonic Code was also adopted and modified by many jurisdictions throughout the world.[10][11][12]
^ His name was also spelled as Nabulione, Nabulio, Napolionne, and Napulione.[16]
^ Aside from his name, there does not appear to be a connection between him and Napoleon's theorem.[26]
^ He was mainly referred to as Bonaparte until he became First Consul for life.[29]
^ This is depicted in Bonaparte Crossing the Alps by Hippolyte Delaroche and in Jacques-Louis David's imperial Napoleon Crossing the Alps. He is less realistically portrayed on a charger in the latter work.[80]
^ Napoleon gave the Pope a tiara following the ceremony, now referred to as the Napoleon Tiara.
^ It was customary to cast a death mask of a leader. Four genuine death masks of Napoleon are known to exist: one in The Cabildo in New Orleans, one in a Liverpool museum, another in Havana and one in the library of the University of North Carolina.[176]
^ The body can tolerate large doses of arsenic if ingested regularly, and arsenic was a fashionable cure-all.[183]
^ "Nous trompons les Égyptiens par notre simili attachement à leur religion, à laquelle Bonaparte et nous ne croyons pas plus qu'à celle de Pie le défunt."[187]
^ "I think the matter that made man was slime, warmed by the sun and vivified by electric fluids. What are animals—an ox, for example—but organized matter? Well, when we see that our physical frame resembles theirs, may we not believe that we are only better organized matter. … The most simple idea consists in worshiping the sun, which gives life to everything. I repeat, I think man was created in an atmosphere warmed by the sun, and that after a certain time this productive power ceased." [191]
^ "I do not think Jesus Christ ever existed. I would believe in the Christian religion if it dated from the beginning of the world. That Socrates, Plato, the Mohammedan, and all the English should be damned is too absurd. Jesus was probably put to death, like many other fanatics who proclaimed themselves to be prophets or the expected Messiah. Every year there were many of these men."[192]
^ Napoleon's height was 5 ft 2 in in French measure according to Antommarchi at Napoleon's autopsy, whereas British sources put his height at 5 ft 6 in in imperial measure: both equivalent to 1.68 m.[220] Napoleon surrounded himself with tall bodyguards and had a nickname of le petit caporal which was an affectionate term that reflected his reported camaraderie with his soldiers rather than his height.
^ One night, during an illicit liaison with the actress Marguerite George, Napoleon had a major fit. This and other more minor attacks have led historians to debate whether he had epilepsy and, if so, to what extent.[274]


Citations


^ E. Hales, "Napoleon and the Pope", (London:1962) pg 114
^ "Napoleon". Random House Webster's Unabridged Dictionary.
^ a b Roberts, Andrew. Napoleon: A Life. Penguin Group, 2014, Introduction.
^ Charles Messenger, ed. (2001). Reader's Guide to Military History. Routledge. pp.&#160;391–427. ISBN&#160;978-1-135-95970-8.&#160;
^ Grab 2003, p.&#160;56.
^ Broers, M. and Hicks, P.The Napoleonic Empire and the New European Political Culture. Palgrave Macmillan, 2012, p. 230
^ Conner, S. P. The Age of Napoleon. Greenwood Publishing Group, 2004, pp. 38-40.
^ Fremont-Barnes, G. and Fisher, T. The Napoleonic Wars: The Rise and Fall of an Empire. Osprey Publishing, 2004, p. 336
^ Grab, A. Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe. Palgrave Macmillan, 2003, Conclusion.
^ a b Roberts 2014, p.&#160;279.
^ a b The ideas that underpin our modern world—meritocracy, equality before the law, property rights, religious toleration, modern secular education, sound finances, and so on—were championed, consolidated, codified and geographically extended by Napoleon. To them he added a rational and efficient local administration, an end to rural banditry, the encouragement of science and the arts, the abolition of feudalism and the greatest codification of laws since the fall of the Roman Empire. Andrew Roberts, Napoleon: A Life (2014), p. xxxiii.
^ a b Xavier Blanc-Jouvan, Worldwide Influence of the French Civil Code of 1804, on the Occasion of its Bicentennial Celebration [1]
^ Roberts 2014, p.&#160;457.
^ Roberts, A. Napoleon: A Life. Penguin Group, 2014, p. 801.
^ McLynn 1998, p.6
^ a b Dwyer 2008, p.xv
^ McLynn 1998, p.2
^ 2012 DNA tests found that some of the family's ancestors were from the Caucasus region; "Le Figaro – Mon Figaro&#160;: Selon son ADN,les ancêtres de Napoléon seraient du Caucase!". Le Figaro. 15 January 2012. Retrieved 20 February 2012.&#160;; The study found haplogroup type E1b1c1*, which originated in Northern Africa circa 1200 BC; the people migrated into the Caucasus and into Europe. "Haplogroup of the Y Chromosome of Napoléon the First; Gerard Lucotte, Thierry Thomasset, Peter Hrechdakian; Journal of Molecular Biology Research". December 2011. Retrieved 18 February 2012.&#160;
^ Cronin 1994, pp. 20–21
^ Philip Dwyer, Napoleon (2008) ch 1
^ Cronin 1994, p.27
^ a b c Roberts 2001, p.xvi
^ McLynn 1998, p.18
^ Dwyer 2008, p.29
^ McLynn 1998, p.21
^ Wells 1992, p.74
^ a b Dwyer 2008, p.42
^ McLynn 1998, p.26
^ a b McLynn 1998, p.290
^ McLynn 1998, p.37
^ McLynn 1998, p.55
^ McLynn 1998, p.61
^ a b c d e Roberts 2001, p.xviii
^ Dwyer 2008, p.132
^ McLynn 1998, p.76
^ a b Dwyer 2008, pp.145–9
^ Chandler 1973, p.30
^ Bourrienne, Memoirs of Napoleon, p.39.
^ Bourrienne, Memoirs of Napoleon, p.38.
^ Dwyer 2008, p.157
^ McLynn 1998, pp.76, 84
^ McLynn 1998, p.92
^ Dwyer 2008, p.26
^ Dwyer 2008, p.164
^ McLynn 1998, p.93
^ a b McLynn 1998, p.96
^ Johnson 2002, p.27
^ "The works of Thomas Carlyle – The French Revolution, vol.III, book 3.VII". Google.&#160;
^ Englund (2010) pp 92–94
^ Dwyer 2008, pp.284–5
^ McLynn 1998, p.132
^ McLynn 1998, p.145
^ McLynn 1998, p.142
^ Harvey 2006, p.179
^ McLynn 1998, p.135
^ Dwyer 2008, p.306
^ Dwyer 2008, p.305
^ Dwyer 2008, p.322
^ a b c Watson 2003, pp.13–14
^ Amini 2000, p.12
^ Dwyer 2008, p.342
^ Englund (2010) pp 127-8
^ McLynn 1998, p.175
^ G. Walter (2013). DuMont BILDATLAS Malta: Inselstaat im Mittelmeer. Dumont Reiseverlag.&#160;
^ Frans Sammut (1997/2008). Bonaparte à Malte. Argo, Malta. ISBN 9789993288060
^ McLynn 1998, p.179
^ Dwyer 2008, p.372
^ a b c d e Roberts 2001, p.xx
^ Dwyer 2008, pp.392
^ Dwyer 2008, pp.411–24
^ McLynn 1998, p.189
^ McLynn 1998, p.193
^ Dwyer 2008, p.442
^ a b c Connelly 2006, p.57
^ Dwyer 2008, p.444
^ Dwyer 2008, p.455
^ François Furet, The French Revolution, 1770–1814 (1996), p. 212
^ Georges Lefebvre, Napoleon from 18 Brumaire to Tilsit 1799–1807 (1969), pp. 60–68
^ Lefebvre, Napoleon from 18 Brumaire to Tilsit 1799–1807 (1969), pp. 71–92
^ Chandler 2002, p.51
^ a b McLynn 1998, p.235
^ a b Schom 1997, p.302
^ Alder 2002
^ Edwards 1999, p.55
^ For an advanced diplomatic history of the era, see Paul W. Schroeder, The Transformation of European Politics 1763–1848 (Oxford U.P. 1996) pp 177–560
^ McLynn 1998, p.265
^ Roberts, Andrew. Napoleon: A Life. Penguin Group, 2014, p. 301
^ Roberts, Andrew. Napoleon: A Life. Penguin Group, 2014, p. 303
^ Connelly 2006, p.70
^ McLynn 1998, p.243
^ McLynn 1998, p.296
^ a b McLynn 1998, p.297
^ Woolley, Reginald Maxwell (1915). Coronation Rites. Cambridge University Press. pp.&#160;106–107.&#160;
^ Paul W. Schroeder, The Transformation of European Politics 1763–1848 (1996) pp 231-86
^ Chandler p. 328. Meanwhile, French territorial rearrangements in Germany occurred without Russian consultation and Napoleon's annexations in the Po valley increasingly strained relations between the two.
^ Chandler p. 331
^ Chandler p. 323
^ Chandler p. 332
^ a b Chandler p. 333
^ a b McLynn 1998, p.321
^ McLynn 1998, p.332
^ Richard Brooks (editor), Atlas of World Military History. p. 108
^ Andrew Uffindell, Great Generals of the Napoleonic Wars. p. 15
^ Richard Brooks (editor), Atlas of World Military History. p. 156.
^ Richard Brooks (editor), Atlas of World Military History. p. 156. It is a historical cliché to compare the Schlieffen Plan with Hannibal's tactical envelopment at Cannae (216 BC); Schlieffen owed more to Napoleon's strategic maneuver on Ulm (1805).
^ David G. Chandler, The Campaigns of Napoleon. p. 407
^ Adrian Gilbert (2000). The Encyclopedia of Warfare: From Earliest Time to the Present Day. Taylor &amp; Francis. p.&#160;133. ISBN&#160;978-1-57958-216-6. Retrieved 11 July 2014.&#160;
^ Schom 1997, p.414
^ McLynn 1998, p.350
^ Cronin 1994, p.344
^ Karsh 2001, p.12
^ a b c Chandler 1966, p. 467–68
^ Brooks 2000, p. 110
^ McLynn 1998, p.497
^ Jacques Godechot et al. Napoleonic Era in Europe (1971) pp 126–39
^ McLynn 1998, p.370
^ Roberts 2014, p.&#160;[page&#160;needed].
^ Roberts 2014, pp.&#160;458–59.
^ Roberts 2014, p.&#160;[page&#160;needed].
^ Todd Fisher &amp; Gregory Fremont-Barnes, The Napoleonic Wars: The Rise and Fall of an Empire. p. 197.
^ Fisher &amp; Fremont-Barnes pp. 198–99.
^ Fisher &amp; Fremont-Barnes p. 199.
^ "The Erfurt Convention 1808". Napoleon-series.org. Retrieved 22 April 2013.&#160;
^ Fisher &amp; Fremont-Barnes p. 205.
^ Chandler pp. 659-60.
^ a b c Fisher &amp; Fremont-Barnes p. 106.
^ Chandler p. 690.
^ Chandler p. 701.
^ Chandler p. 705.
^ Chandler p. 706.
^ Chandler p. 707.
^ a b David G. Chandler, The Campaigns of Napoleon. p. 708.
^ David G. Chandler, The Campaigns of Napoleon. p. 720.
^ David G. Chandler, The Campaigns of Napoleon. p. 729.
^ "The British Expeditionary Force to Walcheren: 1809". napoleon-series.org.&#160;
^ a b Todd Fisher &amp; Gregory Fremont-Barnes, The Napoleonic Wars: The Rise and Fall of an Empire. p. 144.
^ David G. Chandler, The Campaigns of Napoleon. p. 732.
^ McLynn 1998, p.378
^ McLynn 1998, p.495
^ McLynn 1998, p.507
^ McLynn 1998, p.506
^ McLynn 1998, pp.504–505
^ Harvey 2006, p.773
^ McLynn 1998, p.518
^ Markham 1988, p.194
^ "Napoleon1812". napoleon-1812.nl.&#160;
^ Markham 1988, pp.190, 199
^ McLynn 1998, p.541
^ McLynn 1998, p.549
^ McLynn 1998, p.565
^ Chandler 1995, p.1020
^ a b J. P. Riley (2013). Napoleon and the World War of 1813: Lessons in Coalition Warfighting. Routledge. p.&#160;206.&#160;
^ Leggiere (2007). The Fall of Napoleon: Volume 1, The Allied Invasion of France, 1813–1814. pp.&#160;53–54.&#160;
^ Fremont-Barnes 2004, p.14
^ McLynn 1998, p.585
^ Gates 2003, p.&#160;259.
^ Lieven, Dominic (2010). Russia Against Napoleon: The True Story of the Campaigns of War and Peace. Penguin. pp.&#160;484–85.&#160;
^ "Napoleon's act of abdication". Bulletin des lois de la Republique Française. Retrieved 28 August 2009.&#160;
^ McLynn 1998, pp.593–4
^ McLynn 1998, p.597
^ a b c McLynn 1998, p.604
^ "(untitled)". Freeman's Journal and Daily Commercial Advertiser (Dublin). 24 November 1831.&#160;
^ Ferrier, Tracey. "Napoleon's getaway ship 'found in Queensland'". MSN News Australia. Retrieved 16 June 2015.&#160;
^ McLynn 1998, p.605
^ McLynn 1998, p.607
^ Chesney 2006, p.35
^ Cordingly 2004, p.254
^ Schom 1997, pp.769–770
^ McLynn 1998, p.642
^ Wilkins 1972
^ McLynn 1998, p.651
^ Albert Benhamou, Inside Longwood – Barry O'Meara's clandestine letters, 2012
^ McLynn 1998, p. 655
^ Roberts, Napoleon (2014) 799-801
^ Wilson 1975, pp.293–5
^ Fulghum 2007
^ a b McLynn 1998, p.655
^ Driskel 1993, p. 168"
^ McLynn 1998, p.656
^ Johnson 2002, pp.180–1
^ a b c Cullen 2008, pp.146–48
^ a b Cullen 2008, p.156
^ Cullen 2008, p.50
^ Cullen 2008, p.161, and Hindmarsh et al. 2008, p.2092
^ a b "L'Empire et le Saint-Siège". Napoleon.org. Retrieved 15 June 2011.&#160;
^ Stephen Coote (2005). Napoleon and the Hundred Days. Perseus. p.&#160;28.&#160;
^ Jacques Bainville, Napoleon I, p.94
^ "Bonaparte and Islam.". Center for History and New Media at George Mason University. Retrieved 12 July 2012.&#160;
^ "Napoleon: Man of Peace". Napoleon-series.org. 17 November 1999. Retrieved 4 November 2011.&#160;
^ Juan Cole, Napoleon's Egypt: Invading the Middle East, Palgrave Macmillan, 2007, p.29
^ Talk Of Napoleon At St. Helena (1903), pp. 270–271
^ Talk Of Napoleon At St. Helena (1903), pp. 276–277
^ Talk Of Napoleon At St. Helena (1903), pp. 274–275
^ Talk Of Napoleon At St. Helena'' (1903), pp. 279–280
^ Louis Antoine Fauvelet de Bourrienne, Memoirs of Napoleon Bonaparte. Scott, Webster &amp; Geary. 1839. p.&#160;586. Retrieved 5 February 2011.&#160;
^ William Roberts, "Napoleon, the Concordat of 1801, and Its Consequences." in by Frank J. Coppa, ed., Controversial Concordats: The Vatican's Relations with Napoleon, Mussolini, and Hitler (1999) pp: 34-80.
^ Nigel Aston, Religion and revolution in France, 1780–1804 (Catholic University of America Press, 2000) pp 279-315
^ Nigel Aston, Christianity and revolutionary Europe, 1750–1830 (Cambridge University Press, 2002) pp 261-62.
^ Luis Granados (2012). Damned Good Company. Humanist Press. pp.&#160;182–83.&#160;
^ McLynn 1998, p.436
^ Schwarzfuchs 1979, p.50
^ Cronin 1994, p.315
^ Pieter Geyl, Napoleon, For and Against (1982)
^ George F. E. Rudé (1988). The French Revolution. Grove Weidenfeld. p.&#160;128. ISBN&#160;978-0-8021-3272-7.&#160;
^ Andrea Barham (2014). Napoleon Wasn't Short and St Patrick Wasn't Irish: When History Gets It Wrong. Michael O'Mara. pp.&#160;47–49. ISBN&#160;978-1-78243-095-7.&#160;
^ Jack Coggins (1966). Soldiers And Warriors: An Illustrated History. Courier Dover Publications. p.&#160;187. ISBN&#160;978-0-486-45257-9.&#160;
^ Sally Waller (2002). France in Revolution, 1776–1830. Heinemann. p.&#160;188. ISBN&#160;978-0-435-32732-3.&#160;
^ a b See David Chandler, "General Introduction" to his Chandler, David. The Campaigns of Napoleon: The Mind and Method of History's Greatest Soldier (1975).
^ Roberts, Napoleon: A Life (2014) pp 470-73
^ Gregory R. Copley (2007). The Art of Victory: Strategies for Personal Success and Global Survival in a Changing World. Simon and Schuster. p.&#160;97. ISBN&#160;1-4165-2478-9.&#160;
^ Philip Dwyer, Citizen Emperor (2013) pp 175–76
^ J. M. Thompson, Napoleon Bonaparte: His Rise and Fall (1954), p.285
^ Christopher Hibbert (1999). Wellington: A Personal History. Da Capo Press. p.&#160;171. ISBN&#160;0-7382-0148-0.&#160;
^ McLynn, (1998) p 357
^ Steven Englund, Napoleon: A Political Life (2004), pp.379ff
^ van Crevald, Martin (1987). Command in War. Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. p.&#160;64. ISBN&#160;0-674-14441-4.&#160;
^ "Napoleon Bonaparte (Character)". Internet Movie Database. Retrieved 12 October 2008.&#160; and Bell 2007, p.13
^ Roberts 2004, p.93
^ "Napoleon Bonaparte Having Been Short is a Myth". Today I Found Out (in en-US). Retrieved 2015-11-10.&#160; CS1 maint: Unrecognized language (link)
^ Nature Clinical Practice Gastroenterology &amp; Hepatology (12 May 2006). "Nature Clinical Practice Gastroenterology &amp; Hepatology | Napoleon Bonaparte's gastric cancer: a clinicopathologic approach to staging, pathogenesis, and etiology | Article". Nature. Retrieved 25 January 2014.&#160;
^ Hall 2006, p.181
^ Bordes 2007, p.118
^ McGRAW-HILL'S, US History 2012, pp.&#160;112–113
^ Blaufarb 2007, pp.101–2
^ McLynn 1998, p.255
^ Bernard Schwartz (1998). The Code Napoleon and the Common-law World. The Lawbook Exchange. p.&#160;7. ISBN&#160;978-1-886363-59-5.&#160;
^ Wood 2007, p.55
^ Scheck 2008, Chapter: The Road to National Unification
^ Astarita 2005, p.264
^ Alter 2006, pp.61–76
^ Andrew Roberts, Napoleon: A Life (2014) p xxxiii
^ Robert R. Palmer and Joel Colton, A History of the Modern World (New York: McGraw Hill, 1995), pp. 428–9.
^ a b Archer et al. 2002, p.397
^ Flynn 2001, p.16
^ Bruce McConachy, "The Roots of Artillery Doctrine: Napoleonic Artillery Tactics Reconsidered," Journal of Military History 2001 65(3): 617–640. in JSTOR; online
^ Archer et al. 2002, p.383
^ John Shy, "Jomini" in Peter Paret, ed. Makers of Modern Strategy: From Machiavelli to the Nuclear Age (1986).
^ Archer et al. 2002, p.380
^ Roberts 2001, p.272
^ Archer et al. 2002, p.404
^ Hallock, William; Wade, Herbert T (1906). "Outlines of the evolution of weights and measures and the metric system". London: The Macmillan Company. pp.&#160;66–69.&#160;
^ Denis Février. "Un historique du mètre" (in French). Ministère de l'Economie, des Finances et de l'Industrie. Retrieved 10 March 2011.&#160;
^ Thierry Sabot (1 October 2000). "Les poids et mesures sous l'Ancien Régime" [The weights and measures of the Ancien Régime] (in French). histoire-genealogie. Retrieved 10 February 2011.&#160;
^ O'Connor 2003
^ Clive Emsley (2014). Napoleon: Conquest, Reform and Reorganisation. Routledge. p.&#160;52.&#160;
^ L. Pearce Williams, "Science, education and Napoleon I." Isis (1956): 369-382 in JSTOR
^ Margaret Bradley, "Scientific education versus military training: the influence of Napoleon Bonaparte on the Ecole Polytechnique." Annals of science (1975) 32#5 pp: 415-449.
^ Harvnb|Roberts|2014|p=278-281
^ Max Hastings, "Everything Is Owed to Glory," The Wall Street Journal October 31, 2014
^ Charles Esdaile, Napoleon's Wars: An International History 1803–1815 (2008), p 39
^ Colin S. Gray (2007). War, Peace and International Relations: An Introduction to Strategic History. Routledge. p.&#160;47. ISBN&#160;978-1-134-16951-1.&#160;
^ Abbott 2005, p.3
^ a b McLynn 1998, p.666
^ Repa, Jan (2 December 2005). "Furore over Austerlitz ceremony". BBC. Retrieved 5 April 2010.&#160;
^ Poulos 2000
^ Geyl 1947
^ Philip Dwyer, "Remembering and Forgetting in Contemporary France: Napoleon, Slavery, and the French History Wars", French Politics, Culture &amp; Society (2008) 26#3. pp 110–122. online
^ Chandler 1973, p. xliii
^ Hanson 2003
^ Cronin 1994, pp.342–3
^ Alan Forrest, "Propaganda and the Legitimation of Power in Napoleonic France." French History, 2004 18(4): 426–445
^ a b Sudhir Hazareesingh, "Memory and Political Imagination: the Legend of Napoleon Revisited." French History, 2004 18(4): 463–483
^ a b Venita Datta, "'L'appel Au Soldat': Visions of the Napoleonic Legend in Popular Culture of the Belle Epoque." French Historical Studies 2005 28(1): 1–30
^ "Call for Papers: International Napoleonic Society, Fourth International Napoleonic Congress". La Fondation Napoléon. Retrieved 27 June 2008.&#160;
^ Laurent, Ottavi (8 February 2012). "A New Napoleonic Campaign for Montereau". Foundation Napoleon.&#160;
^ Alexander Grab, Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe (Macmillan, 2003), country by country analysis
^ "Napoleonic Code". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved 13 April 2012.&#160;
^ Andrzej Nieuwazny, "Napoleon and Polish identity." History Today, May 1998 vol. 48 no. 5 pp.50–55
^ McGRAW-HILL's,US History 2012, pp.&#160;112–113
^ McLynn 1998, p.117
^ McLynn 1998, p.271
^ McLynn 1998, p.118
^ McLynn 1998, p.188
^ McLynn 1998, p.284
^ McLynn 1998, p.100
^ a b McLynn 1998, p.663
^ McLynn 1998, p.630
^ Lucotte, Gérard; Macé, Jacques &amp; Hrechdakian, Peter (September 2013). "Reconstruction of the Lineage Y Chromosome Haplotype of Napoléon the First" (PDF). International Journal of Sciences (Alkhaer Publications) 2 (9): 127–139. ISSN&#160;2305-3925.&#160;
^ McLynn 1998, p.423


References

Biographical studies

Abbott, John (2005). Life of Napoleon Bonaparte. Kessinger Publishing. ISBN&#160;1-4179-7063-4.&#160;
Blaufarb, Rafe (2007). Napoleon: Symbol for an Age, A Brief History with Documents. Bedford. ISBN&#160;0-312-43110-4.&#160;
Chandler, David (2002). Napoleon. Leo Cooper. ISBN&#160;0-85052-750-3.&#160;
Cronin, Vincent (1994). Napoleon. HarperCollins. ISBN&#160;0-00-637521-9.&#160;
Dwyer, Philip. Napoleon: The Path to Power (2008) excerpt vol 1; Citizen Emperor: Napoleon in Power (2013) excerpt and text search v 2; most recent scholarly biography
Englund, Steven (2010). Napoleon: A Political Life. Scribner. ISBN&#160;0-674-01803-6.&#160;
Gueniffey, Patrice. Bonaparte: 1769–1802 (Harvard UP, 2015, French edition 2013); 1008pp; most comprehensive recent scholarly biography; less emphasis on battles and campaigns
Johnson, Paul (2002). Napoleon: A life. Penguin Books. ISBN&#160;0-670-03078-3.&#160;; 200pp; quite hostile
Lefebvre, Georges (1969). Napoleon from 18 Brumaire to Tilsit, 1799–1807. Columbia University Press.&#160; influential wide-ranging history

Lefebvre, Georges (1969). Napoleon; from Tilsit to Waterloo, 1807–1815. Columbia University Press.&#160;


Markham, Felix (1963). Napoleon. Mentor.&#160;; 303pp; short biography by an Oxford scholar online
McLynn, Frank (1998). Napoleon. Pimlico. ISBN&#160;0-7126-6247-2. ASIN&#160;0712662472.&#160;; well-written popular history
Roberts, Andrew (2014). Napoleon: A Life. Penguin Group. ISBN&#160;978-0-670-02532-9.&#160;
Thompson, J.M. (1951). Napoleon Bonaparte: His Rise and Fall. Oxford U.P.&#160;, 412pp; by an Oxford scholar

Specialty studies

Alder, Ken (2002). The Measure of All Things—The Seven-Year Odyssey and Hidden Error That Transformed the World. Free Press. ISBN&#160;0-7432-1675-X.&#160;
Alter, Peter (2006). T. C. W. Blanning and Hagen Schulze, ed. Unity and Diversity in European Culture c. 1800. Oxford University Press. ISBN&#160;0-19-726382-8.&#160;
Amini, Iradj (2000). Napoleon and Persia. Taylor &amp; Francis. ISBN&#160;0-934211-58-2.&#160;
Archer, Christon I.; Ferris, John R.; Herwig, Holger H. (2002). World History of Warfare. University of Nebraska Press. ISBN&#160;0-8032-4423-1.&#160;
Astarita, Tommaso (2005). Between Salt Water And Holy Water: A History Of Southern Italy. W. W. Norton &amp; Company. ISBN&#160;0-393-05864-6.&#160;
Bell, David (2007). The First Total War. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. ISBN&#160;0-618-34965-0.&#160;
Bordes, Philippe (2007). Jacques-Louis David. Yale University Press. ISBN&#160;0-300-12346-9.&#160;
Brooks, Richard (2000). Atlas of World Military History. HarperCollins. ISBN&#160;0-7607-2025-8.&#160;
Chandler, David (1973). The Campaigns of Napoleon.&#160;, the standard military history of N's battles
Chesney, Charles (2006). Waterloo Lectures:A Study Of The Campaign Of 1815. Kessinger Publishing. ISBN&#160;1-4286-4988-3.&#160;
Connelly, Owen (2006). Blundering to Glory: Napoleon's Military Campaigns. Rowman &amp; Littlefield. ISBN&#160;0-7425-5318-3.&#160;
Cordingly, David (2004). The Billy Ruffian: The Bellerophon and the Downfall of Napoleon. Bloomsbury. ISBN&#160;1-58234-468-X.&#160;
Cullen, William (2008). Is Arsenic an Aphrodisiac?. Royal Society of Chemistry. ISBN&#160;0-85404-363-2.&#160;
Driskel, Paul (1993). As Befits a Legend. Kent State University Press. ISBN&#160;0-87338-484-9.&#160;
Flynn, George Q. (2001). Conscription and democracy: The Draft in France, Great Britain, and the United States. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN&#160;0-313-31912-X.&#160;
Fremont-Barnes, Gregory; Fisher, Todd (2004). The Napoleonic Wars: The Rise and Fall of an Empire. Osprey. ISBN&#160;1-84176-831-6.&#160;
Fulghum, Neil (2007). "Death Mask of Napoleon". University of North Carolina. Retrieved 4 August 2008.&#160;
Gates, David (2001). The Spanish Ulcer: A History of the Peninsular War. Da Capo Press. ISBN&#160;0-306-81083-2.&#160;
Gates, David (2003). The Napoleonic Wars, 1803–1815. Pimlico. ISBN&#160;0-7126-0719-6.&#160;
Godechot, Jacques; et al. (1971). The Napoleonic era in Europe. Holt, Rinehart and Winston.&#160;
Grab, Alexander (2003). Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe. Macmillan. ISBN&#160;978-0-333-68275-3.&#160;
Hall, Stephen (2006). Size Matters. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. ISBN&#160;0-618-47040-9.&#160;
Harvey, Robert (2006). The War of Wars. Robinson. ISBN&#160;978-1-84529-635-3.&#160;
Hindmarsh, J. Thomas; Savory, John (2008). "The Death of Napoleon, Cancer or Arsenic?". Clinical Chemistry (American Association for Clinical Chemistry) 54 (12): 2092. doi:10.1373/clinchem.2008.117358. Retrieved 10 October 2010.&#160;
Karsh, Inari (2001). Empires of the Sand: The Struggle for Mastery in the Middle East, 1789–1923. Harvard University Press. ISBN&#160;0-674-00541-4.&#160;
O'Connor, J; Robertson, E F (2003). "The history of measurement". St Andrew's University. Retrieved 18 July 2008.&#160;
Poulos, Anthi (2000). "1954 Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict". International Journal of Legal Information (vol 28 ed.).&#160;
Roberts, Chris (2004). Heavy Words Lightly Thrown. Granta. ISBN&#160;1-86207-765-7.&#160;
Scheck, Raffael (2008). Germany, 1871–1945: A Concise History. Berg. ISBN&#160;1-84520-817-X.&#160;
Schom, Alan (1997). Napoleon Bonaparte. HarperCollins. ISBN&#160;978-0-06-017214-5.&#160;
Schroeder, Paul W. (1996). The Transformation of European Politics 1763–1848. Oxford U.P. pp.&#160;177–560. ISBN&#160;978-0-19-820654-5.&#160; advanced diplomatic history of Napoleon and his era
Schwarzfuchs, Simon (1979). Napoleon, the Jews and the Sanhedrin. Routledge. ISBN&#160;0-19-710023-6.&#160;
Watson, William (2003). Tricolor and crescent. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN&#160;0-275-97470-7. Retrieved 12 June 2009.&#160;
Wells, David (1992). The Penguin Dictionary of Curious and Interesting Geometry. Penguin Books. ISBN&#160;0-14-011813-6.&#160;
Wilkins, William (1972) [1944]. Napoleon's Submarine. New English Library. ISBN&#160;0-450-01028-7.&#160;
Wilson, J (1975). "Dr. Archibald Arnott: Surgeon to the 20th Foot and Physician to Napoleon". British Medical Journal 3 (vol.3): 293–5. doi:10.1136/bmj.3.5978.293. PMC&#160;1674241. PMID&#160;1097047.&#160;
Wood, Philip (2007). The Law and Practice of International Finance Series. Sweet &amp; Maxwell. ISBN&#160;1-84703-210-9.&#160;


Historiography and memory

Dwyer, Philip (2008). "Remembering and Forgetting in Contemporary France: Napoleon, Slavery, and the French History Wars". French Politics, Culture &amp; Society 26 (3): 110–122.&#160;
Englund, Steven. "Napoleon and Hitler" Journal of the Historical Society (2006) 6#1 pp 151–169.
Geyl, Pieter (1982) [1947]. Napoleon For and Against. Penguin Books.&#160;
Hanson, Victor Davis (2003). "The Claremont Institute: The Little Tyrant, A review of Napoleon: A Penguin Life". The Claremont Institute.&#160; Missing or empty |url= (help)
Hazareesingh, Sudhir (2005). The Legend of Napoleon.&#160; excerpt and text search

Hazareesingh, Sudhir. "Memory and Political Imagination: The Legend of Napoleon Revisited," French History (2004) 18#4 pp 463–483.
Hazareesingh, Sudhir (2005). "Napoleonic Memory in Nineteenth-Century France: The Making of a Liberal Legend". MLN 120 (4): 747–773.&#160;



External links




Corsica portal






Find more about
Napoleon Bonaparte
at Wikipedia's sister projects




Definitions from Wiktionary



Media from Commons



News stories from Wikinews



Quotations from Wikiquote



Source texts from Wikisource



Textbooks from Wikibooks



Learning resources from Wikiversity



The Napoleonic Guide
Napoleon Series
International Napoleonic Society
Napoléon Bonaparte (Character) at the Internet Movie Database
Biography by the US Public Broadcasting Service
Inside Longwood descriptions of Longwood House &amp; other places on St. Helena, articles on Napoleon's captivity
Alan Schom Interview on his book Napoleon Bonaparte on Booknotes, 26 October 1997
Works by Napoleon at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about Napoleon at Internet Archive

Memoirs of Napoleon at Project Gutenberg

John Holland Rose. The Life of Napoleon I at Project Gutenberg

John Gibson Lockhart. The History of Napoleon Buonaparte at Project Gutenberg

William Milligan Sloane. The Life of Napoleon I. at Project Gutenberg Vol. 1/4

William Milligan Sloane. The Life of Napoleon I. at Project Gutenberg Vol. 3/4




Emperor Napoleon I of France
House of Bonaparte



Political offices


Preceded&#160;by
French Directory
Provisional Consul of France
11 November&#160;– 12 December 1799
Served alongside: 
Roger Ducos and Emmanuel Joseph Sieyès
Became Consul


New title
Consulate created

First Consul of France
12 December 1799&#160;– 18 May 1804
Served alongside: 
Jean Jacques Régis de Cambacérès (Second Consul)
Charles-François Lebrun (Third Consul)
Became Emperor


Regnal titles


Vacant
French Revolution
Title last held by
Louis XVI of France
as King of the French
Emperor of the French
18 May 1804&#160;– 11 April 1814
Succeeded&#160;by
Louis XVIII of France
as King of France and Navarre


Vacant
Title last held by
Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor
as last crowned monarch, 1530
King of Italy
17 March 1805&#160;– 11 April 1814
Vacant
Title next held by
Victor Emmanuel II of Savoy


Preceded&#160;by
Louis XVIII of France
as King of France and Navarre
Emperor of the French
20 March&#160;– 22 June 1815
Succeeded&#160;by
Louis XVIII of France
as King of France and Navarre
(Napoleon II according to his will only)


Vacant
Title last held by
Louis XVI of France
Co-Prince of Andorra
1806&#160;– 11 April 1814
Succeeded&#160;by
Louis XVIII of France


Preceded&#160;by
none
Sovereign of the Island of Elba
11 April 1814&#160;– 20 March 1815
Succeeded&#160;by
none


New title
State created

Protector of the Confederation of the Rhine
12 July 1806&#160;– 19 October 1813
Rhine Confederation dissolved
successive ruler:
Francis II, Holy Roman Emperor
as President of the German Confederation



Titles in pretence


New title
—&#160;TITULAR&#160;—
Emperor of the French
11 April 1814&#160;– 20 March 1815
Vacant
Title next held by
Napoleon II










v
t
e


Napoleonic Wars









Third Coalition
Fourth Coalition
Peninsular War
Fifth Coalition
French Invasion of Russia
Sixth Coalition
Seventh Coalition








Belligerents





France, client states
and allies




France
Polish Legions
Italy
Holland
Etruria
Swiss Confederation
Naples
Confederation of the Rhine

Bavaria
Saxony
Westphalia
Württemberg


Denmark–Norway
Ottoman Empire
Persia
Spain









Coalition forces




United Kingdom
Austria
Russia
Prussia
Spain
Portugal
Sicily
Papal States
Ottoman Empire
Persia
Sardinia
Sweden
Netherlands
Brunswick
Hanover
Nassau
French Royalists











Major battles





Prelude




French Revolution
First Coalition
Second Coalition
18 Brumaire
Planned invasion of the United Kingdom
Duc d'Enghien Execution
Coronation of Napoleon









1805




Diamond Rock
Cape Finisterre
Wertingen
Günzburg
Haslach-Jungingen
Elchingen
Ulm
Verona
Trafalgar
Caldiero
Cape Ortegal
Amstetten
Dürenstein
Schöngrabern
Austerlitz









1806




Gaeta
Campo Tenese
Maida
Schleiz
Saalfeld
Jena–Auerstedt
Erfurt
Halle
Magdeburg
Prenzlau
Pasewalk
Stettin
Waren-Nossentin
Lübeck
Greater Poland Uprising
Hameln
Czarnowo
Golymin
Pułtusk









1807




Mohrungen
Stralsund
Eylau
Ostrołęka
Kolberg
Danzig
Mileto
Guttstadt-Deppen
Heilsberg
Friedland
Invasion of Portugal









1808




Dos de Mayo
Bruch
Rosily Squadron
Cabezón
1st Zaragoza
Valencia
Medina de Rioseco
Bailén
Roliça
Vimeiro
Pancorbo
Valmaseda
Burgos
Espinosa
Tudela
Somosierra
2nd Zaragoza
Sahagún
Benavente









1809




Castellón
Uclés
Corunna
Valls
Tyrolean Rebellion
Villafranca
Yevenes/Yébenes
Ciudad Real
1st Porto
Medellín
Bergisel
Sacile
Teugen-Hausen
Raszyn
Abensberg
Landshut
Eckmühl
Ratisbon
Neumarkt-Sankt Veit
Dalmatian Campaign
Ebelsberg
Gerona
Piave River
Grijó
2nd Porto
Wörgl
Tarvis
Aspern-Essling
Alcañiz
Sankt Michael
Stralsund
Raab
María
Graz
Wagram
Korneuburg
Stockerau
Gefrees
Hollabrunn
Schöngrabern
Armistice of Znaim
Talavera
Walcheren Campaign
Ölper
Almonacid
Tamames
Ocaña
Alba de Tormes









1810




Cádiz
Astorga
Ciudad Rodrigo
Barquilla
Côa
Almeida
Bussaco









1811




Gebora
Barrosa
Pombal
Redinha
Casal Novo
Campo Maior
Sabugal
Almeida
Fuentes de Oñoro
Tarragona
Albuera
Usagre
Saguntum
Arroyo dos Molinos
Valencia









1812




Ciudad Rodrigo
Badajoz
Villagarcia
Almaraz
Maguilla
Mir
Salamanca
García Hernández
Saltanovka
Ostrovno
Vitebsk
Klyastitsy
Majadahonda
Smolensk
1st Polotsk
Valutino
Mesoten
Borodino
Burgos
Tarutino
2nd Polotsk
Venta del Pozo
Maloyaroslavets
Chashniki
Vyazma
Smoliani
Krasnoi
Berezina









1813




Castalla
Lützen
Bautzen
Tarragona
Luckau
Vitoria
San Sebastián
Pyrenees
Sorauren
Großbeeren
Katzbach
Dresden
1st Kulm
San Marcial
Dennewitz
2nd Kulm
Göhrde
Bidassoa
Leipzig
Hanau
Nivelle
Bornhöved
Sehested









1814




Brienne
La Rothière
Mincio River
Champaubert
Montmirail
Château-Thierry
Vauchamps
Garris
Mormant
Montereau
Orthez
Bar-sur-Aube
Laon
Reims
Craonne
Arcis-sur-Aube
Fère-Champenoise
Saint-Dizier
Montmartre
Paris
Toulouse
Bayonne









1815




Panaro
Occhiobello
Carpi
Casaglia
Ronco
Cesenatico
Pesaro
Scapezzano
Tolentino
Ancona
Castel di Sangro
San Germano
Gaeta
Quatre Bras
Ligny
Waterloo
Wavre
Rocheserviere
La Suffel
Rocquencourt
Issy











Information





French and ally
military and political leaders




Napoleon
Louis-Alexandre Berthier
Joachim Murat
Louis-Nicolas Davout
Jean Lannes
André Masséna
Michel Ney
Jean-de-Dieu Soult
Jean-Baptiste Bessières
Pierre-Charles Villeneuve
Joseph I
Louis Bonaparte
Jérôme Bonaparte
Prince Poniatowski
Prince Eugène
Maximilian I Joseph of Bavaria
Frederick Augustus I of Saxony
Frederick I of Württemberg
Frederick VI of Denmark









Coalition
military and political leaders




Duke of Wellington
Horatio Nelson
Francis II, Holy Roman Emperor
Archduke Charles
Prince von Schwarzenberg
Archduke John of Austria
Alexander I of Russia
Mikhail Kutuzov
Michael Andreas Barclay de Tolly
Count Bennigsen
Pyotr Bagration
Frederick William III of Prussia
Gebhard von Blücher
Duke of Brunswick
Prince of Hohenlohe
Ferdinand VII of Spain
Miguel de Álava
Maria I of Portugal
Prince Regent John of Portugal
Count of Feira
William, Prince of Orange
Ferdinand I of the Two Sicilies
Gustav IV Adolf of Sweden
Prince Charles John of Sweden
Louis XVIII of France









Related conflicts




English Wars

Gunboat War
Dano-Swedish War


Pomeranian War (Franco-Swedish War)
Russo-Persian War
Russo-Turkish War
Finnish War
Anglo-Turkish War
Anglo-Russian War
Anglo-Swedish War
War of 1812
Swedish–Norwegian War









Treaties




Campo Formio
Lunéville
Amiens
Artlenburg
Pressburg
Finckenstein
Tilsit
Sintra
Schönbrunn
Paris (1810)
Tauroggen
Ried
Chaumont
Kiel
Mantua
Casalanza
Paris (1815)









Miscellaneous




Bibliography
Continental System
England expects that every man will do his duty
Casualties
Grande Armée
Longwood House
Bourbon Restoration














 Portal
 Military History
 definition
 media
 quotes
















v
t
e


French Revolution









Timeline
Ancien Régime
Causes
Revolution
Constitutional monarchy
Republic
Directory
Consulate
Glossary












&#160;
Significant civil and political events by year






1788



Day of the Tiles (7 Jun 1788)
Assembly of Vizille (21 Jul 1788)








1789



What Is the Third Estate? (Jan 1789)
Réveillon riots (28 Apr 1789)
Convocation of the Estates-General (5 May 1789)
National Assembly (17 Jun – 9 Jul 1790)
National Constituent Assembly (9 Jul – 30 Sep 1791)
Tennis Court Oath (20 Jun 1789)
Storming of the Bastille (14 Jul 1789)
Great Fear (20 Jul – 5 Aug 1789)
Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen (27 Aug 1789)
Women's March on Versailles (5 Oct 1789)








1790



Abolition of the Parlements (Feb–Jul 1790)
Abolition of the Nobility (19 Jun 1790)
Civil Constitution of the Clergy (12 Jul 1790)








1791



Flight to Varennes (20–21 Jun 1791)
Champ de Mars Massacre (17 Jul 1791)
Declaration of Pillnitz (27 Aug 1791)
The Constitution of 1791 (3 Sep 1791)
Legislative Assembly (1 Oct 1791 – Sep 1792)








1792



Brunswick Manifesto (25 Jul 1792)
Paris Commune becomes insurrectionary (Jun 1792)
10th of August (10 Aug 1792)
September Massacres (Sep 1792)
National Convention (20 Sep 1792 – 26 Oct 1795)
First republic declared (22 Sep 1792)








1793



Execution of Louis XVI (21 Jan 1793)
Revolutionary Tribunal (9 Mar 1793 – 31 May 1795)
Reign of Terror (27 Jun 1793 – 27 Jul 1794)

Committee of Public Safety
Committee of General Security


Fall of the Girondists (2 Jun 1793)
Assassination of Marat (13 Jul 1793)
Levée en masse (23 Aug 1793)
Law of Suspects (17 Sep 1793)
Marie Antoinette is guillotined (16 Oct 1793)
Anti-clerical laws (throughout the year)








1794



Danton &amp; Desmoulins guillotined (5 Apr 1794)
Law of 22 Prairial (10 Jun 1794)
Thermidorian Reaction (27 Jul 1794)
White Terror (Fall 1794)
Closing of the Jacobin Club (11 Nov 1794)








1795



1795 Constitution (22 Aug 1795)
Conspiracy of the Equals (Nov 1795)
Directoire (1795–99)

Council of Five Hundred
Council of Ancients










1797



Coup of 18 Fructidor (4 Sep 1797)
Second Congress of Rastatt (Dec 1797)








1799



Coup of 30 Prairial VII (18 Jun 1799)
Coup of 18 Brumaire (9 Nov 1799)
Constitution of the Year VIII (24 Dec 1799)
Consulate















&#160;
Revolutionary campaigns






1792



Verdun
Thionville
Valmy
Royalist Revolts

Chouannerie
Vendée
Dauphiné


Lille
Siege of Mainz
Jemappes
Namur&#160;(fr)








1793



First Coalition
Siege of Toulon (18 Sep – 18 Dec 1793)
War in the Vendée
Battle of Neerwinden)
Battle of Famars (23 May 1793)
Capture of San Pietro and Sant'Antioco (25 May 1793)
Battle of Kaiserslautern
Siege of Mainz
Battle of Wattignies
Battle of Hondschoote
Siege of Bellegarde
Battle of Peyrestortes (Pyrenees)
First Battle of Wissembourg (13 Oct 1793)
Battle of Truillas (Pyrenees)
Second Battle of Wissembourg (26–27 Dec 1793)








1794



Battle of Villers-en-Cauchies (24 Apr 1794)
Battle of Boulou (Pyrenees) (30 Apr – 1 May 1794)
Battle of Tournay (22 May 1794)
Battle of Fleurus (26 Jun 1794)
Chouannerie
Battle of Tourcoing (18 May 1794)
Battle of Aldenhoven (2 Oct 1794)








1795



Peace of Basel








1796



Battle of Lonato (3–4 Aug 1796)
Battle of Castiglione (5 Aug 1796)
Battle of Theiningen
Battle of Neresheim (11 Aug 1796)
Battle of Amberg (24 Aug 1796)
Battle of Würzburg (3 Sep 1796)
Battle of Rovereto (4 Sep 1796)
First Battle of Bassano (8 Sep 1796)
Battle of Emmendingen (19 Oct 1796)
Battle of Schliengen (26 Oct 1796)
Second Battle of Bassano (6 Nov 1796)
Battle of Calliano (6–7 Nov 1796)
Battle of the Bridge of Arcole (15–17 Nov 1796)
The Ireland Expedition (Dec 1796)








1797



Naval Engagement off Brittany (13 Jan 1797)
Battle of Rivoli (14–15 Jan 1797)
Battle of the Bay of Cádiz (25 Jan 1797)
Treaty of Leoben (17 Apr 1797)
Battle of Neuwied (18 Apr 1797)
Treaty of Campo Formio (17 Oct 1797)








1798



French Invasion of Egypt (1798–1801)
Irish Rebellion of 1798 (23 May – 23 Sep 1798)
Quasi-War (1798–1800)
Peasants' War (12 Oct – 5 Dec 1798)








1799



Second Coalition (1798–1802)
Siege of Acre (20 Mar – 21 May 1799)
Battle of Ostrach (20–21 Mar 1799)
Battle of Stockach (25 Mar 1799)
Battle of Magnano (5 Apr 1799)
Battle of Cassano (27 Apr 1799)
First Battle of Zurich (4–7 Jun 1799)
Battle of Trebbia (19 Jun 1799)
Battle of Novi (15 Aug 1799)
Second Battle of Zurich (25–26 Sep 1799)








1800



Battle of Marengo (14 Jun 1800)
Battle of Hohenlinden (3 Dec 1800)
League of Armed Neutrality (1800–02)








1801



Treaty of Lunéville (9 Feb 1801)
Treaty of Florence (18 Mar 1801)
Algeciras Campaign (8 Jul 1801)








1802



Treaty of Amiens (25 Mar 1802)















&#160;
Military leaders






 French Army



Eustache Charles d'Aoust
Pierre Augereau
Alexandre de Beauharnais
Jean-Baptiste Bernadotte
Louis-Alexandre Berthier
Jean-Baptiste Bessières
Guillaume-Marie-Anne Brune
Jean François Carteaux
Jean Étienne Championnet
Chapuis de Tourville
Adam Philippe, Comte de Custine
Louis-Nicolas Davout
Louis Desaix
Jacques François Dugommier
Thomas-Alexandre Dumas
Charles François Dumouriez
Pierre Marie Barthélemy Ferino
Louis-Charles de Flers
Paul Grenier
Emmanuel de Grouchy
Jacques Maurice Hatry
Lazare Hoche
Jean-Baptiste Jourdan
François Christophe de Kellermann
Jean Baptiste Kléber
Pierre Choderlos de Laclos
Jean Lannes
Charles Leclerc
Claude Lecourbe
François Joseph Lefebvre
Jacques MacDonald
Jean-Antoine Marbot
Jean Baptiste de Marbot
François Séverin Marceau-Desgraviers
Auguste de Marmont
André Masséna
Bon-Adrien Jeannot de Moncey
Jean Victor Marie Moreau
Édouard Mortier, duc de Trévise
Joachim Murat
Michel Ney
Pierre-Jacques Osten&#160;(fr)
Nicolas Oudinot
Catherine-Dominique de Pérignon
Jean-Charles Pichegru
Józef Poniatowski
Laurent de Gouvion Saint-Cyr
Barthélemy Louis Joseph Schérer
Jean-Mathieu-Philibert Sérurier
Joseph Souham
Jean-de-Dieu Soult
Louis-Gabriel Suchet
Belgrand de Vaubois
Claude Victor-Perrin, Duc de Belluno








 French Navy



Charles-Alexandre Linois








Opposition




 Austria



József Alvinczi
Archduke Charles, Duke of Teschen
Count of Clerfayt (Walloon)
Karl Aloys zu Fürstenberg
Friedrich Freiherr von Hotze (Swiss)
Friedrich Adolf, Count von Kalckreuth
Pál Kray (Hungarian)
Charles Eugene, Prince of Lambesc (French)
Maximilian Baillet de Latour (Walloon)
Karl Mack von Leiberich
Rudolf Ritter von Otto (Saxon)
Prince Josias of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld
Peter Vitus von Quosdanovich
Prince Heinrich XV of Reuss-Plauen
Johann Mészáros von Szoboszló (Hungarian)
Karl Philipp Sebottendorf
Dagobert von Wurmser








 Britain



Sir Ralph Abercromby
Admiral Sir James Saumarez
Admiral Sir Edward Pellew
Prince Frederick, Duke of York and Albany








 Dutch Republic



William V, Prince of Orange








&#160;Prussia



Charles William Ferdinand, Duke of Brunswick-Wolfenbüttel
Frederick Louis, Prince of Hohenlohe-Ingelfingen








 Russia



Alexander Korsakov
Alexander Suvorov








 Spain



Luis Firmin de Carvajal
Antonio Ricardos


















&#160;
Other significant figures and factions







Feuillants
and monarchiens




Madame de Lamballe
Madame du Barry
Louis de Breteuil
Loménie de Brienne
Charles Alexandre de Calonne
de Chateaubriand
Jean Chouan
Grace Elliott
Arnaud de La Porte
Jean-Sifrein Maury
Jacques Necker
François-Marie, marquis de Barthélemy
Guillaume-Mathieu Dumas
Antoine Barnave
Lafayette
Alexandre-Théodore-Victor, comte de Lameth
Charles Malo François Lameth
André Chénier
Jean-François Rewbell
Camille Jordan
Madame de Staël
Boissy d'Anglas
Jean-Charles Pichegru
Pierre Paul Royer-Collard








Girondists



Jacques Pierre Brissot
Roland de La Platière
Madame Roland
Father Henri Grégoire
Étienne Clavière
Marquis de Condorcet
Charlotte Corday
Marie Jean Hérault
Jean Baptiste Treilhard
Pierre Victurnien Vergniaud
Bertrand Barère de Vieuzac
Jérôme Pétion de Villeneuve
Jean Debry
Jean-Jacques Duval d'Eprémesnil
Olympe de Gouges
Jean-Baptiste Robert Lindet
Louis Marie de La Révellière-Lépeaux








The Plain



Abbé Sieyès
de Cambacérès
Charles François Lebrun
Lazare Nicolas Marguerite Carnot
Philippe Egalite
Louis Philippe I
Mirabeau
Antoine Christophe Merlin de Thionville
Jean Joseph Mounier
Pierre Samuel du Pont de Nemours
François de Neufchâteau








Montagnards



Maximilien Robespierre
Georges Danton
Jean-Paul Marat
Camille Desmoulins
Louis Antoine de Saint-Just
Paul Nicolas, vicomte de Barras
Louis Philippe I
Louis Michel le Peletier de Saint-Fargeau
Jacques-Louis David
Marquis de Sade
Jacques-Louis David
Georges Couthon
Roger Ducos
Jean-Marie Collot d'Herbois
Jean-Henri Voulland
Philippe-Antoine Merlin de Douai
Antoine Quentin Fouquier-Tinville
Philippe-François-Joseph Le Bas
Marc-Guillaume Alexis Vadier
Jean-Pierre-André Amar
Prieur de la Côte-d'Or
Prieur de la Marne
Gilbert Romme
Jean Bon Saint-André
Jean-Lambert Tallien
Pierre Louis Prieur
Bertrand Barère de Vieuzac
Antoine Christophe Saliceti








Hébertists
and Enragés



Jacques Hébert
Jacques Nicolas Billaud-Varenne
Pierre Gaspard Chaumette
Charles-Philippe Ronsin
Antoine-François Momoro
François-Nicolas Vincent
François Chabot
Jean Baptiste Noël Bouchotte
Jean-Baptiste-Joseph Gobel
François Hanriot
Jacques Roux
Stanislas-Marie Maillard
Charles-Philippe Ronsin
Jean-François Varlet
Theophile Leclerc
Claire Lacombe
Pauline Léon
François-Noël Babeuf
Sylvain Maréchal








Others



Charles X
Louis XVI
Louis XVII
Louis XVIII
Louis Antoine, Duke of Enghien
Louis Henri, Prince of Condé
Louis Joseph, Prince of Condé
Marie Antoinette
Napoléon Bonaparte
Lucien Bonaparte
Joseph Bonaparte
Joseph Fesch
Joséphine de Beauharnais
Joachim Murat
Jean Sylvain Bailly
Jacques-Donatien Le Ray
Guillaume-Chrétien de Malesherbes
Talleyrand
Thérésa Tallien
Gui-Jean-Baptiste Target
Catherine Théot
List of people associated with the French Revolution















&#160;
Influential thinkers









Les Lumières
Beaumarchais
Edmund Burke
Anacharsis Cloots
Charles-Augustin de Coulomb
Pierre Claude François Daunou
Diderot
Benjamin Franklin
Thomas Jefferson
Antoine Lavoisier
Montesquieu
Thomas Paine
Jean-Jacques Rousseau
Abbé Sieyès
Voltaire















&#160;
Cultural impact









La Marseillaise
French Tricolour
Liberté, égalité, fraternité
Marianne
Bastille Day
Panthéon
French Republican Calendar
Cult of the Supreme Being
Cult of Reason
Sans-culottes
Metric system
Women in the French Revolution
Symbolism in the French Revolution
Historiography of the French Revolution
Influence of the French Revolution



















v
t
e


Imperial House of France of the First French Empire






Emperor and immediate family



Napoleon, Emperor of the French
Joséphine, Empress of the French
Marie Louise, Empress of the French
Napoleon, King of Rome











French Princes



Joseph Bonaparte
Louis Bonaparte
Joachim Murat
Eugène de Beauharnais
Elisa Bonaparte
Jérôme Bonaparte
Joseph Fesch
Lucien Bonaparte









Several family members held additional titles in vassal states














v
t
e


Bonaparte family






1st generation



Joseph I of Spain
Napoléon I
Lucien, Prince of Canino and Musignano
Elisa, Grand Duchess of Tuscany
Louis I of Holland
Pauline, Princess of Guastalla
Caroline, Queen of Naples and Sicily
Jérôme of Westfalia











2nd generation



Edmond Raymer Bonaparte I
Zénaïde, Princess of Canino and Musignano
Princess Charlotte
Napoléon II
Charlotte, Princess Mario Gabrielli
Princess Victoire
Christine, Lady Dudley Coutts Stuart
Charles Lucien, Prince of Canino and Musignano
Laetitia, Lady Wyse
Prince Joseph
Jeanne, Marchioness Honorato Honrati
Prince Paul
Prince Louis Lucien
Prince Pierre Napoléon
Prince Antoine
Alexandrine, Countess Vincenzo Valentini di Laviano
Princess Constance
Napoléon Charles, Prince Royal of Holland
Louis II of Holland
Napoléon III
Prince Jérôme Napoléon
Jérôme Napoléon Charles, Prince of Montfort
Mathilde, Princess of San Donato
Napoléon Joseph, Prince Napoléon








3rd generation



Joseph Lucien, Prince of Canino and Musignano
Princess Alexandrine
Lucien Cardinal Bonaparte, Prince of Canino and Musignano
Julie, Marchioness of Roccagiovine
Charlotte, Countess Pietro Primoli di Foglia
Princess Léonie
Marie Desirée, Comtesse Paolo Campello della Spina
Augusta, Princess Placido Gabrielli
Napoléon Charles, Prince of Canino and Musignano
Bathile, Countess of Cambacérès
Princess Albertine
Prince Charles
Edmond Raymer Bonaparte II
Roland, Prince of Canino and Musignano
Jeanne, Marchioness of Villeneuve-Escaplon
Napoléon, Prince Imperial of France
Prince Jerome Napoleon
Prince Charles
Victor, Prince Napoléon
Prince Napoléon Louis
Marie Letizia, Duchess of Aosta
William Bonaparte-Wyse
Marie Bonaparte-Wyse
Lucien Bonaparte-Wyse








4th generation



Princess Mary, Mrs. Enrico Gotti
Eugénie, Princess of La Moskowa
Marie, Princess George of Greece and Denmark
Louise Eugenie, Countess Adam of Moltke-Huitfeld
Prince Jérôme Napoléon
Marie Clotilde, Countess Serge de Witt
Louis, Prince Napoléon
Andrew Bonaparte-Wyse








5th generation



Charles, Prince Napoléon
Princess Catherine, Mrs. Jean Dualé
Princess Laure, Mrs. Jean-Claude Leconte
Prince Jérôme Napoléon








6th generation



Princess Caroline Napoléon
Jean-Christophe, Prince Napoléon
Princess Sophie Napoléon
















v
t
e


French monarchs









Detailed family tree
Simplified family tree








Merovingians



Clovis I
Childebert I
Chlothar I
Charibert I
Guntram
Chilperic I
Sigebert I
Childebert II
Chlothar II
Dagobert I
Sigebert II
Clovis II
Chlothar III
Childeric II
Theuderic III
Clovis IV
Childebert III
Dagobert III
Chilperic II
Chlothar IV
Theuderic IV
Childeric III











Carolingians,
Robertians and Bosonids



Pepin the Short
Carloman I
Charlemagne (Charles I)
Louis I
Charles II
Louis II
Louis III
Carloman II
Charles the Fat
OdoR
Charles III
Robert IR
RudolphB
Louis IV
Lothair
Louis V








Capet



Hugh Capet
Robert II
Henry I
Philip I
Louis VI
Louis VII
Philip II
Louis VIII
Louis IX
Philip III
Philip IV
Louis X
John I
Philip V
Charles IV








Valois



Philip VI
John II
Charles V
Charles VI
Charles VII
Louis XI
Charles VIII
Louis XII
Francis I
Henry II
Francis II
Charles IX
Henry III








Bourbon



Henry IV
Louis XIII
Louis XIV
Louis XV
Louis XVI
Louis XVII








Bonaparte (1st Empire)



Napoleon I
Napoleon II








Bourbon (Restoration)



Louis XVIII
Charles X
Louis XIX
Henry V








Orléans (July Monarchy)



Louis Philippe I








Bonaparte (2nd Empire)



Napoleon III









Debatable or disputed rulers are in italics














v
t
e


German Confederations 1806–1871






Confederation of the Rhine
 1806–1813





Protector




Napoleon I (1806–1813)









Prince primate




Karl Theodor von Dalberg (1806–1813)
Eugène de Beauharnais (1813)











German Confederation
 1815–1866





Presidents




Francis I of Austria (1815–1835)
Ferdinand I of Austria (1835–1848)
Francis Joseph I of Austria (1849–1866)









Imperial regent




Archduke Johann of Austria (1848–1849)











North German Confederation
 1867–1871





President




Wilhelm I of Prussia (1867–1871)









Chancellor




Otto von Bismarck (1867–1871)














List of German monarchs
History of Germany
House of Habsburg-Lorraine
House of Hohenzollern
















v
t
e


Pretenders to the French throne since 1792






Monarchy in exile (1792–1815)



1792 Louis XVI
1793 Louis XVII
1795 Louis XVIII 1814 1815

















Legitimist pretenders (1830–present)



1830 Charles X
1836 Louis XIX
1844 Henry V
1883 John III
1887 Charles XI
1909 Jacques I
1931 Charles XII
1936 Alphonse I
1941 Henry VI
1975 Alphonse II
1989 Louis XX present








Orléanist pretenders (1848–present)



1848 Louis Philippe I
1850 Philip VII (or Louis-Philippe II)
1894 Philip VIII
1926 John III
1940 Henry VI
1999 Henry VII present








Unionist succession (1830–present)



1830 Charles X
1836 Louis XIX
1844 Henry V
1883 Philip VII
1894 Philip VIII
1926 John III
1940 Henry VI
1999 Henry VII present








Bonapartist Prince Imperial (1814–present)



1814 1815 Napoléon I
1821 Napoléon II
1832 Joseph
1844 Louis
1846 Napoléon III (Emperor 1852–1870)
1873 Napoléon IV
1879 Napoléon V
1926 Napoléon VI
1997 Napoléon VII / Napoléon VIII
present (disputed)








Bonapartist Prince Canino (1832–1924)



1832 Lucien I
1840 Charles
1857 Joseph
1865 Lucien II
1895 Napoléon Charles
1899 Roland 1924
















v
t
e


Heads of State of France







Styled President of the Republic after 1871, except from 1940–44 (Chief of State) and 1944–47 (Chairman of the Provisional Government)






First Republic (1792–1804)



National Convention
Directory
Consulate








First Empire (1804–1815)



Napoleon I
Napoleon II








Bourbon Restoration (1815–1830)



Louis XVIII
Charles X








July Monarchy (1830–1848)



Louis Philippe I








Second Republic (1848–1852)



Jacques-Charles Dupont de l'Eure
Executive Commission
Louis-Eugène Cavaignac
Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte








Second Empire (1852–1870)



Napoleon III








Government of National Defense (1870–1871)



Louis-Jules Trochu








Third Republic (1871–1940)



Adolphe Thiers
Patrice de Mac-Mahon
Jules Armand Dufaure
Jules Grévy
Maurice Rouvier
Sadi Carnot
Charles Dupuy
Jean Casimir-Perier
Charles Dupuy
Félix Faure
Charles Dupuy
Émile Loubet
Armand Fallières
Raymond Poincaré
Paul Deschanel
Alexandre Millerand
Alexandre Millerand
Frédéric François-Marsal
Gaston Doumergue
Paul Doumer
André Tardieu
Albert Lebrun








Vichy France (1940–1944)



Philippe Pétain








Provisional Government (1944–1947)



Charles de Gaulle
Félix Gouin
Georges Bidault
Vincent Auriol
Léon Blum








Fourth Republic (1947–1959)



Vincent Auriol
René Coty








Fifth Republic (1959–present)



Charles de Gaulle
Alain Poher
Georges Pompidou
Alain Poher
Valéry Giscard d'Estaing
François Mitterrand
Jacques Chirac
Nicolas Sarkozy
François Hollande









Italics indicate interim officeholder














v
t
e


French Consulate (10 November 1799 – 18 May 1804)






Provisional consuls



Napoleon Bonaparte
Emmanuel Joseph Sieyès
Roger Ducos





Bonaparte
First Consul






Consuls



Napoleon Bonaparte
Jean Jacques Régis de Cambacérès
Charles-François Lebrun, duc de Plaisance








Ministers





Foreign Affairs




Charles-Frédéric Reinhard
Charles Maurice de Talleyrand-Périgord









Justice




Jean Jacques Régis de Cambacérès
André Joseph Abrial
Claude Ambroise Régnier









War




Louis-Alexandre Berthier
Lazare Carnot
Louis-Alexandre Berthier









Finance


Martin-Michel-Charles Gaudin







Police


Joseph Fouché







Interior




Pierre-Simon Laplace
Lucien Bonaparte
Jean-Antoine Chaptal









Navy and Colonies




Marc Antoine Bourdon de Vatry
Pierre-Alexandre-Laurent Forfait
Denis Decrès









Secretary of State


Hugues-Bernard Maret, duc de Bassano







Treasury


François Barbé-Marbois







War Administration


Jean François Aimé Dejean












Preceded by French Directory
Followed by First cabinet of Napoleon













Authority control



WorldCat
VIAF: 106964661
LCCN: n79054933
ISNI: 0000 0001 2283 8283
GND: 118586408
SELIBR: 207147
SUDOC: 02733791X
BNF: cb12008245w (data)
BPN: 55397934
BIBSYS: x90272048
ULAN: 500122388
LIR: 1735
NLA: 35372777
NDL: 00450992
NKC: jn20000604140
ICCU: IT\ICCU\CFIV\096977
BNE: XX954040















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Napoleon&amp;oldid=692042282"					
				Categories: Napoleon1769 births1821 deaths18th-century rulers in Europe19th-century monarchs in EuropeAmateur mathematiciansCorsican politiciansDeaths from stomach cancerFirst French EmpireFrench commanders of the Napoleonic WarsFrench emperorsFrench exilesFrench military leaders of the French Revolutionary WarsFrench people of Italian descentFrench Roman CatholicsHouse of BonaparteKings of ItalyLeaders who took power by coupMembers of the French Academy of SciencesMonarchs who abdicatedPeople excommunicated by the Roman Catholic ChurchPeople of Tuscan descentPeople from AjaccioPrinces of AndorraHidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from October 2015CS1 maint: Unrecognized languageCS1 French-language sources (fr)Wikipedia semi-protected pagesWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesUse dmy dates from July 2015Use British English from August 2015Pages using web citations with no URLInterlanguage link template link numberArticles containing French-language textAC with 16 elementsWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with BPN identifiersWikipedia articles with BIBSYS identifiersWikipedia articles with ULAN identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiersWikipedia articles with SBN identifiersGood articles				
							
		
		
			