


		
		
		
			

							
						

			New Objectivity
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				For the architectural aspects of this movement, see New Objectivity (architecture).




Made in Germany (Den macht uns keiner nach), by George Grosz, drawn in pen 1919, photo-lithograph published 1920 in the portfolio God with us (Gott mit Uns). Sheet 48.3&#160;×&#160;39.1 cm. In the collection of the MOMA


The New Objectivity (in German: Neue Sachlichkeit) is a term used to characterize the attitude of public life in Weimar Germany as well as the art, literature, music, and architecture created to adapt to it. Rather than some goal of philosophical objectivity, it was meant to imply a turn towards practical engagement with the world—an all-business attitude, understood by Germans as intrinsically American: "The Neue Sachlichkeit is Americanism, cult of the objective, the hard fact, the predilection for functional work, professional conscientiousness, and usefulness."[1]
The term was originally the title of an art exhibition staged by Gustav Friedrich Hartlaub, the director of the Kunsthalle in Mannheim, to showcase artists who were working in a post-expressionist spirit, but it took a life of its own, going beyond Hartlaub's intentions.[1] As these artists rejected the self-involvement and romantic longings of the expressionists, Weimar intellectuals in general made a call to arms for public collaboration, engagement, and rejection of romantic idealism.
The movement essentially ended in 1933 with the fall of the Weimar Republic and the rise of the Nazis to power.



Contents


1 Meaning
2 Background
3 Pictorial art

3.1 Verists and classicists
3.2 Regional groups
3.3 Photography


4 Architecture
5 Film
6 Theater
7 Music
8 Legacy
9 Notes
10 References
11 External links



Meaning[edit]
Although "New Objectivity" has been the most common translation of "Neue Sachlichkeit", other translations have included "New Matter-of-factness", "New Resignation", "New Sobriety", and "New Dispassion". An introductory note by author Dennis Crockett in German post-expressionism explains that there is no direct English translation, and breaks down the meaning in the original German:

Sachlichkeit should be understood by its root, Sach, meaning "thing", "fact", "subject", or "object." Sachlich could be best understood as "factual", "matter-of-fact", "impartial", "practical", or "precise"; Sachlichkeit is the noun form of the adjective/adverb and usually implies "matter-of-factness".[2]

In particular, Crockett argues against the view implied by the translation of "New Resignation", which he says is a popular misunderstanding of the attitude it describes. The idea that it conveys resignation comes from the notion that the age of great socialist revolutions was over and that the left-leaning intellectuals who were living in Germany at the time wanted to adapt themselves to the social order represented in the Weimar Republic. Crockett tries to ground the word to its original meaning as intended by Hartlaub, and points out that the art of the Neue Sachlichkeit was meant to be more forward in political action than the modes of Expressionism it was turning against.
Background[edit]
Main article: Post-expressionism
Leading up to World War II, much of the art world was under the influence of Futurism and Expressionism, both of which abandoned any sense of order or commitment to objectivity or tradition. Expressionism was in particular the dominant form of art in Germany, and it was represented in many different facets of public life—in dance, in theater, in painting, in architecture, in poetry, and in literature.
Expressionists abandoned nature and sought to express emotional experience, often centering their art around inner turmoil (angst), whether in reaction to the modern world, to alienation from society, or in the creation of personal identity. In concert with this evocation of angst and unease with bourgeois life, expressionists also echoed some of the same feelings of revolution as did Futurists. This is evidenced by a 1919 anthology of expressionist poetry titled Menschheitsdämmerung, which translates to “Twilight of Humanity”—meant to suggest that humanity was in a twilight; that there was an imminent demise of some old way of being and beneath it the urgings of a new dawning.[3]
Critics of expressionism came from many circles. From the left, a strong critique began with Dadaism. The early exponents of Dada had been drawn together in Switzerland, a neutral country in the war, and seeing their common cause, wanted to use their art as a form of moral and cultural protest—they saw shaking off the constraints of artistic language in the same way they saw their refusal of national boundaries. They wanted to use their art in order to express political outrage and encourage political action.[3] Expressionism, to Dadaists, expressed all of the angst and anxieties of society, but was helpless to do anything about it.
Bertolt Brecht, a German dramatist, launched another early critique of expressionism, referring to it as constrained and superficial. Just as in politics Germany had a new parliament but lacked parliamentarians, he argued, in literature there was an expression of delight in ideas, but no new ideas, and in theater a "will to drama", but no real drama. His early plays, Baal and Trommeln in der Nacht (Drums in the Night) express repudations of fashionable interest in Expressionism.
After the destruction of the war, more conservative critics gained force particularly in their critique of the style of expressionism. This was exhibited particularly in Italy in a call for a return to order, but also had influence within Germany.
Pictorial art[edit]
Verists and classicists[edit]
Hartlaub first used the term in 1923 in a letter he sent to colleagues describing an exhibition he was planning.[4] In his subsequent article, "Introduction to 'New Objectivity': German Painting since Expressionism," Hartlaub explained,


“
what we are displaying here is distinguished by the—in itself purely external—characteristics of the objectivity with which the artists express themselves.[5]
”


The New Objectivity comprised two tendencies which Hartlaub characterized in terms of a left and right wing: on the left were the verists, who "tear the objective form of the world of contemporary facts and represent current experience in its tempo and fevered temperature;" and on the right the classicists, who "search more for the object of timeless ability to embody the external laws of existence in the artistic sphere."[5]
The verists' vehement form of realism emphasized the ugly and sordid.[6] Their art was raw, provocative, and harshly satirical. George Grosz and Otto Dix are considered the most important of the verists.[7] The verists developed Dada's abandonment of any pictoral rules or artistic language into a “satirical hyperrealism”, as termed by Raoul Hausmann, and of which the best known examples are the graphical works and photo-montages of John Heartfield. Use of collage in these works became a compositional principle to blend reality and art, as if to suggest that to record the facts of reality was to go beyond the most simple appearances of things.[3] This later developed into portraits and scenes by artists such as Grosz, Dix, and Rudolf Schlichter. Portraits would give emphasis to particular features or objects that were seen as distinctive aspects of the person depicted. Satirical scenes often depicted a madness behind what was happening, depicting the participants as cartoon-like.
Other verists, like Christian Schad, depicted reality with a clinical precision, which suggested both an empirical detachment and intimate knowledge of the subject. Schad's paintings are characterized by "an artistic perception so sharp that it seems to cut beneath the skin", according to the art critic Wieland Schmied.[8] Often, psychological elements were introduced in his work, which suggested an underlying unconscious reality.
Max Beckmann, who is sometimes called an expressionist although he never considered himself part of any movement,[9] was considered by Hartlaub to be a verist[10] and the most important artist of Neue Sachlichkeit.[11]
Compared to the verists, the classicists more clearly exemplify the "return to order" that arose in the arts throughout Europe. The classicists included Georg Schrimpf, Alexander Kanoldt, Carlo Mense, Heinrich Maria Davringhausen, and Wilhelm Heise.[10] The sources of their inspiration included 19th-century art, the Italian metaphysical painters, the artists of Novecento Italiano, and Henri Rousseau.[12]
The classicists are best understood by Franz Roh's term Magic Realism, though Roh originally intended "magical realism" to be synonymous with the Neue Sachlichkeit as a whole.[13] For Roh, as a reaction to expressionism, the idea was declare “[that] the autonomy of the objective world around us was once more to be enjoyed; the wonder of matter that could crystallize into objects was to be seen anew.”[14] With the term, he was emphasizing the “magic” of the normal world as it presents itself to us—how, when we really look at everyday objects, they can appear strange and fantastic.
Regional groups[edit]
Most of the artists of the New Objectivity did not travel widely, and stylistic tendencies were related to geography. While the classicists were based mostly in Munich, the verists worked mainly in Berlin (Grosz, Dix, Schlichter, and Schad); Dresden (Dix, Hans Grundig, Wilhelm Lachnit and others); and Karlsruhe (Karl Hubbuch, Georg Scholz, and Wilhelm Schnarrenberger).[10] In Cologne, a constructivist group was led by Franz Wilhelm Seiwert and Heinrich Hoerle. Also from Cologne was Anton Räderscheidt, who after a brief constructivist phase became influenced by Antonio Donghi and the metaphysical artists.
Franz Radziwill, who painted ominous landscapes, lived in relative isolation in Dangast, a small coastal town.[15] Carl Grossberg became a painter after studying architecture in Aachen and Darmstadt and is noted for his clinical rendering of industrial technology.[16]
Photography[edit]
Albert Renger-Patzsch and August Sander are leading representatives of the "New Photography" movement, which brought a sharply focused, documentary quality to the photographic art where previously the self-consciously poetic had held sway.[17] Some other related projects as Neues Sehen, coexisted at the same moment. Karl Blossfeldt's plant photography is also often described as being a variation on New Objectivity.[18]
Architecture[edit]




Panorama of the IG Farben Building from the south, demonstrating how the curved shape of the building's façade reduces the impact of its scale


Main article: New Objectivity (architecture)
New Objectivity in architecture, as in painting and literature, describes German work of the transitional years of the early 1920s in the Weimar culture, as a direct reaction to the stylistic excesses of Expressionist architecture and the change in the national mood. Architects such as Bruno Taut, Erich Mendelsohn and Hans Poelzig turned to New Objectivity's straightforward, functionally minded, matter-of-fact approach to construction, which became known in Germany as Neues Bauen ("New Building"). The Neues Bauen movement, flourishing in the brief period between the adoption of the Dawes plan and the rise of the Nazis, encompassed public exhibitions like the Weissenhof Estate, the massive urban planning and public housing projects of Taut and Ernst May, and the influential experiments at the Bauhaus.
Film[edit]
Main article: New Objectivity (film)
In film, New Objectivity reached its high point around 1929. As a cinematic style, it translated into realistic settings, straightforward camerawork and editing, a tendency to examine inanimate objects as a way to interpret characters and events, a lack of overt emotionalism, and social themes.
The director most associated with the movement is Georg Wilhelm Pabst. Pabst's films of the 1920s concentrate on social problems such as abortion, prostitution, labor disputes, homosexuality, and addiction. His cool and critical 1925 Joyless Street is a landmark of the objective style. Other directors included Ernő Metzner, Berthold Viertel, and Gerhard Lamprecht.
Theater[edit]
Bertolt Brecht, from his opposition to the focus on the individual in expressionist art, began a collaborative method to play production, starting with his Man Equals Man project.[19] This approach to theater-craft began to be known as "Brechtian'" and the collective of writers and actors who he worked with are known as the "Brechtian collective".
Music[edit]
New Objectivity in music, as in the visual arts, rejected the sentimentality of late Romanticism and the emotional agitation of expressionism. Composer Paul Hindemith may be considered both a New Objectivist and an expressionist, depending on the composition, throughout the 1920s; for example, his wind quintet Kleine Kammermusik Op. 24 No. 2 (1922) was designed as Gebrauchsmusik; one may compare his operas Sancta Susanna (part of an expressionist trilogy) and Neues vom Tage (a parody of modern life).[20] His music typically harkens back to baroque models and makes use of traditional forms and stable polyphonic structures, together with modern dissonance and jazz-inflected rhythms. Ernst Toch and Kurt Weill also composed New Objectivist music during the 1920s. Though known late in life for his austere interpretations of the classics, in earlier years, conductor Otto Klemperer was the most prominent to ally himself with this movement.
Legacy[edit]
The New Objectivity movement is usually considered to have ended at the fall of the Weimar Republic when the National Socialists under Adolf Hitler seized power in January 1933.[21] The Nazi authorities condemned much of the work of the New Objectivity as "degenerate art", so that works were seized and destroyed and many artists were forbidden to exhibit. A few, including Karl Hubbuch, Adolf Uzarski, and Otto Nagel, were among the artists entirely forbidden to paint. While some of the major figures of the movement went into exile, they did not carry on painting in the same manner. George Grosz emigrated to America and adopted a romantic style, and Max Beckmann's work by the time he left Germany in 1937 was, by Franz Roh's definitions, expressionism.
The influence of New Objectivity outside of Germany can be seen in the work of artists like Balthus, Salvador Dalí (in such early works as his Portrait of Luis Buñuel of 1924),[22] Auguste Herbin, Maruja Mallo, Cagnaccio di San Pietro, Grant Wood, Adamson-Eric, and Juhan Muks.
Notes[edit]


^ a b Crockett p.1
^ Crockett, p.xix
^ a b c Midgley 2000, p.15
^ Roh et al. 1997, p. 285
^ a b Kaes et al. 1994, p. 492
^ Michalsky 1994, p. 20
^ Michalsky 1994, p. 27
^ Schmied 1978, p.19
^ Schmied 1978, pp. 23–24
^ a b c Schmied 1978, p. 10
^ Michalsky 1994, p. 147
^ Schmied 1978, p. 11
^ Schmied 1978, p. 9
^ Zamora and Faris 1995
^ Michalski 1994, p. 153
^ Michalski 1994, p. 169
^ Michalski 1994, pp. 181, 188
^ . Art Gallery NSW http://www.artgallery.nsw.gov.au/collection/works/56.2006/. Retrieved 31 May 2014.&#160; Missing or empty |title= (help)
^ Midgley 2000, p.16
^ Albright 2004, 278
^ Schmied 1978, p. 30
^ Roh et al. 1997, p. 291


References[edit]


Albright, Daniel, ed. (2004). Modernism and Music: an anthology of sources. Chicago: University of Chicago Press ISBN 0-226-01267-0
Becker, Sabina (2000). Neue Sachlichkeit. Köln: Böhlau. Print.
Crockett, Dennis (1999). German Post-Expressionism: the art of the Great Disorder 1918-1924". University Park, Pa.: Pennsylvania State University Press
Grüttemeier, Ralf; Beekman, Klaus; Rebel, Ben, eds. (2013). Neue Sachlichkeit and Avant-Garde. Avant-Garde Critical Studies 29. Amsterdam / New York: Rodopi.
Kaes, Anton; Jay, Martin; Dimendberg, Edward, eds (1994). The Weimar Republic Sourcebook. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Lethen, Helmut (1970). Neue Sachlichkeit 1924-1932: Studien zur Literatur des "Weissen Sozialismus." Stuttgart: Metzler.
Lindner, Martin (1994). Leben in der Krise. Zeitromane der neuen Sachlichkeit und die intellektuelle Mentalität der klassischen Moderne. Stuttgart: Metzler.
Michalski, Sergiusz (1994). New Objectivity. Cologne: Benedikt Taschen. ISBN 3-8228-9650-0
Midgley, David (2000). Writing Weimar: Critical Realism in German Literature, 1918-1933. Durham and London: Oxford University Press.&#160;
Roh, Franz, Juan Manuel Bonet, Miguel Blesa De La Parra, and Martin Chirino (1997). Realismo mágico: Franz Roh y la pintura europea 1917-1936&#160;: [exposición] Ivam Centre Julio Gonzalez, [Valencia], 19 junio - 31 agosto 1997&#160;: Fundación Caja de Madrid, Madrid, 17 septiembre - 9 noviembre 1997&#160;: Centro Atlantico de Arte Moderno, [Gran Canaria], 2 diciembre 1997 - 1 febrero 1998. Valencia: Ivam, Institut Valencià d'Art Modern. OCLC&#160;38962637 (Spanish and English)
Schmied, Wieland (1978). Neue Sachlichkeit and German Realism of the Twenties. London: Arts Council of Great Britain. ISBN 0-7287-0184-7
Willett, John (1978). The New Sobriety: art and politics in the Weimar Period, 1917-1933. London: Thames &amp; Hudson (Reissued by Da Capo Press, New York, 1996 as "Art and Politics in the Weimar Period" ISBN 0-306-80724-6)
Zamora, Lois Parkinson and Faris, Wendy B., eds. (1995). Magical Realism: Theory, History, Community. Durham and London: Duke University Press.


External links[edit]

Fritz Schmalenbach essay
Tate modern definition
Neue Sachlichkeit (New Objectivity) Image Library
Chaos and Classicism: Art in France, Italy, and Germany, 1918–1936. The Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum. October 1, 2010 – January 9, 2011.
Table of Contents book Neue Sachlichkeit and Avant-Garde. Amsterdam / New York 2013. Brill/Rodopi
The Essence of Magic Realism - Critical Study of the origins and development of Magic Realism in art.









v
t
e


Art movements






Medieval



Byzantine
Merovingian
Carolingian
Ottonian
Romanesque
Gothic (International Gothic)








Renaissance



Early Netherlandish
High Renaissance
Mannerism








17th century



Baroque
Caravaggisti
Classicism
Dutch Golden Age








18th century



Rococo
Neoclassicism
Romanticism








19th century



Nazarene
Realism / Realism
Historicism
Biedermeier
Gründerzeit
Barbizon school
Pre-Raphaelites
Academic
Aestheticism
Decadent
Macchiaioli
Art Nouveau
Peredvizhniki
Impressionism
Post-Impressionism
Neo-impressionism
Divisionism
Pointillism
Cloisonnism
Les Nabis
Synthetism
Kalighat painting
Symbolism
Hudson River School








20th century



Bengal School of Art
Amazonian pop art
Cubism
Orphism
Purism
Synchromism
Expressionism
Scuola Romana
Abstract expressionism
Kinetic art
Neue Künstlervereinigung München
Der Blaue Reiter
Die Brücke
New Objectivity
Dada
Fauvism
Neo-Fauvism
Precisionism
Bauhaus
De Stijl
Art Deco
Op art
Vienna School of Fantastic Realism
Pop art
Photorealism
Futurism
Metaphysical art
Rayonism
Vorticism
Suprematism
Surrealism
Color Field
Minimalism
Minimalism (visual arts)
Nouveau réalisme
Social realism
Lyrical abstraction
Tachisme
COBRA
Action painting
International Typographic Style
Fluxus
Lettrism
Letterist International
Situationist International
Conceptual art
Installation art
Land art
Performance art
Endurance art
Systems art
Video art
Neo-expressionism
Neo-Dada
Outsider art
Lowbrow
New media art
Young British Artists








21st century



Art intervention
Hyperrealism
Neo-futurism
Stuckism International
Remodernism
Sound art
Superstroke
Superflat
Relational art
Video game art








Related articles



List of art movements
Modern art
Modernism
Late modernism
Postmodern art
Avant-garde
















v
t
e


German language literature






Related articles



German language
History of Germany
History of Austria
History of Switzerland
History of Liechtenstein
Medieval German literature
Sturm und Drang
Weimar Classicism
Romanticism
Literary realism
Weimar culture
Exilliteratur
Austrian literature
Swiss literature
German studies








Related categories



Austrian writers
German writers
Liechtenstein writers
Swiss writers in German








Medieval literature



Dietmar von Aist
Reinmar von Hagenau
Hartmann von Aue
Walther von der Vogelweide
Wolfram von Eschenbach
Albrecht von Johansdorf
Heinrich von Morungen
Nibelungenlied
Gottfried von Strassburg








Early modern
literature



Simon Dach
Paul Fleming
Hans Folz
Hans Jakob Christoffel von Grimmelshausen
Andreas Gryphius
Christian Hoffmann von Hoffmannswaldau
Johann Michael Moscherosch
Martin Opitz
Hans Sachs
Angelus Silesius
Anthony Ulrich, Duke of Brunswick-Wolfenbüttel
Georg Wickram








18th century



Barthold Heinrich Brockes
Christian Gellert
Johann Wolfgang von Goethe
Johann Christoph Gottsched
Johann Christian Günther
Friedrich Hölderlin
Friedrich Gottlieb Klopstock
Jakob Michael Reinhold Lenz
Gotthold Ephraim Lessing
Novalis (Friedrich von Hardenberg)
Jean Paul
Friedrich Schiller
Johann Gottfried Schnabel
Christoph Martin Wieland








19th century



Bettina von Arnim
Ludwig Achim von Arnim
Clemens Brentano
Georg Büchner
Adelbert von Chamisso
Annette von Droste-Hülshoff
Marie von Ebner-Eschenbach
Joseph von Eichendorff
Theodor Fontane
Gustav Freytag
Jeremias Gotthelf
Franz Grillparzer
Jacob Grimm
Wilhelm Grimm
Gerhart Hauptmann
Christian Friedrich Hebbel
Johann Peter Hebel
Heinrich Heine
Georg Herwegh
Paul Heyse
E. T. A. Hoffmann
Friedrich Hölderlin
Gottfried Keller
Heinrich von Kleist
Nikolaus Lenau
Conrad Ferdinand Meyer
Eduard Mörike
Johann Nestroy
Wilhelm Raabe
Adalbert Stifter
Theodor Storm
Ludwig Tieck
Ludwig Uhland








20th century



Ingeborg Bachmann
Hermann Bahr
Johannes R. Becher
Gottfried Benn
Thomas Bernhard
Heinrich Böll
Volker Braun
Bertolt Brecht
Rolf Dieter Brinkmann
Hermann Broch
Arnolt Bronnen
Hermann Burger
Elias Canetti
Paul Celan
Alfred Döblin
Heimito von Doderer
Friedrich Dürrenmatt
Lion Feuchtwanger
Marieluise Fleißer
Erich Fried
Max Frisch
Stefan George
Günter Grass
Marlen Haushofer
Hermann Hesse
Georg Heym
Hugo von Hofmannsthal
Ödön von Horváth
Ricarda Huch
Peter Huchel
Ernst Jandl
Uwe Johnson
Ernst Jünger
Franz Kafka
Erich Kästner
Hermann Kesten
Irmgard Keun
Sarah Kirsch
Egon Erwin Kisch
Karl Kraus
Else Lasker-Schüler
Gert Ledig
Siegfried Lenz
Heinrich Mann
Klaus Mann
Thomas Mann
Christian Morgenstern
Erich Mühsam
Heiner Müller
Adolf Muschg
Robert Musil
Erich Maria Remarque
Rainer Maria Rilke
Joseph Roth
Nelly Sachs
Ernst von Salomon
Paul Scheerbart
Arthur Schnitzler
Kurt Schwitters
W. G. Sebald
Anna Seghers
Ernst Toller
Georg Trakl
Kurt Tucholsky
Robert Walser
Josef Weinheber
Peter Weiss
Christa Wolf
Fritz Zorn (Fritz Angst)
Stefan Zweig








Contemporary
writers



Zsuzsa Bánk
Thomas Brussig
Rainald Goetz
Durs Grünbein
Peter Handke
Elfriede Jelinek
Wladimir Kaminer
Daniel Kehlmann
Alexander Kluge
Christian Kracht
Monika Maron
Terézia Mora
Herta Müller
Emine Sevgi Özdamar
Rafik Schami
Ingo Schulze
Botho Strauß
Yoko Tawada
Uwe Timm
Martin Walser
Peter Wawerzinek
Wolf Wondratschek
Feridun Zaimoğlu








German-language
Nobel laureates



Theodor Mommsen
Rudolf Christoph Eucken
Paul Heyse
Gerhart Hauptmann
Carl Spitteler
Thomas Mann
Nelly Sachs
Heinrich Böll
Elias Canetti
Günter Grass
Elfriede Jelinek
Herta Müller








German-language
literary awards



Ingeborg Bachmann Prize
Georg Büchner Prize
Sigmund Freud Prize
Adelbert von Chamisso Prize
Hans Fallada Prize
Goethe Prize
Heinrich Heine Prize
Kleist Prize
Leipzig Book Fair Prize
Nelly Sachs Prize















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=New_Objectivity&amp;oldid=689424989"					
				Categories: German art movementsModern artModernism (music)20th-century German literatureWeimar cultureHidden categories: Pages with citations lacking titlesPages with citations having bare URLsArticles containing German-language text				
							
		
		
			