


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Norwegian art
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								  (Redirected from Art of Norway)
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				



Hans Gude's Winter Afternoon (1847)




Part of a series on


Norwegians


Culture




Architecture
Art
Cinema
Cuisine
Dance
Dress
Folk art
Literature
Media
Music
Religion
Sport
Theatre
Tourism




By country or region




Iceland
Russia
United Kingdom
Sweden
South Africa
Argentina
Brazil
United States

Minnesota
Dakota


Canada
Australia
New Zealand
Diaspora




Other




Religion
Language




Norwegian Portal





v
t
e





Norwegian art came into its own in the 19th century, especially with the early landscape painters. Until that time, the art scene in Norway had been dominated by imports from Germany and Holland and by the influence of Danish rule. Initially with landscape art, later with Impressionism and Realism.[1]



Contents


1 The beginnings
2 Impressionists and neo-romanticists
3 Edvard Munch
4 Other names
5 References



The beginnings[edit]




Adolph Tidemand's Haugianerne (Haugeans). 1852


Johan Christian Dahl (1788–1857) is often said to be the "father of Norwegian landscape painting". After a period in Copenhagen, he joined the Dresden school to which he made an important contribution. He eventually returned to paint the landscapes of western Norway, defining Norwegian painting for the first time.[2]
Another important early contributor was Johannes Flintoe (1787–1870), a Danish-Norwegian painter, known for his Norwegian landscapes and paintings of folk costumes. He taught at the School of Drawing (Tegneskolen) in Christiania from 1819 to 1851 where his students included budding romanticists such as Hans Gude and Johan F. Eckersberg.[2]
Adolph Tidemand (1814–1876) studied in Copenhagen, in Italy and finally in Düsseldorf where he settled. He often returned to Norway where he painted the old Norwegian farm culture. His best known painting is The bridal procession in Hardanger (together with Hans Gude, 1848) and Haugianerne (Haugeans) painted in 1852.
Norway’s new-found independence from Denmark encouraged painters to develop their Norwegian identity, especially with landscape painting by artists such as Kitty Kielland, 1843–1914, an early female painter who studied under Gude and Harriet Backer, 1845–1932, another pioneer among female artists, influenced by impressionism.
Impressionists and neo-romanticists[edit]
Frits Thaulow, 1847–1906, an impressionist, was initially a student of Hans Gude. He was later influenced by the art scene in Paris where he developed impressionist talents. Returning to Norway in 1880, he became one of the leading figures on the Norwegian art scene, together with Christian Krohg and Erik Werenskiold.
Christian Krohg, 1852–1925, a realist painter, was also influenced by the Paris scene. He is remembered for his paintings of prostitutes which caused something of a scandal.[3]
Thorolf Holmboe (1866–1935) studied under Hans Gude in Berlin between 1886 and 1887 and Fernand Cormon in Paris between 1889 and 1891. He was inspired by many different styles at different points in his career, including Naturalism, Neo-romanticism, Realism and Impressionism.
Nikolai Astrup (1880–1928) grew up in Jølster in the west of Norway. After studying art in Oslo and spending some time in Paris and in Germany, he returned to Jølster where he specialised in painting neo-romantic landscapes with clear, strong colors. He is remembered as one of the greatest Norwegian artists from the early 20th century.[4]
Lars Hertervig (1830–1902) from Tysvær in south-western Norway painted semi-fantastical works inspired by the coastal landscape in Ryfylke. Hertervig completed a number of works on paper using aquarelles and often making the paper base himself from scrapes of discarded pieces of paper. The art museum under the main museum, Stavanger Museum, in Stavanger, Rogaland (previously Rogaland Museum of Fine Art) has the most significant collection of works by Hertervig in Norway.
Harald Sohlberg, (1869–1935), a neo-romanticist, is remembered for his paintings of Røros, and the Norwegian "national painting" Winter's Night in Rondane.
Edvard Munch[edit]




The Scream (1893)


Perhaps Norway's most famous artist is Edvard Munch, (1863–1944), a symbolist/expressionist painter who became worldfamous for The Scream which is said to represent the anxiety of modern man. Painted in 1893, The Scream is Munch's most famous work and one of the most recognizable paintings in all art. It has been widely interpreted as representing the universal anxiety of modern man.[5] With this painting, Munch met his stated goal of “the study of the soul, that is to say the study of my own self”.
Other names[edit]




Gunnar Berg's From Svolvær harbour, ca 1890. Being one of "the young dead", Berg is considered one of the finest painters of northern Norwegian nature.


Other noteworthy 19th century painters are: August Cappelen, Peder Balke, Peter Nicolai Arbo, Eilif Peterssen, Gustav Wentzel, Oscar Wergeland, Erik Werenskiold, Asta Nørregaard, Amaldus Nielsen, Oda Krohg, Fritz Thaulow, Carl Sundt-Hansen, Christian Skredsvig, Gunnar Berg, Halfdan Egedius, Theodor Kittelsen, Harald Sohlberg.
Noteworthy painters from 20th century Norwegian art are: Harald Sohlberg, Reidar Aulie, Per Krohg, Arne Ekeland, Kai Fjell, Jacob Weidemann, Håkon Bleken, Jens Johannessen, Ludvig Karsten, Henrik Sørensen, Kjartan Slettemark, Anna-Eva Bergman, Anders Kjær, Svein Johansen, Svein Bolling, Bjørn Carlsen, Bjørn Ransve, Kåre Tveter, Frans Widerberg, Odd Nerdrum, Ida Lorentzen, Knut Rose, Ørnulf Opdahl, Håvard Vikhagen, Leonard Rickhard, Håkon Gullvåg, Kira Wager, Lars Elling, Vibeke Barbel Slyngstad.[6]
19th-century sculptors include Stephan Sinding, Gunnar Utsond, Brynjulf Bergslien and Mathias Skeibrok.
20th-century sculptors include Gustav Vigeland, Nils Aas, Arnold Haukeland, Bård Breivik, Anne Grimdalen, Kristofer Leirdal, Per Palle Storm, Nina Sundbye, Dyre Vaa and Wilhelm Rasmussen.
In textile art Hannah Ryggen (1894–1970) holds a unique position. Frida Hansen was an art nouveau textile artist.
References[edit]


^ Painting from Norway Cultural Profile. Retrieved 28 November 2008.
^ a b Haverkamp, Frode. Hans Fredrik Gude: From National Romanticism to Realism in Landscape (in Norwegian). trans. Joan Fuglesang.&#160; |access-date= requires |url= (help)
^ Norwegian Artists from ArtCyclopedia. Retrieved 25 November 2008.
^ Nikolai Astrup from nikolai-astrup.com. Retrieved 28 November 2008.
^ Eggum, 1984, p. 10
^ Selection of painters in section "Other names" are based on Tommy Sørbø Norske malerier, 2005. ISBN 978-82-516-2221-9. The selection of sculptors are not based in any source.










v
t
e


Norway&#160;articles






History



Stone Age
Bronze Age
Petty kingdoms
Viking Age
Unification
High Middle Ages
Kalmar Union
Denmark–Norway
Norway in 1814
Sweden–Norway
End of the union
World War II
1945–2000
21st century











Geography







Climate
Extreme points
Islands
Lakes
Mammals
Mountains
Municipalities
Cities
Protected areas
Rivers











Politics







Administrative divisions
National budget
Constitution
Correctional services
Courts
Customs
Elections
Foreign relations
Governments
Health care services
LGBT history
Monarchy
Parliament
Police
Political parties
Prime Minister
Military











Economy







Energy
Krone (currency)
National bank
Norwegian paradox
Oil
Stock Exchange
Taxation
Tourism
Transport
Whaling











Society







Crime
Demographics
Education
Ethnic groups
Immigration
Languages
Norwegians
Pensions
Religion








Culture



Architecture
Art
Bunad (clothing)
Cinema
Cuisine
Jul (season)
Music
Norwegian language
Literature
Media
Prostitution
Public holidays
Sport
Romantic nationalism








Symbols



Anthem
Coat of arms
Flags

national flag


Mottos
Name of Norway















Outline



Category
Portal
WikiProject
















v
t
e


European art






Sovereign states



Albania
Andorra
Armenia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Kazakhstan
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Malta
Moldova
Monaco
Montenegro
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
San Marino
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom









States with limited
recognition




Abkhazia
Kosovo
Nagorno-Karabakh
Northern Cyprus
South Ossetia
Transnistria









Dependencies and
other territories




Åland
Faroe Islands
Gibraltar
Guernsey
Jersey
Isle of Man
Svalbard















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Norwegian_art&amp;oldid=674822719"					
				Categories: Norwegian cultureNorwegian artArt by nationalityHidden categories: Pages using citations with accessdate and no URLCS1 Norwegian-language sources (no)				
							
		
		
			