


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Op art
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				Not to be confused with pop art&#160;or plop art.
For what is known as Operational Art, see Operational level of war.




Movement in Squares, by Bridget Riley 1961


Op art, also known as optical art, is a style of visual art that uses optical illusions.[1]
Op art works are abstract, with many better known pieces created in black and white. Typically, they give the viewer the impression of movement, hidden images, flashing and vibrating patterns, or of swelling or warping.



Contents


1 History

1.1 The Responsive Eye


2 How op art works

2.1 Black-and-white and the figure-ground relationship
2.2 Color

2.2.1 Color interaction




3 Exhibitions
4 Photographic op art
5 Other artists known for their op art
6 See also
7 References
8 Bibliography
9 External links



History[edit]




Francis Picabia, c. 1921-22, Optophone I, encre, aquarelle et mine de plomb sur papier, 72 x 60 cm. Reproduced in Galeries Dalmau, Picabia, exhibition catalogue, Barcelona, November 18 - December 8, 1922






Jesús Soto, Caracas


The antecedents of Op art, in terms of graphic and color effects, can be traced back to Neo-impressionism, Cubism, Futurism, Constructivism and Dada. [2]
Time Magazine coined the term op art in 1964, in response to Julian Stanczak's show Optical Paintings at the Martha Jackson Gallery, to mean a form of abstract art (specifically non-objective art) that uses optical illusions.[3][4] Works now described as "op art" had been produced for several years before Time's 1964 article. For instance, Victor Vasarely's painting Zebras (1938) is made up entirely of curvilinear black and white stripes not contained by contour lines. Consequently, the stripes appear to both meld into and burst forth from the surrounding background. Also, the early black and white "dazzle" panels that John McHale installed at the This Is Tomorrow exhibit in 1956 and his Pandora series at the Institute of Contemporary Arts in 1962 demonstrate proto-op art tendencies.




An optical illusion by the Hungarian-born artist Victor Vasarely in Pécs.


Op art perhaps more closely derives from the constructivist practices of the Bauhaus. This German school, founded by Walter Gropius, stressed the relationship of form and function within a framework of analysis and rationality. Students learned to focus on the overall design or entire composition to present unified works. Op art also stems from Trompe-l'œil and Anamorphosis. Links with psychological research have also been made, particularly with Gestalt theory and Psychophysiology.[2] When the Bauhaus was forced to close in 1933, many of its instructors fled to the United States. There, the movement took root in Chicago and eventually at the Black Mountain College in Asheville, North Carolina, where Anni and Josef Albers eventually taught.[citation needed]

"Op artists thus managed to exploit various phenomena," writes Popper, "the after-image and consecutive movement; line interference; the effect of dazzle; ambiguous figures and reversible perspective; successive colour contrasts and chromatic vibration; and in three-dimensional works different viewpoints and the superimposition of elements in space."[2]

In 1955, for the exhibition «&#160;Mouvements&#160;» at the Denise René gallery in Paris, Victor Vasarely and Pontus Hulten promoted in their "Yellow manifesto" some new kinetic expressions based on optical and luminous phenomenon as well as painting illusionism. The expression "Kinetic art" in this modern form first appeared at the Museum für Gestaltung of Zürich in 1960, and found its major developments in the 1960s. In most European countries, it generally includes the form of optical art that mainly makes use of optical illusions, like Op art, as well as art based on movement represented by Yacov Agam, Carlos Cruz-Diez, Jesús Rafael Soto, Gregorio Vardanega or Nicolas Schöffer. From 1961 to 1968, the GRAV (Groupe de Recherche d’Art Visuel) founded by François Morellet, Julio Le Parc, Francisco Sobrino, Horacio Garcia Rossi, Yvaral, Joël Stein and Vera Molnár was a collective group of opto-kinetic artists that—according to its 1963 manifesto—appealed to the direct participation of the public with an influence on its behaviour, notably through the use of interactive labyrinths.
Some members of the group Nouvelle tendance (1961-1965) in Europe also were engaged in Op art as Almir Mavignier and Gerhard von Graevenitz, mainly with their serigraphics. They studied optical illusions. The term "Op" irritated many of the artists labeled under it, specifically including Albers and Stanczak. They had discussed upon the birth of the term a better label, namely perceptual art.[5] From 1964, Arnold Schmidt (Arnold Alfred Schmidt) had several solo exhibitions of his large, black and white shaped optical paintings exhibited at the Terrain Gallery in New York.[6]
The Responsive Eye[edit]
In 1965, between February 23 and April 25 an exhibition called The Responsive Eye, created by William C. Seitz was held at the Museum of Modern Art in New York City.[7] The works shown were wide ranging, encompassing the minimalism of Frank Stella and Ellsworth Kelly, the smooth plasticity of Alexander Liberman, the collaborative efforts of the Anonima group, alongside the well-known Victor Vasarely, Richard Anuszkiewicz, Wen-Ying Tsai, Bridget Riley and Getulio Alviani. The exhibition focused on the perceptual aspects of art, which result both from the illusion of movement and the interaction of color relationships. The exhibition was enormously popular with the general public, though less so with the critics.[8] Critics dismissed op art as portraying nothing more than trompe-l'œil, or tricks that fool the eye. Regardless, op art's popularity with the public increased, and op art images were used in a number of commercial contexts. Riley tried to sue an American company, without success, for using one of her paintings as the basis of a fabric design.[citation needed]
How op art works[edit]
Black-and-white and the figure-ground relationship[edit]
Op art is a perceptual experience related to how vision functions. It is a dynamic visual art that stems from a discordant figure-ground relationship that puts the two planes—foreground and background—in a tense and contradictory juxtaposition. Artists create op art in two primary ways. The first, best known method, is to create effects through pattern and line. Often these paintings are black-and-white, or otherwise grisaille—as in Bridget Riley's famous painting, Current (1964), on the cover of The Responsive Eye catalogue. Here, black and white wavy lines are close to one another on the canvas surface, creating a volatile figure-ground relationship. Getulio Alviani used aluminum surfaces, which he treated to create light patterns that change as the watcher moves (vibrating texture surfaces). Another reaction that occurs is that the lines create after-images of certain colors due to how the retina receives and processes light. As Goethe demonstrates in his treatise Theory of Colours, at the edge where light and dark meet, color arises because lightness and darkness are the two central properties in the creation of color.[citation needed]
Color[edit]
Beginning in 1965 Bridget Riley began to produce color-based op art,[9] however, other artists, such as Julian Stanczak and Richard Anuszkiewicz, were always interested in making color the primary focus of their work.[10] Josef Albers taught these two primary practitioners of the "Color Function" school at Yale in the 1950s. Often, colorist work is dominated by the same concerns of figure-ground movement, but they have the added element of contrasting colors that produce different effects on the eye. For instance, in Anuszkiewicz's "temple" paintings, the juxtaposition of two highly contrasting colors provokes a sense of depth in illusionistic three-dimensional space so that it appears as if the architectural shape is invading the viewer's space.




Intrinsic Harmony, by Richard Anuszkiewicz, 1965


Color interaction[edit]

There are three major classes of the interaction of color: simultaneous contrast, successive contrast, and reverse contrast (or assimilation). (i) Simultaneous contrast may take place when one area of color is surrounded by another area of a different color. In general, contrast enhances the difference in brightness and/or color between the interacting areas ... Such contrast effects are mutual, but if the surround area is larger and more intense than the area it encloses, then the contrast is correspondingly out of balance, and may appear to be exerted in one direction only. (ii) In successive contrast, first one color is viewed and then another. This may be achieved either by fixing the eye steadily on one color and then quickly replacing that color with another, or by shifting fixation from one color to another. (iii) In reverse contrast (sometimes called the assimilation of color or the spreading effect) the lightness of white or the darkness of black may seem to spread into neighbouring regions. Similarly, colors may appear to spread into or become assimilated into neighbouring areas. All effects tend to make neighbouring areas appear more alike, rather than to enhance their differences as in the more familiar simultaneous contrast, hence the term reverse contrast (Jameson and Hurvich). Note that in the interaction of color the constituent colors retain much of the own identity even though they may be altered somewhat by contrast.
— Floyd Ratliff, The Theory of Color and the Practice of Painting[11]

Exhibitions[edit]

L'oeil Moteur, art optique et cinetique 1960-1975, Musee D'Art Moderne et Contemporain, Strasbourg, France, May 13–September 25, 2005.
Op Art, Schirn Kunsthalle, Frankfurt, Germany, February 17–May 20, 2007.
The Optical Edge, The Pratt Institute of Art, New York, March 8–April 14, 2007.
Optic Nerve: Perceptual Art of the 1960s, Columbus Museum of Art, Columbus, Ohio, February 16–June 17, 2007.
CLE OP: Cleveland Op Art Pioneers, Cleveland Museum of Art, Cleveland, Ohio, April 9, 2011—February 26, 2012

Additionally, Bridget Riley has had several international exhibitions in recent years (e.g. Dia Center, New York, 2000; Tate Britain, London, 2003; Museum of Contemporary Art, Sydney, 2004).
Photographic op art[edit]
Although being relatively mainstream, photographers have been slow to produce op art. In painting, Victor Vasarely and Bridget Riley were producing large amounts of art and the same can be said for many digital artists, such as Akiyoshi Kitaoka. One of the primary reasons for the lack of photographers doing op art, is the difficulty in finding effective subject matter. László Moholy-Nagy, however, produced photographic op art and taught the subject in the Bauhaus. One of his lessons consisted of making his students produce holes in cards and then photographing them.
Other artists known for their op art[edit]


Yaacov Agam
Richard Allen
Edna Andrade
Gianni Colombo
Carlos Cruz-Díez
Tony DeLap
Günter Fruhtrunk
Michael Kidner
Barbara Januszkiewicz
Julio Le Parc
Heinz Mack
John McHale
Youri Messen-Jaschin
Reginald H. Neal
Andreas Nottebohm
Ivan Picelj
Jesús Rafael Soto
Jeffrey Steele
Omar Rayo
Kenneth Snelson
Günther Uecker
Grazia Varisco
Ludwig Wilding
Marian Zazeela


See also[edit]


Divisionism
Kinetic art
Chubb illusion
Cornsweet illusion
Impossible object
Lilac chaser
M. C. Escher
Mach bands
Multistable Perception
Optical illusion
Perception
Same color illusion
Trompe l'oeil
Zero (art)


References[edit]


^ Artspeak, Robert Atkins, ISBN 978-1-55859-127-1
^ a b c Frank Popper, Grove Art Online, Oxford University Press, 2009
^ Jon Borgzinner. "Op Art", Time, October 23, 1964.
^ http://www.visual-arts-cork.com/history-of-art/op-art.htm
^ Bertholf. "Julian Stanczak: Decades of Light" Yale Press
^ http://www.terraingallery.org/Some-History.html
^ "The Responsive Eye - Mike Wallace".&#160;
^ http://www.coolhunting.com/archives/2006/02/moma_1965_the_r.php Responsive Eye catalog, accessed online August 27, 2007
^ Media:[1] After modern art: 1945-2000, Issue 6512 By David Hopkins, p.147
^ See Color Function Painting: The Art of Josef Albers, Julian Stanczak and Richard Anuszkiewicz Wake Forest University, reprinted 2002
^ Floyd Ratliff. "The Theory of Color and the Practice of Painting," in Color Function Painting: The Art of Josef Albers, Julian Stanczak and Richard Anuszkiewicz, Wake Forest University, 1996, p. 8.


Bibliography[edit]

Frank Popper, Origins and Development of Kinetic Art, New York Graphic Society/Studio Vista, 1968
Frank Popper, From Technological to Virtual Art, Leonardo Books, MIT Press, 2007

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Op art.





Look up op art in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



Op Art - Tate Gallery Glossary Terms
Opartica - Online Op Art Making Tool









v
t
e


Geometric abstraction









Concrete art
Constructivism
De Stijl
Minimalism
Op art
Suprematism



















v
t
e


Op art






Artists



Yaacov Agam
Josef Albers
Getulio Alviani
Richard Anuszkiewicz
Carlos Cruz-Diez
Gerhard von Graevenitz
Julio Le Parc
Bridget Riley
Arnold Alfred Schmidt
Francisco Sobrino
Jesús Rafael Soto
Julian Stanczak
Gregorio Vardanega
Victor Vasarely
Yvaral














Color theory
Figure–ground
François Morellet
Hard-edge painting
M. C. Escher
Optical illusion
















v
t
e


Optical illusions







List of optical illusions









Afterimage
Barberpole
Bezold
Blivet
Café wall
Cornsweet
Delboeuf
Ebbinghaus
Ehrenstein
Flash lag
Fraser spiral
Grid
Hering
Jastrow
Mach
McCollough
Müller-Lyer
Necker
Orbison
Penrose

stairs
triangle


Peripheral drift
Poggendorff
Ponzo
Rubin
Sander
Schroeder
Ternus
Vertical–horizontal
White's
Wundt
Zöllner











Related



Auditory
Tactile
Temporal
Op art
Ascending and Descending
Waterfall














v
t
e


Index of the eye






Description



Anatomy

orbit
neural pathways


Physiology

Phenomena

appearance
visual
optical illusions


proteins


Development








Disease



Congenital
Corneal dystrophy
Neoplasms and cancer
Other
Symptoms and signs








Treatment



Procedures
Drugs

infection
glaucoma and miosis
mydriatics
vascular





















v
t
e


Art movements






Medieval



Byzantine
Merovingian
Carolingian
Ottonian
Romanesque
Gothic (International Gothic)








Renaissance



Early Netherlandish
High Renaissance
Mannerism








17th century



Baroque
Caravaggisti
Classicism
Dutch Golden Age








18th century



Rococo
Neoclassicism
Romanticism








19th century



Nazarene
Realism / Realism
Historicism
Biedermeier
Gründerzeit
Barbizon school
Pre-Raphaelites
Academic
Aestheticism
Decadent
Macchiaioli
Art Nouveau
Peredvizhniki
Impressionism
Post-Impressionism
Neo-impressionism
Divisionism
Pointillism
Cloisonnism
Les Nabis
Synthetism
Kalighat painting
Symbolism
Hudson River School








20th century



Bengal School of Art
Amazonian pop art
Cubism
Orphism
Purism
Synchromism
Expressionism
Scuola Romana
Abstract expressionism
Kinetic art
Neue Künstlervereinigung München
Der Blaue Reiter
Die Brücke
New Objectivity
Dada
Fauvism
Neo-Fauvism
Precisionism
Bauhaus
De Stijl
Art Deco
Op art
Vienna School of Fantastic Realism
Pop art
Photorealism
Futurism
Metaphysical art
Rayonism
Vorticism
Suprematism
Surrealism
Color Field
Minimalism
Minimalism (visual arts)
Nouveau réalisme
Social realism
Lyrical abstraction
Tachisme
COBRA
Action painting
International Typographic Style
Fluxus
Lettrism
Letterist International
Situationist International
Conceptual art
Installation art
Land art
Performance art
Endurance art
Systems art
Video art
Neo-expressionism
Neo-Dada
Outsider art
Lowbrow
New media art
Young British Artists








21st century



Art intervention
Hyperrealism
Neo-futurism
Stuckism International
Remodernism
Sound art
Superstroke
Superflat
Relational art
Video game art








Related articles



List of art movements
Modern art
Modernism
Late modernism
Postmodern art
Avant-garde















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Op_art&amp;oldid=691574785"					
				Categories: Op artHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from October 2009Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata				
							
		
		
			