


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Pandeiro
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				
Pandeiro




Other names
Pandeiro, drums


Classification
hand percussion


Playing range


High sound of jingles, plus some have a skin with a lower sound.


Related instruments


Riq, buben, dayereh, daf, kanjira, frame drum


The Pandeiro (Portuguese pronunciation:&#160;[pɐ̃ˈdejɾu]) is a type of hand frame drum popular in Brazil, and which has been described as an unofficial instrument of that nation.[citation needed] The drumhead is tunable, and the rim holds metal jingles (platinelas), which are cupped creating a crisper, drier and less sustained tone on the pandeiro than on the tambourine. It is held in one hand, and struck on the head by the other hand to produce the sound. Typical pandeiro patterns are played by alternating the thumb, fingertips, heel, and palm of the hand. A Pandeiro can also be shaken to make sound, or one can run a finger along the head to produce a roll.
The Pandeiro is used in a number of Brazilian music forms, such as samba, choro, coco, and capoeira music. The Brazilian Pandeiro derives from the pandeireta or pandereta of Spain and Portugal.[citation needed]



Contents


1 Medieval instrument
2 Players

2.1 Non-traditional usage


3 References
4 External links



Medieval instrument[edit]
The term Pandeiro was previously used to describe a square double-skinned frame drum, often with a bell inside; such an instrument is now known by the term adufe in Spain and Portugal. It is derived from an earlier Arabic or Moorish instrument still found in North Africa.[1] The term pandeiro (pandero in Asturian) is still used in parts of Galicia and Portugal to describe the square-shaped drum, while the round drum with jingles is known as Pandeira in Galicia.[2]
Players[edit]




A Brazilian-style Pandeiro being played


Some of the best-known pandeiro players today are Paulinho da Costa, Nanny Assis, Airto Moreira, Marcos Suzano, Cyro Baptista, Zé Maurício, and Carlinhos Pandeiro de Ouro
Non-traditional usage[edit]
Artists such as Stanton Moore use it non-traditionally by tuning it low to sound like a floor tom with jingles, mounting it on a stand and integrating it into the modern drum kit.[citation needed] Others, such as Sule Greg Wilson on the Carolina Chocolate Drops album Genuine Negro Jig, use it in tandem with a tunable bodhran — also mounted — and play them as a pair with brushes to create drum kit effects, as well as their original intent as hand-held percussion.
References[edit]

^ http://rhythmweb.com/frame/galicia.htm
^ Mauricio Molina (2006). Frame Drums in the Medieval Iberian Peninsula. ProQuest. pp.&#160;101–. ISBN&#160;978-0-542-85095-0. Retrieved 25 December 2012.&#160;

External links[edit]



Look up pandeiro in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



Pandeiro.com
Pandeiro by Emiliano Benevides at Emiliano.com
"The Philosophy of... Pandeiro!" by Daniel Allen









v
t
e


Percussion instruments






Pitched percussion



Examples: Carillon
Crotales
Glockenspiel
Handbell
Handchime
Hang
Marimba
Steelpan
Timpani
Vibraphone
Xylophone
Comprehensive list








Unpitched percussion



Examples: Bodhrán
Bongo drum
Cabasa
Castanets
Cowbell
Cymbal
Djembe
Jam block
Lagerphone
Maracas
Snare drum
Tambourine
Timbales
Washboard (musical instrument)
Comprehensive list








Orchestral percussion



Examples: Acme siren
Bell tree
Clapper
Clash cymbals
Glockenspiel
Snare drum
Timpani
Tubular bells
Comprehensive list








World music



Africa
Asia
Central America and Caribbean
Europe
North America
Oceania
South America








Percussion groupings



Drum kit
Percussion section
Percussion ensemble








Other



Cymbal manufacturers
List of drum manufacturers
List of marimba manufacturers
List of timpani manufacturers
Percussion instruments invented since 1800
Classification of percussion instruments









Percussion Portal - List of percussion instruments - Wikiproject Percussion













					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pandeiro&amp;oldid=672470133"					
				Categories: Brazilian musical instrumentsHand drumsBrazilian percussionPortuguese musical instrumentsHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from December 2012Articles with unsourced statements from January 2010				
							
		
		
			