


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Papua New Guinean art
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								  (Redirected from Art of Papua New Guinea)
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				Papua New Guinean art has a rich and diverse tradition. In particular, it is world-famous for carved wooden sculpture: masks, canoes, story-boards. Many of the best collections of these are held in overseas museums.
Some of the artists regarded as being in the first wave of contemporary art in Papua New Guinea are: Mathias Kauage OBE (born 1944), Timothy Akis, Jakupa Ako and Joe Nalo, all from the tough urban area of Port Moresby. Kauage won Australia's Blake Prize for Religious Art, four of his works are in the Glasgow Museum of Modern Art, and he had a solo show in 2005 at the Horniman Museum, "Kauage's Visions: Art from Papua New Guinea". Other noted Papua New Guinean visual artists include Larry Santana, Martin Morububuna and Heso Kiwi.[1]
The works shown below, in composite images, were done while the artists were visiting California but are traditional in content and medium. See http://www.stanford.edu/~mjpeters/png/.







A male spirit dance mask from Kabriman Village, Blackwater River Basin, East Sepik Province, 1960-1973. In the collection of The Children's Museum of Indianapolis









Carved tree trunks, Stanford sculpture garden.









Views of wooden sculpture by Yesu Minja and Nanqui Nokwi, Membor Apokiom and Naui Saunambui, from Bangwis village, Kwoma, sponsored by Bonnie Brae, Stanford University.









A Papua New Guinean wooden sculpture. Stanford University New Guinea sculpture garden.




The Nouméa Biennale (an art fair in New Caledonia) includes works from Papua New Guinea.
See also[edit]

Culture of Papua New Guinea
Sepik art
Melanesian art

References[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Art of Papua New Guinea.




^ Niugini Arts










v
t
e


Oceanian art






Sovereign states



Australia
Federated States of Micronesia
Fiji
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Nauru
New Zealand
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu








Associated states
of New Zealand



Cook Islands
Niue








Dependencies
and other territories



American Samoa
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Easter Island
French Polynesia
Guam
Hawaii
New Caledonia
Norfolk Island
Northern Mariana Islands
Pitcairn Islands
Tokelau
Wallis and Futuna












This art-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.


v
t
e












					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Papua_New_Guinean_art&amp;oldid=688708540"					
				Categories: Papua New Guinean cultureArt by nationalityArt stubsHidden categories: Commons category without a link on WikidataRegion topic template using suffixAll stub articles				
							
		
		
			