


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Peredvizhniki
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				



Ilya Repin, Barge Haulers on the Volga 1870–1873






Ilya Repin, Religious Procession in Kursk Province 1880—1883


Peredvizhniki (Russian: Передви́жники; IPA:&#160;[pʲɪrʲɪˈdvʲiʐnʲɪkʲɪ]), often called The Wanderers or The Itinerants in English, were a group of Russian realist artists who in protest at academic restrictions formed an artists' cooperative; it evolved into the Society for Travelling Art Exhibitions in 1870.



Contents


1 History
2 Influence of literary critics
3 Subjects of the paintings
4 Landscape as the most popular genre of Peredvizhniki
5 Reproduction of works
6 Decline of creativity
7 Gallery
8 Members
9 References
10 Further reading
11 External links



History[edit]
In 1863 a group of fourteen students decided to leave The Imperial Academy of Arts. The students found the rules of the Academy constraining; the teachers were conservative and there was a strict separation between high and low art. In an effort to bring art to the people, the students formed an independent artistic society; The Petersburg Cooperative of Artists (Artel). In 1870, this organization was largely succeeded by the Association of Travelling Art Exhibits (Peredvizhniki) to give people from the provinces a chance to follow the achievements of Russian Art, and to teach people to appreciate art. The society maintained independence from state support and brought the art, which illustrated the contemporary life of the people from Moscow and Saint Petersburg, to the provinces.
From 1871 to 1923, the society arranged 48 mobile exhibitions in St. Petersburg and Moscow, after which they were shown in Kiev, Kharkov, Kazan, Oryol, Riga, Odessa and other cities.[1]
Influence of literary critics[edit]
Peredvizhniki were influenced by the public views of the literary critics Vissarion Belinsky and Nikolai Chernyshevsky, both of whom espoused liberal ideas. Belinsky thought that literature and art should attribute a social and moral responsibility. Like most Slavophiles, Chernyshevsky ardently supported the emancipation of serfs, which was finally realized in the reform of 1861. He viewed press censorship, serfdom, and capital punishment as Western influences. Because of his political activism, officials prohibited publication of any of his writing, including his dissertation; but it eventually found its way to the artworld of nineteenth-century Russia. In 1863, almost immediately after the emancipation of serfs, Chernyshevsky’s goals were realized with the help of Peredvizhniki, who took the pervasive Slavophile-populist idea that Russia had a distinguishable, modest, inner beauty of its own and worked out how to display it on canvas.[2]
Subjects of the paintings[edit]

External video

 Newcomer at School by Emily Shanks


 An introduction to Peredvizhniki, 12:20, in Swedish with English subtitles.


 Interview with guest curator David Jackson, 3:30, in English with Swedish subtitles.



 Interview with Galina Tjurak, 2:30, in Russian with English subtitles.
Nationalmuseum (Stockholm), 2011


Peredvizhniki portrayed the many-sided aspects of social life, often critical of inequities and injustices. But their art showed not only poverty but also the beauty of the folk way of life; not only suffering but also fortitude and strength of characters. Peredvizhniki condemned the Russian aristocratic orders and autocratic government in their humanistic art. They portrayed the emancipation movement of Russian people with empathy (The Arrest of Propagandist; Refuse from Confession; Not Expected by Ilya Yefimovich Repin). They portrayed social-urban life, and later used historic art to depict the common people (The Morning of the Execution of Streltsy by Vasily Surikov).
During their blossoming (1870–1890), the Peredvizhniki society developed an increasingly wider scope, with more natural and free images. In contrast to the traditional dark palette of the time, they chose a lighter palette, with a freer manner in their technique. They worked for naturalness in their images, and the depiction of people's relationship with their surroundings. The society united most of the highly talented artists of the country. Among Peredvizhniki there were artists of Ukraine, Latvia, and Armenia. The society also showed the work of Mark Antokolski, Vasili Vereshchagin, and Andrei Ryabushkin. The work of the critic and democrat Vladimir Stasov was important for the development of Peredvizhniki's art. Pavel Mikhailovich Tretyakov showed the work of these artists in his gallery and gave them important material and moral support.[3]
Landscape as the most popular genre of Peredvizhniki[edit]
Landscape painting flourished in the 1870s and 1880s. Peredvizhniki painted mainly landscapes; some, like Polenov, used plein air technique. Two painters, Ivan Shishkin and Isaak Levitan, painted only landscapes of Russia. Shishkin is still considered to be the Russian "Singer of forest", while Levitan's landscapes are famous for their intense moods. The Russian landscape gained importance as a national icon after Peredvizhniki.
Peredvizhniki painted landscapes to explore the beauty of their own country and encourage ordinary people to love and preserve it. Levitan once said, "I imagine such a gracefulness in our Russian land – overflowing rivers bringing everything back to life. There is no country more beautiful than Russia! There can be a true landscapist only in Russia". Peredvizhniki gave a national character to landscapes, so people of other nations could recognize Russian landscape. The landscapes of Peredvizhniki are the symbolic embodiments of Russian nationality.[1]
Reproduction of works[edit]
Even though the number of travelling exhibition visitors from the provinces was increasing during the years, the main audience was the urban elite. Local photographers created the first reproductions of Peredvizhniki's paintings, which helped popularize the works and could be bought at exhibitions. The Niva magazine also published illustrated articles about the exhibitions. Since 1898 the landscapes of the society have been used in the postcard industry. Various books of poems were published with the illustrations of landscapes. Ordinary Russian people at that time could not afford to go to Moscow or Saint Petersburg, so popularization of Russian art made them familiar with a number of Russian art masterpieces. Even now publishers use the reproductions in textbooks as a visual icon of national identity.[3]
Decline of creativity[edit]
As the authority and public influence of the society steadily grew, government officials had to stop their efforts to repress the members. Attempts were made to subordinate their activity, and raise the falling value of Academy of Arts-sanctioned works. By the 1890s, the Academy of Arts structure was including Peredvizhniki art in its classes and history, and the influence of the artists showed in national art schools.
In 1898, their influence began to be superseded by Mir iskusstva, which advanced modern trends in Russian art. Some of the members of Peredvizhniki became more conservative, but some remained as radical as their predecessors. Some of the artists began showing socialist ideas, which reflected the development of a working-class movement. Many of the Peredvizhniki entered the Soviet art culture bringing the realistic traditions of the 19th century to Socialist realism.
The 48th exhibition of Peredvizhniki in 1923 was the last one. Most members joined the Association of Artists in Revolutionary Russia (AKhRR). Its members built on the traditions of Peredvizhniki and aspired to create works of art accessible to the common people and faithfully reflecting the righteousness of Soviet society.[4]
Gallery[edit]







Vasily Perov, The Hunters at Rest, 1871









Alexei Savrasov, The Rooks Have Come Back, 1871









Ivan Shishkin, Morning in a Pine Forest, 1878









Ilya Repin, Reply of the Zaporozhian Cossacks, 1880–91









Vasily Surikov, Morning of Streltsy's execution, 1881









Arkhip Kuindzhi, Night on the Dnieper, 1882









Ivan Kramskoi, Portrait of an Unknown Woman, 1883









Valentin Serov, The girl with peaches, 1887









Isaac Levitan, Over Eternal Peace, 1894









Viktor Vasnetsov, Bogatyrs, 1898




Members[edit]




Artel of Artists (1863-1864) (from left to right): Bogdan Wenig&#160;(ru), Firs Zhuravlev, Alexander Ivanovich Morozov, Kirill Lemokh, Ivan Kramskoi, Alexander Litovchenko, Konstantin Makovsky, Nikolai Dmitriev-Orenburgsky, Nikolai Petrovich Petrov&#160;(ru), Vasily Kreitan, Mikhail Peskov, Nikolay Shustov, Alexei Korzukhin, Alexander Konstantinovich Grigoryev&#160;(ru)






The Peredvizhniki (1885) (from left to right): Grigoriy Myasoyedov, Konstantin Savitsky, Vasily Polenov, Sergey Ammosov&#160;(ru), Alexander Kiselyov, Yefim Volkov, Nikolai Nevrev, Vasily Surikov, Vladimir Makovsky, Alexander Litovchenko, Ivan Shishkin, Kirill Lemokh, Ivan Kramskoi, Nikolai Yaroshenko, Ilya Repin, Pavel Brullov, Ivanov (manager of Peredvizhniki cooperative), Nikolay Makovsky, Alexander Beggrov


Peredvizhniki artists included:[4]

Abram Arkhipov
Pavel Brullov
Nikolai Ge
Kārlis Hūns
Nikolay Kasatkin
Alexander Kiselyov
Ivan Kramskoi
Arkhip Kuindzhi
Nikolai Kuznetsov
Isaac Levitan
Rafail Levitsky
Alexander Litovchenko
Vladimir Makovsky
Vassily Maximov
Grigoriy Myasoyedov
Leonid Pasternak
Vasily Perov
Konstantin Pervukhin
Vasily Polenov
Illarion Pryanishnikov
Ilya Repin
Andrei Ryabushkin
Konstantin Savitsky
Alexei Savrasov
Valentin Serov
Emily Shanks
Ivan Shishkin
Alexei Stepanov
Vasily Surikov
Apollinary Vasnetsov
Viktor Vasnetsov
Yefim Volkov
Nikolai Yaroshenko

References[edit]


^ a b Ely, Christopher (2000). "Critics in the native soil: landscape and conflicting ideas of nationality in Imperial Russia". Ecumene 7 (3): 253–270.&#160;
^ Sartorti, Rosalinde (2010). "Pictures at an exhibition: Russian land in a global world". Studies of East European thought 62 (3/4): 377–399.&#160;
^ a b Brooks, Jeffrey (2010). "The Russian nation imagined: the peoples of Russia as seen in popular imagery, 1860-1890s". Journal of social history 43 (3): 535–557.&#160;
^ a b Donnelly, Michael E. "The Immortal Itinerants (Peredvizhniki)". Russian Paintings Gallery. Retrieved 2009-02-12.&#160;


Further reading[edit]

Society of Wandering Art Exhibits. Letters and Documents. 1869–1899. Vol. 1, 2., Publisher ‘Iskusstvo’, Moscow, 1987. Text in Russian
Evgeny Steiner. “The Battle for ‘The People’s Cause’ or for the Market Case?” // Cahiers du Monde Russe, 50:4, 2009; pp. 627-646.
Evgeny Steiner. “Pursuing Independence: Kramskoi and the Itinerants Vs. the Academy of Arts” // Russian Review, #70, 2011, pp. 252-271.

External links[edit]
 Media related to Peredvizhniki at Wikimedia Commons

A battle for the “people's cause” or for the market case - Cairn.info
Peredvizhniki (Wanderers), by Kristen M. Harkness, Smarthistory
The Immortal Itinerants
Peredvizhniki (Wanderers)
Society of Traveling Exhibitions Web Site, in Russian









v
t
e


Russian art movements









Stroganov School
Peredvizhniki
Abramtsevo Colony
Russian Symbolism
Mir iskusstva
Russian Futurism
Rayonism
Suprematism
Constructivism
Russian avant-garde
Socialist realism
Nonconformism
Conceptualism



















v
t
e


Art movements






Medieval



Byzantine
Merovingian
Carolingian
Ottonian
Romanesque
Gothic (International Gothic)








Renaissance



Early Netherlandish
High Renaissance
Mannerism








17th century



Baroque
Caravaggisti
Classicism
Dutch Golden Age








18th century



Rococo
Neoclassicism
Romanticism








19th century



Nazarene
Realism / Realism
Historicism
Biedermeier
Gründerzeit
Barbizon school
Pre-Raphaelites
Academic
Aestheticism
Decadent
Macchiaioli
Art Nouveau
Peredvizhniki
Impressionism
Post-Impressionism
Neo-impressionism
Divisionism
Pointillism
Cloisonnism
Les Nabis
Synthetism
Kalighat painting
Symbolism
Hudson River School








20th century



Bengal School of Art
Amazonian pop art
Cubism
Orphism
Purism
Synchromism
Expressionism
Scuola Romana
Abstract expressionism
Kinetic art
Neue Künstlervereinigung München
Der Blaue Reiter
Die Brücke
New Objectivity
Dada
Fauvism
Neo-Fauvism
Precisionism
Bauhaus
De Stijl
Art Deco
Op art
Vienna School of Fantastic Realism
Pop art
Photorealism
Futurism
Metaphysical art
Rayonism
Vorticism
Suprematism
Surrealism
Color Field
Minimalism
Minimalism (visual arts)
Nouveau réalisme
Social realism
Lyrical abstraction
Tachisme
COBRA
Action painting
International Typographic Style
Fluxus
Lettrism
Letterist International
Situationist International
Conceptual art
Installation art
Land art
Performance art
Endurance art
Systems art
Video art
Neo-expressionism
Neo-Dada
Outsider art
Lowbrow
New media art
Young British Artists








21st century



Art intervention
Hyperrealism
Neo-futurism
Stuckism International
Remodernism
Sound art
Superstroke
Superflat
Relational art
Video game art








Related articles



List of art movements
Modern art
Modernism
Late modernism
Postmodern art
Avant-garde













Authority control



VIAF: 198122407
GND: 4045138-0
SUDOC: 150706081
NDL: 00563890















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Peredvizhniki&amp;oldid=672504226"					
				Categories: 1923 disestablishmentsEuropean artist groups and collectivesOrganizations established in 1863Russian art movementsRussian landscape paintersSocial realismPeredvizhnikiHidden categories: Articles containing Russian-language textInterlanguage link template link numberWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers				
							
		
		
			