


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Pop art
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								  (Redirected from Pop Art)
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				



Eduardo Paolozzi. I was a Rich Man's Plaything (1947), part of his Bunk! series, is considered the initial bearer of "pop art" and first to display the word "pop".






Andy Warhol, Campbell's Tomato Juice Box, 1964. Synthetic polymer paint and silkscreen ink on wood, 10 inches × 19 inches × 9½ inches (25.4 × 48.3 × 24.1 cm), Museum of Modern Art, New York City


Pop art is an art movement that emerged in the mid-1950s in Britain and the late 1950s in the United States.[1] Among the early artists that shaped the pop art movement were Eduardo Paolozzi and Richard Hamilton in Britain, and Robert Rauschenberg and Jasper Johns in the United States. Pop art presented a challenge to traditions of fine art by including imagery from popular culture such as advertising and news. In pop art, material is sometimes visually removed from its known context, isolated, and/or combined with unrelated material.[1][2] The concept of "pop art" refers not as much to the art itself as to the attitudes behind the art.[2]
Pop art employs aspects of mass culture, such as advertising, comic books and mundane cultural objects. One of its aims is to use images of popular (as opposed to elitist) culture in art, emphasizing the banal or kitschy elements of any culture, most often through the use of irony.[2] It is also associated with the artists' use of mechanical means of reproduction or rendering techniques.
Pop art is widely interpreted as a reaction to the then-dominant ideas of abstract expressionism, as well as an expansion of those ideas.[3] Due to its utilization of found objects and images, it is similar to Dada. Pop art and minimalism are considered to be art movements that precede postmodern art, or are some of the earliest examples of postmodern art themselves.[4]
Pop art often takes imagery that is currently in use in advertising. Product labeling and logos figure prominently in the imagery chosen by pop artists, seen in the labels of Campbell's Soup Cans, by Andy Warhol. Even the labeling on the outside of a shipping box containing food items for retail has been used as subject matter in pop art, as demonstrated by Warhol's Campbell's Tomato Juice Box, 1964 (pictured).



Contents


1 Origins

1.1 Proto-pop


2 United Kingdom: the Independent Group
3 United States

3.1 Early U.S. exhibitions


4 Spain
5 Japan
6 Italy
7 Belgium
8 Netherlands
9 Russian Federation
10 Painting and sculpture examples
11 Notable artists
12 See also
13 Notes and references
14 Further reading
15 External links



Origins[edit]
The origins of pop art in North America developed differently from Great Britain .[2] In the United States, pop art was a response by artists; it marked a return to hard-edged composition and representational art. They used impersonal, mundane reality, irony, and parody to "defuse" the personal symbolism and "painterly looseness" of abstract expressionism.[3][5] In the U.S., some artwork by Alex Katz and Man Ray anticipated pop art.[6]
By contrast, the origins of pop art in post-War Britain, while employing irony and parody, were more academic. Britain focused on the dynamic and paradoxical imagery of American pop culture as powerful, manipulative symbolic devices that were affecting whole patterns of life, while simultaneously improving the prosperity of a society.[5] Early pop art in Britain was a matter of ideas fueled by American popular culture when viewed from afar.[3] Similarly, pop art was both an extension and a repudiation of Dadaism.[3] While pop art and Dadaism explored some of the same subjects, pop art replaced the destructive, satirical, and anarchic impulses of the Dada movement with a detached affirmation of the artifacts of mass culture.[3] Among those artists in Europe seen as producing work leading up to pop art are: Pablo Picasso, Marcel Duchamp, and Kurt Schwitters.
Proto-pop[edit]




Charles Demuth, I Saw the Figure 5 in Gold 1928, collection of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York City


It should be noted that, while the British pop art movement predated the American pop art movement, Marcel Duchamp and others in Europe like Francis Picabia and Man Ray predate the British; in addition there were some earlier American proto-pop origins which utilized "as found" cultural objects.[3] During the 1920s, American artists Gerald Murphy, Charles Demuth and Stuart Davis created paintings that contained pop culture imagery (mundane objects culled from American commercial products and advertising design), almost "prefiguring" the pop art movement.[7][8]
United Kingdom: the Independent Group[edit]




Richard Hamilton's collage Just what is it that makes today's homes so different, so appealing? (1956) is one of the earliest works to be considered "pop art".


The Independent Group (IG), founded in London in 1952, is regarded as the precursor to the pop art movement.[1][9] They were a gathering of young painters, sculptors, architects, writers and critics who were challenging prevailing modernist approaches to culture as well as traditional views of fine art. Their group discussions centered on pop culture implications from elements such as mass advertising, movies, product design, comic strips, science fiction and technology. At the first Independent Group meeting in 1952, co-founding member, artist and sculptor Eduardo Paolozzi presented a lecture using a series of collages titled Bunk! that he had assembled during his time in Paris between 1947 and 1949.[1][9] This material of "found objects" such as advertising, comic book characters, magazine covers and various mass-produced graphics mostly represented American popular culture. One of the collages in that presentation was Paolozzi's I was a Rich Man's Plaything (1947), which includes the first use of the word "pop", appearing in a cloud of smoke emerging from a revolver.[1][10] Following Paolozzi's seminal presentation in 1952, the IG focused primarily on the imagery of American popular culture, particularly mass advertising.[5]
According to the son of John McHale, the term "pop art" was first coined by his father in 1954 in conversation with Frank Cordell,[11] although other sources credit its origin to British critic Lawrence Alloway.[12][13] (Both versions agree that the term was used in Independent Group discussions by mid-1955.)
"Pop art" as a moniker was then used in discussions by IG members in the Second Session of the IG in 1955, and the specific term "pop art" first appeared in published print in the article "But Today We Collect Ads" by IG members Alison and Peter Smithson in Ark magazine in 1956.[14] However, the term is often credited to British art critic/curator Lawrence Alloway for his 1958 essay titled The Arts and the Mass Media, even though the precise language he uses is "popular mass culture".[15] Nevertheless, Alloway was one of the leading critics to defend the inclusion of the imagery of mass culture in the fine arts.
In London, the annual Royal Society of British Artists (RBA) exhibition of young talent in 1960 first showed American pop influences. In January 1961, the most famous RBA-Young Contemporaries of all put David Hockney, the American R B Kitaj, New Zealander Billy Apple, Allen Jones, Derek Boshier, Joe Tilson, Patrick Caulfield, Peter Phillips and Peter Blake on the map; Apple designed the posters and invitations for both the 1961 and 1962 Young Contemporaries exhibitions.[16] Hockney, Kitaj and Blake went on to win prizes at the John-Moores-Exhibition in Liverpool in the same year. Apple and Hockney traveled together to New York during the Royal College's 1961 summer break, which is when Apple first made contact with Andy Warhol – both later moved to the United States and Apple became involved with the New York pop art scene.[16]
United States[edit]




Roy Lichtenstein, Drowning Girl, 1963, on display at the Museum of Modern Art, New York.


Although pop art began in the late 1950s, in America it was given its greatest impetus during the 1960s. The term "pop art" was officially introduced in December 1962; the occasion was a "Symposium on Pop Art" organized by the Museum of Modern Art.[17] By this time, American advertising had adopted many elements and inflections of modern art and functioned at a very sophisticated level. Consequently, American artists had to search deeper for dramatic styles that would distance art from the well-designed and clever commercial materials.[5] As the British viewed American popular culture imagery from a somewhat removed perspective, their views were often instilled with romantic, sentimental and humorous overtones. By contrast, American artists, bombarded every day with the diversity of mass-produced imagery, produced work that was generally more bold and aggressive.[9]




The Cheddar Cheese canvas from Andy Warhol's Campbell's Soup Cans, 1962.


Two important painters in the establishment of America's pop art vocabulary were Jasper Johns and Robert Rauschenberg.[9] While the paintings of Rauschenberg have relationships to the earlier work of Kurt Schwitters and other Dadaists, his concern was for the social issues of the moment. His approach was to create art out of ephemeral materials. By using topical events in the life of everyday America, he gave his work a unique quality.[9][18] Johns' and Rauschenberg's work of the 1950s is classified as Neo-Dada, and is visually distinct from the "classic" American pop art which began in the early 1960s.[19][20]
Roy Lichtenstein is of equal importance to American pop art. His work, and its use of parody, probably defines the basic premise of pop art better than any other.[9] Selecting the old-fashioned comic strip as subject matter, Lichtenstein produces a hard-edged, precise composition that documents while also parodying in a soft manner. Lichtenstein used oil and Magna paint in his best known works, such as Drowning Girl (1963), which was appropriated from the lead story in DC Comics' Secret Hearts #83. (Drowning Girl is part of the collection of the Museum of Modern Art.)[21] His work features thick outlines, bold colors and Ben-Day dots to represent certain colors, as if created by photographic reproduction. Lichtenstein said, "[abstract expressionists] put things down on the canvas and responded to what they had done, to the color positions and sizes. My style looks completely different, but the nature of putting down lines pretty much is the same; mine just don't come out looking calligraphic, like Pollock's or Kline's."[22] Pop art merges popular and mass culture with fine art while injecting humor, irony, and recognizable imagery/content into the mix.
The paintings of Lichtenstein, like those of Andy Warhol, Tom Wesselmann and others, share a direct attachment to the commonplace image of American popular culture, but also treat the subject in an impersonal manner clearly illustrating the idealization of mass production.[9] Andy Warhol is probably the most famous figure in pop art. In fact, art critic Arthur Danto once called Warhol "the nearest thing to a philosophical genius the history of art has produced".[17] Warhol attempted to take pop beyond an artistic style to a life style, and his work often displays a lack of human affectation that dispenses with the irony and parody of many of his peers.[23][24]
Early U.S. exhibitions[edit]
Claes Oldenburg, Jim Dine and Tom Wesselmann had their first shows in the Judson Gallery in 1959 and 1960. In 1960, Martha Jackson showed installations and assemblages, New Media - New Forms featured Hans Arp, Kurt Schwitters, Jasper Johns, Claes Oldenburg, Robert Rauschenberg, Jim Dine and May Wilson. 1961 was the year of Martha Jackson's spring show, Environments, Situations, Spaces.[25][26] Andy Warhol held his first solo exhibition in Los Angeles in July 1962 at Irving Blum's Ferus Gallery, where he showed 32 paintings of Campell's soup cans, one for every flavor. Warhol sold the set of paintings to Blum for $1,000; in 1996, when the Museum of Modern Art acquired it, the set was valued at $15 million.[17]
Donald Factor, the son of Max Factor, Jr., and an art collector and co-editor of avant garde literary magazine Nomad, wrote an essay in the magazine's last issue, Nomad/New York. The essay was one of the first on what would become known as pop art, though Factor did not use the term. The essay, "Four Artists", focused on Roy Lichtenstein, James Rosenquist, Jim Dine, and Claes Oldenburg.[27]
In the 1960s, Oldenburg, who became associated with the pop art movement, created many happenings, which were performance art-related productions of that time. The name he gave to his own productions was "Ray Gun Theater". The cast of colleagues in his performances included: artists Lucas Samaras, Tom Wesselman, Carolee Schneemann, Oyvind Fahlstrom and Richard Artschwager; dealer Annina Nosei; art critic Barbara Rose; and screenwriter Rudy Wurlitzer.[28] His first wife, Patty Mucha, who sewed many of his early soft sculptures, was a constant performer in his happenings. This brash, often humorous, approach to art was at great odds with the prevailing sensibility that, by its nature, art dealt with "profound" expressions or ideas. In December 1961, he rented a store on Manhattan's Lower East Side to house The Store, a month-long installation he had first presented at the Martha Jackson Gallery in New York, stocked with sculptures roughly in the form of consumer goods.[28]
Opening in 1962, Willem de Kooning's New York art dealer, the Sidney Janis Gallery, organized the groundbreaking International Exhibition of the New Realists, a survey of new-to-the-scene American, French, Swiss, Italian New Realism, and British pop art. The fifty-four artists shown included Richard Lindner, Wayne Thiebaud, Roy Lichtenstein (and his painting Blam), Andy Warhol, Claes Oldenburg, James Rosenquist, Jim Dine, Robert Indiana, Tom Wesselmann, George Segal, Peter Phillips, Peter Blake (The Love Wall from 1961), Yves Klein, Arman, Daniel Spoerri, Christo and Mimmo Rotella. The show was seen by Europeans Martial Raysse, Niki de Saint-Phalle and Jean Tinguely in New York, who were stunned by the size and look of the American artwork. Also shown were Marisol, Mario Schifano, Enrico Baj and Öyvind Fahlström. Janis lost some of his abstract expressionist artists when Mark Rothko, Robert Motherwell, Adolph Gottlieb and Philip Guston quit the gallery, but gained Dine, Oldenburg, Segal and Wesselmann.[29] At an opening-night soiree thrown by collector Burton Tremaine, Willem de Kooning appeared and was turned away by Tremaine, who ironically owned a number of de Kooning's works. Rosenquist recalled: "at that moment I thought, something in the art world has definitely changed".[17] Turning away a respected abstract artist proved that, as early as 1962, the pop art movement had begun to dominate art culture in New York.
A bit earlier, on the West Coast, Roy Lichtenstein, Jim Dine and Andy Warhol from New York City; Phillip Hefferton and Robert Dowd from Detroit; Edward Ruscha and Joe Goode from Oklahoma City; and Wayne Thiebaud from California were included in the New Painting of Common Objects show. This first pop art museum exhibition in America was curated by Walter Hopps at the Pasadena Art Museum [1]. Pop art was ready to change the art world. New York followed Pasadena in 1963, when the Guggenheim Museum exhibited Six Painters and the Object, curated by Lawrence Alloway. The artists were Jim Dine, Jasper Johns, Roy Lichtenstein, Robert Rauschenberg, James Rosenquist, and Andy Warhol.[30] Another pivotal early exhibition was The American Supermarket organised by the Bianchini Gallery in 1964. The show was presented as a typical small supermarket environment, except that everything in it—the produce, canned goods, meat, posters on the wall, etc.—was created by prominent pop artists of the time, including Apple, Warhol, Lichtenstein, Wesselmann, Oldenburg, and Johns. This project was recreated in 2002 as part of the Tate Gallery's Shopping: A Century of Art and Consumer Culture.[31]
By 1962, pop artists started exhibiting in commercial galleries in New York and Los Angeles; for some, it was their first commercial one-man show. The Ferus Gallery presented Andy Warhol in Los Angeles (and Ed Ruscha in 1963). In New York, the Green Gallery showed Rosenquist, Segal, Oldenburg, and Wesselmann. The Stable Gallery showed R. Indiana and Warhol (in his first New York show). The Leo Castelli Gallery presented Rauschenberg, Johns, and Lichtenstein. Martha Jackson showed Jim Dine and Allen Stone showed Wayne Thiebaud. By 1966, after the Green Gallery and the Ferus Gallery closed, the Leo Castelli Gallery represented Rosenquist, Warhol, Rauschenberg, Johns, Lichtenstein and Ruscha. The Sidney Janis Gallery represented Oldenburg, Segal, Dine, Wesselmann and Marisol, while Allen Stone continued to represent Thiebaud, and Martha Jackson continued representing Robert Indiana.[32]
In 1968, the São Paulo 9 Exhibition – Environment U.S.A.: 1957–1967 featured the "Who's Who" of pop art. Considered as a summation of the classical phase of the American pop art period, the exhibit was curated by William Seitz. The artists were Edward Hopper, James Gill, Robert Indiana, Jasper Johns, Roy Lichtenstein, Claes Oldenburg, Robert Rauschenberg, Andy Warhol and Tom Wesselmann.[33]
Spain[edit]
In Spain, the study of pop art is associated with the "new figurative", which arose from the roots of the crisis of informalism. Eduardo Arroyo could be said to fit within the pop art trend, on account of his interest in the environment, his critique of our media culture which incorporates icons of both mass media communication and the history of painting, and his scorn for nearly all established artistic styles. However, the Spanish artist who could be considered most authentically part of "pop" art is Alfredo Alcaín, because of the use he makes of popular images and empty spaces in his compositions.
Also in the category of Spanish pop art is the "Chronicle Team" (El Equipo Crónica), which existed in Valencia between 1964 and 1981, formed by the artists Manolo Valdés and Rafael Solbes. Their movement can be characterized as "pop" because of its use of comics and publicity images and its simplification of images and photographic compositions. Filmmaker Pedro Almodóvar emerged from Madrid's "La Movida" subculture of the 1970s making low budget super 8 pop art movies, and he was subsequently called the Andy Warhol of Spain by the media at the time. In the book Almodovar on Almodovar, he is quoted as saying that the 1950s film "Funny Face" was a central inspiration for his work. One pop trademark in Almodovar's films is that he always produces a fake commercial to be inserted into a scene.
Japan[edit]
In Japan, pop art evolved from the nations prominent avant-garde scene. The use of images of the modern world, copied from magazines in the photomontage-style paintings produced by Harue Koga in the late 1920s and early 1930s, foreshadowed elements of pop art.[34] The work of Yayoi Kusama contributed to the development of pop art and influenced many other artists, including Andy Warhol.[35][36] In the mid-1960s, graphic designer Tadanori Yokoo became one of the most successful pop artists and an international symbol for Japanese pop art. He is well known for his advertisements and creating artwork for pop culture icons such as commissions from The Beatles, Marilyn Monroe, Elizabeth Taylor, among others.[37] Another leading pop artist at that time was Keiichi Tanaami. Iconic characters from Japanese manga and anime have also become symbols for pop art, such as Speed Racer and Astro Boy. Japanese manga and anime also influenced later pop artists such as Takashi Murakami and his superflat movement.
Italy[edit]
In Italy, by 1964, pop art was known and took different forms, such as the "Scuola di Piazza del Popolo" in Rome, with pop artists such as Mario Schifano, Franco Angeli, Giosetta Fioroni, Tano Festa, Claudio Cintoli, and some artworks by Piero Manzoni, Lucio Del Pezzo and Mimmo Rotella.
Italian pop art originated in 1950s culture – the works of the artists Enrico Baj and Mimmo Rotella to be precise, rightly considered the forerunners of this scene. In fact, it was around 1958–1959 that Baj and Rotella abandoned their previous careers (which might be generically defined as belonging to a non-representational genre, despite being thoroughly post-Dadaist), to catapult themselves into a new world of images, and the reflections on them, which was springing up all around them. Rotella's torn posters showed an ever more figurative taste, often explicitly and deliberately referring to the great icons of the times. Baj's compositions were steeped in contemporary kitsch, which turned out to be a "gold mine" of images and the stimulus for an entire generation of artists.
The novelty came from the new visual panorama, both inside "domestic walls" and out-of-doors. Cars, road signs, television, all the "new world", everything can belong to the world of art, which itself is new. In this respect, Italian pop art takes the same ideological path as that of the international scene. The only thing that changes is the iconography and, in some cases, the presence of a more critical attitude toward it. Even in this case, the prototypes can be traced back to the works of Rotella and Baj, both far from neutral in their relationship with society. Yet this is not an exclusive element; there is a long line of artists, including Gianni Ruffi, Roberto Barni, Silvio Pasotti, Umberto Bignardi, and Claudio Cintoli, who take on reality as a toy, as a great pool of imagery from which to draw material with disenchantment and frivolity, questioning the traditional linguistic role models with a renewed spirit of "let me have fun" à la Aldo Palazzeschi.[38]
Belgium[edit]
In Belgium, pop art was represented by Paul Van Hoeydonck, whose sculpture Fallen Astronaut was left on the moon during one of the moon missions. Internationally recognized artists such as Marcel Broodthaers ( 'vous êtes doll? ") and Panamarenko are indebted to the pop art movement; Broodthaers's great influence was George Segal. Another well-known artist, Roger Raveel, mounted a birdcage with a real live pigeon in one of his paintings. By the end of the 1960s and early 1970s, pop art references disappeared from the work of these artists when they started to adopt a more critical attitude towards America because of the Vietnam War's increasingly gruesome character. Panamarenko, however, has retained the irony inherent in the pop art movement up to the present day.
Netherlands[edit]
While there was no formal pop art movement in the Netherlands, there was a group of artists who spent time in New York during the early years of pop art, and drew inspiration from the international pop art movement. Key representatives of Dutch pop art are Gustave Asselbergs, Woody van Amen, Daan van Golden, Rik Bentley, Jan Cremer, Wim T. Schippers and Jacques Frenken. They had in common that they opposed the Dutch petit bourgeois mentality by creating humorous works with a serious undertone. Examples of this nature include Sex O'Clock, by Woody van Amen, and Crucifix / Target, by Jacques Frenken.[39]
Russian Federation[edit]
Russia was a little late to become part of the pop art movement, and some of the artwork that resembles pop art only surfaced around the early 1970s. Russia was a communist country at that point and bold artistic statements were closely monitored. Russia's own version of pop art was Soviet-themed and was referred to as Sots Art. After 1991, the Communist Party lost its power and the Russian revolution was beginning, and with it came a freedom to express. That is when pop art in Russia took on another form, epitomised by Dmitri Vrubel with his painting titled My God, Help Me to Survive This Deadly Love in 1990. One might argue that the Soviet posters made in the 1950s to promote the wealth of the nation were in itself a form of pop art.[40]
Painting and sculpture examples[edit]







Jasper Johns, 1954–1955 Flag









Andy Warhol, Marilyn Diptych 1962, Pop Art









Wayne Thiebaud, 1963 Three Machines









Claes Oldenburg and Coosje van Bruggen, Typewriter Eraser, Scale X, 1999, painted stainless steel and fiberglas, National Gallery of Art, Washington, DC




Notable artists[edit]




Billy Apple
Evelyne Axell
Sir Peter Blake
Derek Boshier
Pauline Boty
Patrick Caulfield
Allan D'Arcangelo
Jim Dine
Rosalyn Drexler
Robert Dowd
Ken Elias
Erró
James Gill
Bruce Gray (sculptor)
Red Grooms
Richard Hamilton
Keith Haring




Jann Haworth
David Hockney
Dorothy Iannone
Robert Indiana
Jasper Johns
Allen Jones
Alex Katz
Corita Kent
Konrad Klapheck
Kiki Kogelnik
Nicholas Krushenick
Yayoi Kusama
Gerald Laing
Roy Lichtenstein
Richard Lindner




John McHale
Marisol
Peter Max
Marta Minujin
Takashi Murakami
Yoshitomo Nara
Claes Oldenburg
Julian Opie
Eduardo Paolozzi
Peter Phillips
Sigmar Polke
Hariton Pushwagner
Mel Ramos
Robert Rauschenberg




Larry Rivers
James Rizzi
James Rosenquist
Ed Ruscha
Niki de Saint Phalle
Peter Saul
George Segal
Colin Self
Marjorie Strider
Aya Takano
Wayne Thiebaud
Joe Tilson
Andy Warhol
Idelle Weber
John Wesley
Tom Wesselmann




See also[edit]

Chicago Imagists
Ferus Gallery
Sidney Janis
Leo Castelli
Green Gallery
New Painting of Common Objects
Figuration Libre (art movement)
Lowbrow (art movement)
Nouveau réalisme
Neo-pop
Op art
Plop art
Retro art
Superflat
SoFlo Superflat

Notes and references[edit]


^ a b c d e Livingstone, M., Pop Art: A Continuing History, New York: Harry N. Abrams, Inc., 1990
^ a b c d de la Croix, H.; Tansey, R., Gardner's Art Through the Ages, New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, Inc., 1980.
^ a b c d e f Piper, David. The Illustrated History of Art, ISBN 0-7537-0179-0, p486-487.
^ Harrison, Sylvia (2001-08-27). Pop Art and the Origins of Post-Modernism. Cambridge University Press.&#160;
^ a b c d Gopnik, A.; Varnedoe, K., High &amp; Low: Modern Art &amp; Popular Culture, New York: The Museum of Modern Art, 1990
^ smithsonianmag.com/arts-culture/alex-katz
^ New Yorker article, accessed online August 28, 2007
^ Wayne Craven, American Art: History and . p.464.
^ a b c d e f g Arnason, H., History of Modern Art: Painting, Sculpture, Architecture, New York: Harry N. Abrams, Inc. 1968.
^ Tate Collection image: I was a Rich Man's Plaything
^ Interview with John McHale (Jr.) the son of the "Father of Pop", by Gary Comenas, July 2006
^ "Pop art", A Dictionary of Twentieth-Century Art, Ian Chilvers. Oxford University Press, 1998.
^ "Pop art", The Concise Oxford Dictionary of Art Terms, Michael Clarke, Oxford University Press, 2001.
^ Alison and Peter Smithson, "But Today We Collect Ads", reprinted on page 54 in Modern Dreams The Rise and Fall of Pop, published by ICA and MIT, ISBN 0-262-73081-2
^ Lawrence Alloway, "The Arts and the Mass Media," Architectural Design &amp; Construction, February 1958.
^ a b Barton, Christina (2010). Billy Apple: British and American Works 1960-69. London: The Mayor Gallery. pp.&#160;11–21. ISBN&#160;978-0-9558367-3-2.&#160;
^ a b c d Scherman, Tony. "When Pop Turned the Art World Upside Down." American Heritage 52.1 (February 2001), 68.
^ Sandler, Irving H. The New York School: The Painters and Sculptors of the Fifties, New York: Harper &amp; Row, 1978. ISBN 0-06-438505-1 pp. 174–195, Rauschenberg and Johns; pp. 103–111, Rivers and the gestural realists.
^ Robert Rosenblum, "Jasper Johns" Art International (September 1960): 75.
^ Hapgood, Susan, Neo-Dada: Redefining Art, 1958-62. New York: Universe Books, 1994.
^ Hendrickson 1988, p.&#160;31
^ Kimmelman, Michael (September 30, 1997). "Roy Lichtenstein, Pop Master, Dies at 73". New York Times. Retrieved November 12, 2007.&#160;
^ Michelson, Annette, Buchloh, B. H. D. (eds) Andy Warhol (October Files), MIT Press, 2001.
^ Warhol, Andy. The Philosophy of Andy Warhol, from A to B and back again. Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1975
^ The Store, MoMA retrieved July 10, 2010
^ Joslyn Art Museum, The Great American Pop Art Store: Multiples of the Sixties 2000 exhibition retrieved July 9, 2010
^ Diggory (2013).
^ a b Kristine McKenna (July 2, 1995), When Bigger Is Better: Claes Oldenburg has spent the past 35 years blowing up and redefining everyday objects, all in the name of getting art off its pedestal Los Angeles Times.
^ ,Andy Warhol poetry and gossip, in the 1960s retrieved December 6, 2009
^ World Cat. retrieved December 6, 2009
^ Gayford, Martin (2002-12-19). "Still life at the check-out". The Telegraph. Telegraph Media Group Ltd. Retrieved 28 November 2012.&#160;
^ Pop Artists: Andy Warhol, Pop Art, Roy Lichtenstein, Jasper Johns, Peter Max, Erró, David Hockney, Wally Hedrick, Michael Leavitt (May 20, 2010) Reprinted: 2010, General Books, Memphis, Tennessee, USA, ISBN 978-1-155-48349-8, ISBN 1-155-48349-9.
^ Jim Edwards, William Emboden, David McCarthy: Uncommonplaces: The Art of James Francis Gill, 2005, p.54
^ Eskola, Jack (2015). Harue Koga: David Bowie of the Early 20th Century Japanese Art Avant-garde. Kindle, e-book.&#160;
^ http://www.timeout.com/london/feature/2175/interview-yayoi-kusama
^ http://art.sy/artist/yayoi-kusama
^ http://www.adcglobal.org/archive/hof/2000/?id=205
^ http://www.comune.modena.it/galleria/exhibitions/past-exhibitions/2005/pop-art-italia-1958-1968-1
^ http://www.8weekly.nl/artikel/2701/ Dutch Pop Art &amp; The Sixties
^ http://www.canofart.com


Further reading[edit]

Diggory, Terence (2013) Encyclopedia of the New York School Poets (Facts on File Library of American Literature). ISBN 978-1-4381-4066-7
Francis, Mark and Hal Foster. Pop. London and New York: Phaidon, 2010.
Haskell, Barbara. BLAM! The Explosion of Pop, Minimalism and Performance 1958-1964. New York: W.W. Norton &amp; Company, Inc. in association with the Whitney Museum of American Art, 1984.
Lippard, Lucy R. Pop Art, with contributions by Lawrence Alloway, Nancy Marmer, Nicolas Calas, Frederick A. Praeger, New York, 1966.
MoMa. "A symposium on Pop Art." Arts Magazine, April 1963, pp.&#160;36–45. Transcript of symposium was held at The Museum of Modern Art in 1962. Transcript reprinted at popartmachine.com/masters/article/190.

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Pop art.





Wikiquote has quotations related to: Pop art



Pop Art: A Brief History, MoMA Learning
Pop Art in Modern and Contemporary Art, The Met
Brooklyn Museum Exhibitions: Seductive Subversion: Women Pop Artists, 1958–1968, Oct. 2010-Jan. 2011
Brooklyn Museum, Wiki/Pop (Women Pop Artists)
Tate Glossary term for Pop art









v
t
e


Art movements






Medieval



Byzantine
Merovingian
Carolingian
Ottonian
Romanesque
Gothic (International Gothic)








Renaissance



Early Netherlandish
High Renaissance
Mannerism








17th century



Baroque
Caravaggisti
Classicism
Dutch Golden Age








18th century



Rococo
Neoclassicism
Romanticism








19th century



Nazarene
Realism / Realism
Historicism
Biedermeier
Gründerzeit
Barbizon school
Pre-Raphaelites
Academic
Aestheticism
Decadent
Macchiaioli
Art Nouveau
Peredvizhniki
Impressionism
Post-Impressionism
Neo-impressionism
Divisionism
Pointillism
Cloisonnism
Les Nabis
Synthetism
Kalighat painting
Symbolism
Hudson River School








20th century



Bengal School of Art
Amazonian pop art
Cubism
Orphism
Purism
Synchromism
Expressionism
Scuola Romana
Abstract expressionism
Kinetic art
Neue Künstlervereinigung München
Der Blaue Reiter
Die Brücke
New Objectivity
Dada
Fauvism
Neo-Fauvism
Precisionism
Bauhaus
De Stijl
Art Deco
Op art
Vienna School of Fantastic Realism
Pop art
Photorealism
Futurism
Metaphysical art
Rayonism
Vorticism
Suprematism
Surrealism
Color Field
Minimalism
Minimalism (visual arts)
Nouveau réalisme
Social realism
Lyrical abstraction
Tachisme
COBRA
Action painting
International Typographic Style
Fluxus
Lettrism
Letterist International
Situationist International
Conceptual art
Installation art
Land art
Performance art
Endurance art
Systems art
Video art
Neo-expressionism
Neo-Dada
Outsider art
Lowbrow
New media art
Young British Artists








21st century



Art intervention
Hyperrealism
Neo-futurism
Stuckism International
Remodernism
Sound art
Superstroke
Superflat
Relational art
Video game art








Related articles



List of art movements
Modern art
Modernism
Late modernism
Postmodern art
Avant-garde
















v
t
e


Avant-garde movements






Visual art



Abstract expressionism
Art Nouveau
Conceptual art
Cubism
Proto-Cubism
Cubo-Futurism
De Stijl
Devětsil
Divisionism
Ego-Futurism
Fauvism
Impressionism
Neo-Impressionism
Post-Impressionism
Color Field
Lyrical Abstraction
Incoherents
Minimalism
Mail art
Neue Slowenische Kunst
Nonconformism
Pop art
Rayonism
Suprematism
Vorticism
Nouveau réalisme








Music



Aleatoric music
Ars subtilior
Atonal music
Avant-garde jazz
Avant-garde metal
Avant-prog
Drone music
Electroacoustic music
Electronic music
Experimental rock
Free jazz
Futurism (music)
Industrial music
Krautrock
Microtonal music
Minimal music
Musique concrète
New Complexity
No wave
Noise music
Post-rock
Progressive rock
Rock in Opposition
Second Viennese School
Serialism
Spectral music
Stochastic music
Textural music
Totalism
Twelve-tone technique








Literature and poetry



Acmeist poetry
Angry Penguins
Asemic writing
Cyberpunk
Experimental literature
Flarf poetry
Hungry generation
Imaginism
Language poets
Neoteric
Oberiu
Oulipo
Ultraísmo
Visual poetry
Nouveau roman








Cinema and theatre



Cinéma pur
Dogme 95
Drop Art
Epic theatre
Remodernist film
Theatre of the Absurd
Theatre of Cruelty








General



Bauhaus
Dada
Expressionism
Fluxus
Futurism
Lettrism
Modernism
Minimalism
Postminimalism
Neo-minimalism
Neo-Dada
Neoism
Postmodernism
Late modernism
Primitivism
Russian Futurism
Russian symbolism
Situationist International
Social realism
Socialist realism
Surrealism
Symbolism









 Book














v
t
e


Modernism






Milestones



Le Déjeuner sur l’herbe (1862-63)
Olympia (1863)
A Sunday Afternoon on the Island of La Grande Jatte (1886)
Mont Sainte-Victoir) (1887)
The Starry Night (1889)
Ubu Roi (1896)
Verklärte Nacht (1899)
Le bonheur de vivre (1905-1906)
Les Demoiselles d'Avignon (1907)
The Firebird (1910)
Afternoon of a Faun (1912)
Nude Descending a Staircase, No. 2 (1912)
In Search of Lost Time (1913–1927)
The Metamorphosis (1915)
Fountain (1917)
The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari (1920)
Six Characters in Search of an Author (1921)
Ulysses (1922)
The Waste Land (1922)
The Magic Mountain (1924)
Battleship Potemkin (1925)
The Sun Also Rises (1926)
The Threepenny Opera (1928)
Un Chien Andalou (1929)
Villa Savoye (1931)
The Blue Lotus (1936)
Fallingwater (1936)
Waiting for Godot (1953)








Literature



Guillaume Apollinaire
Djuna Barnes
Tadeusz Borowski
André Breton
Mikhail Bulgakov
Anton Chekhov
Joseph Conrad
Alfred Döblin
E. M. Forster
William Faulkner
Gustave Flaubert
Ford Madox Ford
André Gide
Knut Hamsun
Jaroslav Hašek
Ernest Hemingway
Hermann Hesse
James Joyce
Franz Kafka
Arthur Koestler
D. H. Lawrence
Wyndham Lewis
Thomas Mann
Katherine Mansfield
Filippo Tommaso Marinetti
Guy de Maupassant
Robert Musil
Katherine Anne Porter
Marcel Proust
Gertrude Stein
Italo Svevo
Virginia Woolf








Poetry



Anna Akhmatova
Richard Aldington
W. H. Auden
Charles Baudelaire
Luca Caragiale
Constantine P. Cavafy
Blaise Cendrars
Hart Crane
H.D.
Robert Desnos
T. S. Eliot
Paul Éluard
Odysseas Elytis
F. S. Flint
Stefan George
Max Jacob
Federico García Lorca
Amy Lowell
Robert Lowell
Mina Loy
Stéphane Mallarmé
Marianne Moore
Wilfred Owen
Octavio Paz
Fernando Pessoa
Ezra Pound
Lionel Richard
Rainer Maria Rilke
Arthur Rimbaud
Giorgos Seferis
Wallace Stevens
Dylan Thomas
Tristan Tzara
Paul Valéry
William Carlos Williams
W. B. Yeats








Visual art



Josef Albers
Jean Arp
Balthus
George Bellows
Umberto Boccioni
Pierre Bonnard
Georges Braque
Constantin Brâncuși
Alexander Calder
Charles Camoin
Mary Cassatt
Paul Cézanne
Marc Chagall
Giorgio de Chirico
Camille Claudel
Joseph Cornell
Joseph Csaky
Salvador Dalí
Edgar Degas
Raoul Dufy
Othon Friesz
Willem de Kooning
Robert Delaunay
Charles Demuth
Otto Dix
Theo van Doesburg
Marcel Duchamp
James Ensor
Max Ernst
Jacob Epstein
Paul Gauguin
Alberto Giacometti
Vincent van Gogh
Natalia Goncharova
Julio González
Juan Gris
George Grosz
Raoul Hausmann
Hannah Höch
Edward Hopper
Frida Kahlo
Wassily Kandinsky
Ernst Ludwig Kirchner
Paul Klee
Oskar Kokoschka
Pyotr Konchalovsky
Aristarkh Lentulov
André Lhote
Fernand Léger
Franz Marc
Albert Marque
Ilya Mashkov
Jean Marchand
René Magritte
Kazimir Malevich
Édouard Manet
Henri Matisse
Colin McCahon
Jean Metzinger
Joan Miró
Amedeo Modigliani
Piet Mondrian
Claude Monet
Henry Moore
Edvard Munch
Emil Nolde
Georgia O'Keeffe
Méret Oppenheim
Henri Ottmann
Francis Picabia
Pablo Picasso
Camille Pissarro
Man Ray
Odilon Redon
Pierre-Auguste Renoir
Auguste Rodin
Henri Rousseau
Egon Schiele
René Schützenberger
Georges Seurat
Paul Signac
Alfred Sisley
Edward Steichen
Alfred Stieglitz
Henriette Tirman
Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec
Louis Valtat
Édouard Vuillard
Grant Wood








Music



George Antheil
Milton Babbitt
Jean Barraqué
Alban Berg
Luciano Berio
Nadia Boulanger
Pierre Boulez
John Cage
Elliott Carter
Aaron Copland
Henry Cowell
Henri Dutilleux
Morton Feldman
Henryk Gorecki
Josef Matthias Hauer
Paul Hindemith
Arthur Honegger
Charles Ives
Leoš Janáček
György Ligeti
Witold Lutosławski
Olivier Messiaen
Luigi Nono
Harry Partch
Krzysztof Penderecki
Sergei Prokofiev
Luigi Russolo
Erik Satie
Pierre Schaeffer
Arnold Schoenberg
Dmitri Shostakovich
Richard Strauss
Igor Stravinsky
Edgard Varèse
Anton Webern
Kurt Weill
Iannis Xenakis








Theatre



Edward Albee
Maxwell Anderson
Jean Anouilh
Antonin Artaud
Samuel Beckett
Bertolt Brecht
Anton Chekhov
Friedrich Dürrenmatt
Jean Genet
Maxim Gorky
Walter Hasenclever
Henrik Ibsen
William Inge
Eugène Ionesco
Alfred Jarry
Georg Kaiser
Maurice Maeterlinck
Vladimir Mayakovsky
Arthur Miller
Seán O'Casey
Eugene O'Neill
John Osborne
Luigi Pirandello
Erwin Piscator
George Bernard Shaw
August Strindberg
John Millington Synge
Ernst Toller
Frank Wedekind
Thornton Wilder
Stanisław Ignacy Witkiewicz








Film



Ingmar Bergman
Anton Giulio Bragaglia
Luis Buñuel
Marcel Carné
Charlie Chaplin
René Clair
Jean Cocteau
Maya Deren
Alexander Dovzhenko
Carl Theodor Dreyer
Viking Eggeling
Sergei Eisenstein
Jean Epstein
Robert J. Flaherty
Abel Gance
Isidore Isou
Buster Keaton
Lev Kuleshov
Fritz Lang
Marcel L'Herbier
Georges Méliès
F. W. Murnau
Georg Wilhelm Pabst
Vsevolod Pudovkin
Jean Renoir
Walter Ruttmann
Victor Sjöström
Josef von Sternberg
Dziga Vertov
Jean Vigo
Robert Wiene








Dance



George Balanchine
Merce Cunningham
Clotilde von Derp
Sergei Diaghilev
Isadora Duncan
Michel Fokine
Loie Fuller
Martha Graham
Hanya Holm
Doris Humphrey
Léonide Massine
Vaslav Nijinsky
Alwin Nikolais
Alexander Sakharoff
Ted Shawn
Anna Sokolow
Ruth St. Denis
Helen Tamiris
Charles Weidman
Mary Wigman








Architecture



Alvar Aalto
Marcel Breuer
Gordon Bunshaft
Antoni Gaudí
Walter Gropius
Hector Guimard
Raymond Hood
Victor Horta
Friedensreich Hundertwasser
Philip Johnson
Louis Kahn
Le Corbusier
Adolf Loos
Konstantin Melnikov
Erich Mendelsohn
Pier Luigi Nervi
Richard Neutra
Oscar Niemeyer
Hans Poelzig
Antonin Raymond
Gerrit Rietveld
Eero Saarinen
Rudolf Steiner
Edward Durell Stone
Louis Sullivan
Vladimir Tatlin
Paul Troost
Jørn Utzon
Ludwig Mies van der Rohe
Frank Lloyd Wright








Related articles



American modernism
Armory Show
Art Deco
Art Nouveau
Ashcan School
Avant-garde
Ballets Russes
Bauhaus
Buddhist modernism
Constructivism
Cubism
Dada
Degenerate art
De Stijl
Der Blaue Reiter
Die Brücke
Expressionism
Expressionist music
Fauvism
Fourth dimension in art
Fourth dimension in literature
Futurism
Imagism
Impressionism
International Style
Late modernism
Late modernity
Lettrism
List of art movements
List of avant-garde artists
List of modernist poets
Lyrical abstraction
Minimalism
Modern art
Modernity
Neo-Dada
Neo-primitivism
New Objectivity
Orphism
Post-Impressionism
Postminimalism
Postmodernism
Reactionary modernism
Metamodernism
Remodernism
Romanticism
Second Viennese School
Structural film
Surrealism
Symbolism
Synchromism
Tonalism
















v
t
e


Appropriation in the arts






By field





Music




Appropriation
Contrafact

List


Contrafactum
Cover version
Interpolation
List of musical medleys
Music mashup
Musical plagiarism
Musical quotation
Parody music
Pasticcio
Plunderphonics
Potpourri
DJ mix
Quodlibet
Remix
Sampling
Sound collage
Trope
Variation









Literature&#160;/ theatre




Assemblage
Cut-up technique
Joke theft
Trope
Found poetry
Flarf poetry
Verbatim theatre










Painting&#160;/ comics&#160;/
photography





Collage
Swipe
Comic strip switcheroo
Photographic mosaic
Combine painting





By source material




Mona Lisa
Michelangelo's David
Michelangelo's Pietà












Cinema&#160;/ television&#160;/
video




Video mashup
Re-cut trailer
TV format
Found footage
Remake
Parody film
Collage film











General concepts





Intertextual figures




Allusion
Quotation
Calque
Plagiarism
Translation
Pastiche
Parody









Adaptation




Film
Literary
Theatre









Other concepts




Imitation in art
Reprise
Détournement
Source criticism in the arts
Citation
Homage
Derivative work
Bricolage
Assemblage (art)
Found art












Related artistic
concepts




Originality
Artistic inspiration
Afflatus
Genius (literature)
Genre
Genre studies
Parody advertisement
In-joke
Tribute act
Fan fiction
Simulacrum
Archetypal literary criticism
Readymades of Marcel Duchamp
Anti-art
Pop art
Aesthetic interpretation
Western canon









Standard blocks
and forms




Jazz standard
Stock character
Plot device
Dramatic structure
Formula fiction
Monomyth
Archetype
Winged word









Epoch-marking
works




L.H.O.O.Q. (1919)
Pierre Menard, Author of the Quixote (1939)
Reality Hunger: A Manifesto (2010)








Theorization



Mimesis
Dionysian imitatio
De Copia Rerum
Romantic movement
Russian formalism
Modernist movement
Postmodern movement
Palimpsests: Literature in the Second Degree









Related non-artistic
concepts




Cultural appropriation
Appropriation in sociology
Articulation in sociology
Trope (linguistics)
Academic dishonesty
Authorship
Genius
Intellectual property
Recontextualisation













Authority control



GND: 4076259-2
NDL: 00569127















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pop_art&amp;oldid=691799365"					
				Categories: Pop artAvant-garde artModern artContemporary artArt movementsWestern artBritish artHidden categories: Commons category with page title same as on WikidataWikipedia articles with GND identifiers				
							
		
		
			