


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Post-Impressionism
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				




This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (May 2013)






Henri Rousseau, The Centenary of Independence, 1892, Getty Center, Los Angeles


Post-Impressionism (also spelled Postimpressionism) is a predominantly French art movement that developed roughly between 1886 and 1905; from the last Impressionist exhibition to the birth of Fauvism. Post-Impressionism emerged as a reaction against Impressionists’ concern for the naturalistic depiction of light and colour. Due to its broad emphasis on abstract qualities or symbolic content, Post-Impressionism encompasses Neo-Impressionism, Symbolism, Cloisonnism, Pont-Aven School, and Synthetism, along with some later Impressionists' work. The movement was led by Paul Cézanne, Paul Gauguin, Vincent van Gogh, and Georges Seurat.
The term Post-Impressionism was coined by the British artist and art critic Roger Fry in 1910 to describe the development of French art since Manet. Fry used the term when he organized the 1910 exhibition, Manet and the Post-Impressionists. Post-Impressionists extended Impressionism while rejecting its limitations: they continued using vivid colours, often thick application of paint, and real-life subject matter, but were more inclined to emphasize geometric forms, distort form for expressive effect, and use unnatural or arbitrary colour.



Contents


1 Overview
2 Defining Post-Impressionism

2.1 Reviews and adjustments


3 Gallery of major Post-Impressionist artists
4 Further reading
5 See also
6 References and sources
7 External links



Overview[edit]
The Post-Impressionists were dissatisfied with what they felt was the triviality of subject matter and the loss of structure in Impressionist paintings, though they did not agree on the way forward. Georges Seurat and his followers concerned themselves with Pointillism, the systematic use of tiny dots of colour. Paul Cézanne set out to restore a sense of order and structure to painting, to "make of Impressionism something solid and durable, like the art of the museums".[1] He achieved this by reducing objects to their basic shapes while retaining the saturated colours of Impressionism. The Impressionist Camille Pissarro experimented with Neo-Impressionist ideas between the mid-1880s and the early 1890s. Discontented with what he referred to as romantic Impressionism, he investigated Pointillism, which he called scientific Impressionism, before returning to a purer Impressionism in the last decade of his life.[2] Vincent van Gogh used colour and vibrant swirling brush strokes to convey his feelings and his state of mind.
Although they often exhibited together, Post-Impressionist artists were not in agreement concerning a cohesive movement. Yet, the abstract concerns of harmony and structural arrangement, in the work of all these artists, took precedence over naturalism. Artists such as Seurat adopted a meticulously scientific approach to colour and composition.[3]
Younger painters during the 1890s and early 20th century worked in geographically disparate regions and in various stylistic categories, such as Fauvism and Cubism.
Defining Post-Impressionism[edit]




Poster of the 1889 Exhibition of Paintings by the Impressionist and Synthetist Group, at Café des Arts, known as the The Volpini Exhibition, 1889






Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec, Portrait of Émile Bernard, 1886, Tate Gallery London


The term was coined in 1910 by Roger Fry in the title of an exhibition of modern French painters: Manet and the Post-Impressionists, organized by Fry for the Grafton Galleries in London.[3][4] Most of the artists in the exhibition were younger than the Impressionists. Fry later explained: "For purposes of convenience, it was necessary to give these artists a name, and I chose, as being the vaguest and most non-committal, the name of Post-Impressionism. This merely stated their position in time relatively to the Impressionist movement."[5] John Rewald limited the scope to the years between 1886 and 1892 in his pioneering publication on Post-Impressionism: From Van Gogh to Gauguin (1956). Rewald considered this a continuation of his 1946 study, History of Impressionism, and pointed out that a "subsequent volume dedicated to the second half of the post-impressionist period":[6] Post-Impressionism: From Gauguin to Matisse, was to follow. This volume would extend the period covered to other artistic movements derived from Impressionism, though confined to the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Rewald focused on such outstanding early Post-Impressionists active in France as Van Gogh, Gauguin, Seurat, and Redon. He explored their relationships as well as the artistic circles they frequented (or were in opposition to), including:

Neo-Impressionism: ridiculed by contemporary art critics as well as artists as Pointillism; Seurat and Signac would have preferred other terms: Divisionism for example
Cloisonnism: a short-lived term introduced in 1888 by the art critic Édouard Dujardin, was to promote the work of Louis Anquetin, and was later also applied to contemporary works of his friend Émile Bernard
Synthetism: another short-lived term coined in 1889 to distinguish recent works of Gauguin and Bernard from that of more traditional Impressionists exhibiting with them at the Café Volpini.
Pont-Aven School: implying little more than that the artists involved had been working for a while in Pont-Aven or elsewhere in Brittany.
Symbolism: a term highly welcomed by vanguard critics in 1891, when Gauguin dropped Synthetism as soon as he was acclaimed to be the leader of Symbolism in painting.

Furthermore, in his introduction to Post-Impressionism, Rewald opted for a second volume featuring Toulouse-Lautrec, Henri Rousseau "le Douanier", Les Nabis and Cézanne as well as the Fauves, the young Picasso and Gauguin's last trip to the South-Sea; it was to expand the period covered at least into the first decade of the 20th century—yet this second volume remained unfinished.




Camille Pissarro, Haying at Eragny, 1889, Private Collection


Reviews and adjustments[edit]
Rewald wrote that "the term 'Post-Impressionism' is not a very precise one, though a very convenient one." Convenient, when the term is by definition limited to French visual arts derived from Impressionism since 1886. Rewald's approach to historical data was narrative rather than analytic, and beyond this point he believed it would be sufficient to "let the sources speak for themselves."[6]
Rival terms like Modernism or Symbolism were never as easy to handle, for they covered literature, architecture and other arts as well, and they expanded to other countries.

Modernism, thus, is now considered to be the central movement within international western civilization with its original roots in France, going back beyond the French Revolution to the Age of Enlightenment.


Symbolism, however, is considered to be a concept which emerged a century later in France, and implied an individual approach. Local national traditions as well as individual settings therefore could stand side by side, and from the very beginning a broad variety of artists practicing some kind of symbolic imagery, ranged between extreme positions: The Nabis for example united to find synthesis of tradition and brand new form, while others kept to traditional, more or less academic forms, when they were looking for fresh contents: Symbolism is therefore often linked to fantastic, esoteric, erotic and other non-realist subject matter.

To meet the recent discussion, the connotations of the term 'Post-Impressionism' were challenged again: Alan Bowness and his collaborators expanded the period covered forward to 1914 and the beginning of World War I, but limited their approach widely on the 1890s to France. Other European countries are pushed back to standard connotations, and Eastern Europe is completely excluded.
So, while a split may be seen between classical 'Impressionism' and 'Post-Impressionism' in 1886, the end and the extent of 'Post-Impressionism' remains under discussion. For Bowness and his contributors as well as for Rewald, 'Cubism' was an absolutely fresh start, and so Cubism has been seen in France since the beginning, and later in Anglosaxonia. Meanwhile, Eastern European artists, however, did not care so much for western traditions, and proceeded to manners of painting called abstract and suprematic—terms expanding far into the 20th century.
According to the present state of discussion, Post-Impressionism is a term best used within Rewald's definition in a strictly historical manner, concentrating on French art between 1886 and 1914, and re-considering the altered positions of impressionist painters like Claude Monet, Camille Pissarro, Auguste Renoir, and others—as well as all new schools and movements at the turn of the century: from Cloisonnism to Cubism. The declarations of war, in July/August 1914, indicate probably far more than the beginning of a World War—they signal a major break in European cultural history, too.
Along with general art history information given about "Post-Impressionism" works, there are many museums that offer additional history, information and gallery works, both online and in house, that can help viewers understand a deeper meaning of "Post-Impressionism" in terms of fine art and traditional art applications.
Gallery of major Post-Impressionist artists[edit]







Paul Cézanne (1839–1906)









Odilon Redon (1840–1916)









Henri Rousseau (1844-1910)









Paul Gauguin (1848-1903)









Vincent van Gogh (1853–1890)









Charles Angrand (1854–1926)









Henri-Edmond Cross (1856–1910)









Maximilien Luce (1858–1941)









Georges Seurat (1859–1891)









René Schützenberger (1860-1916)









Marius Borgeaud (1861-1924)









Charles Laval (1862-1894)









Théo van Rysselberghe (1862–1926)









Paul Signac (1863–1935)









Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec (1864–1901)









Paul Sérusier (1864–1927)









Paul Ranson (1864–1909)









Georges Lemmen (1865-1916)









Félix Vallotton (1865–1925)









Pierre Bonnard (1867–1947)









Édouard Vuillard (1868–1940)









Émile Bernard (1868-1941)









Cuno Amiet (1868–1961)









Maurice Denis (1870-1943)




Further reading[edit]

Manet and the Post-Impressionists (exh. cat. by R. Fry and D. MacCarthy, London, Grafton Gals, 1910–11)
The Second Post-Impressionist Exhibition (exh. cat. by R. Fry, London, Grafton Gals, 1912)
J. Rewald. Post-Impressionism: From Van Gogh to Gauguin (New York, 1956, rev. 3/1978)
F. Elgar. The Post-Impressionists (Oxford, 1977)
Post-Impressionism: Cross-currents in European Painting (exh. cat., ed. J. House and M. A. Stevens; London, RA, 1979–80)
B. Thomson. The Post-Impressionists (Oxford and New York, 1983, rev. 2/1990)
J. Rewald. Studies in Post-Impressionism (London, 1986)

See also[edit]

Art periods
Cubism
Kapists
Neo-impressionism
Expressionism

References and sources[edit]

References



^ Huyghe, Rene: Impressionism. (1973). Secaucus, N.J.: Chartwell Books Inc., p. 222. OCLC&#160;153804642
^ Cogniat, Raymond (1975). Pissarro. New York: Crown, pp. 69–72. ISBN 0-517-52477-5.
^ a b Caroline Boyle-Turner, Post-Impressionism, History and application of the term, MoMA, From Grove Art Online, Oxford University Press, 2009
^ Manet and the post-impressionists; Nov. 8 to Jan. 15, 1910-11, Grafton Galleries, London
^ Gowing, Lawrence (2005). Facts on File Encyclopedia of Art: 5. New York: Facts on File, p. 804. ISBN 0-8160-5802-4
^ a b Rewald, John: Post-Impressionism: From Van Gogh to Gauguin, revised edition: Secker &amp; Warburg, London, 1978, p. 9.



Sources


Bowness, Alan, et alt.: Post-Impressionism. Cross-Currents in European Painting, Royal Academy of Arts &amp; Weidenfeld and Nicolson, London 1979 ISBN 0-297-77713-0
Metropolitan Museum of Art Timeline

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Post-Impressionist paintings.





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Post-Impressionism.



Georges Seurat, 1859-1891, a full text exhibition catalog from The Metropolitan Museum of Art
Toulouse-Lautrec in the Metropolitan Museum of Art, a full text exhibition catalog from The Metropolitan Museum of Art









v
t
e


Post-Impressionism






19th-century
movements



Neo-impressionism
Divisionism
Pointillism
Cloisonnism
Les Nabis
Synthetism
Symbolism
Art Nouveau








Artists



Cuno Amiet
Charles Angrand
Émile Bernard
Pierre Bonnard
Marius Borgeaud
Paul Cézanne
Henri-Edmond Cross
Maurice Denis
Georges Dufrénoy
Paul Gauguin
Hippolyte Petitjean
Paul Ranson
Odilon Redon
Henri Rousseau
René Schützenberger
Paul Sérusier
Georges Seurat
Paul Signac
Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec
Charles Laval
Georges Lemmen
Maximilien Luce
Paul Ranson
Vincent van Gogh
Théo van Rysselberghe
Félix Vallotton
Édouard Vuillard








20th-century
movements



Fauvism
Die Brücke
Der Blaue Reiter
Expressionism
Cubism








Artists



Georges Braque
Charles Camoin
André Derain
Raoul Dufy
Henri Matisse
Albert Gleizes
Ernst Ludwig Kirchner
Karl Schmidt-Rottluff
Wassily Kandinsky
Sonia Lewitska
Franz Marc
Jean Metzinger
Henry Ottmann
Francis Picabia
Pablo Picasso
Robert Antoine Pinchon
Henriette Tirman
Jean Marchand
Othon Friesz








Exhibitions



Artistes Indépendants
Les XX
Volpini Exhibition
Le Barc de Boutteville
La Libre Esthétique
Ambroise Vollard
Salon d'Automne
Salon des Indépendants
Salon des Cent
Salon des Tuileries








Critics



Félix Fénéon
Albert Aurier








See also



Impressionism
Modernism
Modern art
Secessionism
















v
t
e


Impressionism






Originators



Frédéric Bazille
Eugène Boudin
Gustave Caillebotte
Mary Cassatt
Paul Cézanne
Edgar Degas
Armand Guillaumin
Édouard Manet
Claude Monet
Berthe Morisot
Camille Pissarro
Pierre-Auguste Renoir
Alfred Sisley











Patrons



Gustave Caillebotte
Henry O. Havemeyer
Ernest Hoschedé








Dealers



Paul Durand-Ruel
Georges Petit
Ambroise Vollard








American artists



William Merritt Chase
Frederick Carl Frieseke
Childe Hassam
Willard Metcalf
Lilla Cabot Perry
Theodore Robinson
John Henry Twachtman
J. Alden Weir








Other artists



John Peter Russell
Lovis Corinth
Antoine Guillemet
Max Liebermann
Max Slevogt
Konstantin Korovin
Valentin Serov
Francisco Oller
Joaquín Sorolla
Philip Wilson Steer
Laura Muntz Lyall
Władysław Podkowiński
Nazmi Ziya Güran
Henry Moret








Other media



Music
Literature
French Impressionist Cinema








See also



American Impressionism
California Impressionism
Pennsylvania Impressionism
Heidelberg School
Amsterdam Impressionism
Decorative Impressionism
Post-Impressionism
















v
t
e


Art movements






Medieval



Byzantine
Merovingian
Carolingian
Ottonian
Romanesque
Gothic (International Gothic)








Renaissance



Early Netherlandish
High Renaissance
Mannerism








17th century



Baroque
Caravaggisti
Classicism
Dutch Golden Age








18th century



Rococo
Neoclassicism
Romanticism








19th century



Nazarene
Realism / Realism
Historicism
Biedermeier
Gründerzeit
Barbizon school
Pre-Raphaelites
Academic
Aestheticism
Decadent
Macchiaioli
Art Nouveau
Peredvizhniki
Impressionism
Post-Impressionism
Neo-impressionism
Divisionism
Pointillism
Cloisonnism
Les Nabis
Synthetism
Kalighat painting
Symbolism
Hudson River School








20th century



Bengal School of Art
Amazonian pop art
Cubism
Orphism
Purism
Synchromism
Expressionism
Scuola Romana
Abstract expressionism
Kinetic art
Neue Künstlervereinigung München
Der Blaue Reiter
Die Brücke
New Objectivity
Dada
Fauvism
Neo-Fauvism
Precisionism
Bauhaus
De Stijl
Art Deco
Op art
Vienna School of Fantastic Realism
Pop art
Photorealism
Futurism
Metaphysical art
Rayonism
Vorticism
Suprematism
Surrealism
Color Field
Minimalism
Minimalism (visual arts)
Nouveau réalisme
Social realism
Lyrical abstraction
Tachisme
COBRA
Action painting
International Typographic Style
Fluxus
Lettrism
Letterist International
Situationist International
Conceptual art
Installation art
Land art
Performance art
Endurance art
Systems art
Video art
Neo-expressionism
Neo-Dada
Outsider art
Lowbrow
New media art
Young British Artists








21st century



Art intervention
Hyperrealism
Neo-futurism
Stuckism International
Remodernism
Sound art
Superstroke
Superflat
Relational art
Video game art








Related articles



List of art movements
Modern art
Modernism
Late modernism
Postmodern art
Avant-garde
















v
t
e


Avant-garde movements






Visual art



Abstract expressionism
Art Nouveau
Conceptual art
Cubism
Proto-Cubism
Cubo-Futurism
De Stijl
Devětsil
Divisionism
Ego-Futurism
Fauvism
Impressionism
Neo-Impressionism
Post-Impressionism
Color Field
Lyrical Abstraction
Incoherents
Minimalism
Mail art
Neue Slowenische Kunst
Nonconformism
Pop art
Rayonism
Suprematism
Vorticism
Nouveau réalisme








Music



Aleatoric music
Ars subtilior
Atonal music
Avant-garde jazz
Avant-garde metal
Avant-prog
Drone music
Electroacoustic music
Electronic music
Experimental rock
Free jazz
Futurism (music)
Industrial music
Krautrock
Microtonal music
Minimal music
Musique concrète
New Complexity
No wave
Noise music
Post-rock
Progressive rock
Rock in Opposition
Second Viennese School
Serialism
Spectral music
Stochastic music
Textural music
Totalism
Twelve-tone technique








Literature and poetry



Acmeist poetry
Angry Penguins
Asemic writing
Cyberpunk
Experimental literature
Flarf poetry
Hungry generation
Imaginism
Language poets
Neoteric
Oberiu
Oulipo
Ultraísmo
Visual poetry
Nouveau roman








Cinema and theatre



Cinéma pur
Dogme 95
Drop Art
Epic theatre
Remodernist film
Theatre of the Absurd
Theatre of Cruelty








General



Bauhaus
Dada
Expressionism
Fluxus
Futurism
Lettrism
Modernism
Minimalism
Postminimalism
Neo-minimalism
Neo-Dada
Neoism
Postmodernism
Late modernism
Primitivism
Russian Futurism
Russian symbolism
Situationist International
Social realism
Socialist realism
Surrealism
Symbolism









 Book













					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Post-Impressionism&amp;oldid=690120559"					
				Categories: Post-ImpressionismModernismArt movementsEdwardian eraHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from May 2013All articles needing additional referencesCommons category with local link same as on Wikidata				
							
		
		
			