


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Quillwork
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				



Huron quillwork moccasin


Quillwork is a form of textile embellishment traditionally practiced by Native Americans that employs the quills of porcupines as an aesthetic element. Quills from bird feathers were also occasionally used in quillwork.



Contents


1 History
2 Technique
3 Today
4 See also
5 Notes
6 References
7 External links



History[edit]




Backside of loomed quillwork collected from an Upper Missouri tribe by the Lewis and Clark Expedition, pre-1804. All natural dyes. Collection of the University of Pennsylvania Museum


Porcupine quillwork is an art form completely unique to North America. Before the introduction of glass beads, quillwork was a major decorative element used by the peoples who resided in the porcupine's natural habitat,[1] which included indigenous peoples of the Subarctic, Northeastern Woodlands, and Northern Plains. The use of quills in designs spans from Maine to Alaska.[2] Quillworking tools were discovered in Alberta, Canada and date back to the 6th century CE.[3]
Cheyenne oral history, as told by Picking Bones Woman to George Bird Grinnell, says quilling came to their tribe from a man who married a woman, who hid her true identity as a buffalo. His son was also a buffalo. The man visited his wife and son in their buffalo home, and, while among the buffalo, the man learned the art of quilling, which he shared with the women of his tribe.[4]
Joining the Cheyenne Quilling Society was a prestigious honor for Cheyenne women. Upon entering the Society, women would work first on quilling moccasins, then cradleboards, rosettes for men's shirts and tipis, and ultimately, hide robes and backrests.[4]
Porcupine quills often adorned rawhide and tanned hides, but during the 19th century, quilled birch bark boxes were a popular trade item to sell to European-Americans among Eastern and Great Lakes tribes.
Technique[edit]




A quillwork knife sheath.


Quills suitable for embellishment are two to three inches long and may be dyed before use.[1] In their natural state, the quills are pale yellow to white with black tips. The tips are usually snipped off before use. Quills readily take dye, which originally was derived from local plants and included a wide spectrum of colors, with black, yellow, and red being the most common. By the 19th century, aniline dyes were available through trade and made dying easier.[5]
The quills can been flattened with specific bone tools or by being run through one's teeth. Awls were used to punch holes in hides, and sinew, later replaced by European thread, was used to bind the quills to the hides.
The four most common techniques for quillwork are appliqué, embroidery, wrapping, and loom weaving.[6] Appliquéd quills are stitched into hide in a manner that covers the stitches.[1] In wrapping, a single quill may be wrapped upon itself or two quills may be intertwined.[1]
Quills can be appliquéd singly to form curvilinear patterns, as found on Odawa pouches from the 18th century.[7] This technique lends itself to floral designs popularized among northeastern tribes by Ursuline nuns. Huron women excelled at floral quillwork during the 18th and 19th centuries.[8]
Plains quillwork is characterized by bands of rectangles creating geometrical patterns found also in Plains painting.[9] Rosettes of concentric circles of quillwork commonly adorned historical Plains men's shirts, as did parallel panels of quillwork on the sleeves. These highly abstracted designs had layers of symbolic meaning.
The Red River Ojibwe of Manitoba created crisp, geometric patterns by weaving quills on a loom in the 19th century.[10]
Today[edit]




Contemporary quillwork design on birch bark, by Ferdy Goode


Quillwork never died out as a living art form in the Northern Plains. Some communities that had lost their quillwork tradition have been able to revive the art form. For instance, no women quilled in the Dene community of Wha Ti, Northwest Territories by the late 1990s. The Dene Cultural Institute held two workshops there in 1999 and 2000, effectively reviving quillwork in Wha Ti.[11]
The art form is very much alive today. Examples of contemporary, award-winning quillworkers include Juanita Growing Thunder Fogarty, (Sioux-Assiniboine) artist;[12] Dorothy Brave Eagle (Oglala Lakota) of Denver, Colorado;[13] Kanatiiosh (Akwesasne Mohawk) of St. Regis Mohawk Reservation;[14][15] Sarah Hardisty (Dene) of Jean Marie River, Northwest Territories;[16] Leonda Fast Buffalo Horse (Blackfeet) of Browning, Montana;[17] and Deborah Magee Sherer (Blackfeet) of Cut Bank, Montana.[18]
Northern Lakes College of Alberta, Canada teaches a college-level course in quillwork art.
See also[edit]

Hair drop, men's ornaments typically featuring quillwork

Notes[edit]


^ a b c d Gillow and Sentance 223
^ Orchard
^ Dubin 265
^ a b Penney and Horse Capture 119
^ Feest 138
^ Feest 215
^ Vincent 15
^ Vincent 24
^ Feest 140
^ Vincent 28 and 43
^ Marie and Thompson, 29
^ Durbin 279 and 304
^ Melmer, David. "Quillwork: Lakota Style." Indian Country Today. 22 Sept 2004.
^ Native American Quillwork. Native Languages of the Americans. 2008 (retrieved 19 Feb 2009)
^ Roberts, Kathaleen. Native Costume. Journal Santa Fe. 3 Nov 2008. Retrieved 19 Feb 2009.
^ Menicoche, Kevin A. (March 3, 2014). "Kevin A. Menicoche on Condolences On The Passing Of Nahendeh Resident Sarah Hardisty". OpenNWT.&#160;
^ Leonda Fast Buffalo Horse: Quillwork. Montana Arts Council. (retrieved 19 Feb 2009)
^ Horse Capture 118-119


References[edit]

Dubin, Lois Sherr. North American Indian Jewelry and Adornment: From Prehistory to the Present. New York: Harry N. Abrams, Inc. Publishers, 1999. ISBN 0-8109-3689-5.
Feest, Christian F. Native Arts of North America. London: Thames and Hudson, 1992. ISBN 978-0-500-20262-3.
Gillow, John and Bryan Sentance (1999). World Textiles: A Visual Guide to Traditional Techniques. Thames &amp; Hudson. ISBN 978-0-500-28247-2.
Horse Capture, John D. et al. Beauty, Honor, and Tradition: The Legacy of Plains Indian Shirts. Washington DC: National Museum of the American Indian, 2001. ISBN 978-0-8166-3947-2.
Marie, Suzan and Judy Thompson. "Whadoo Themi: Long-Ago People's Packsack: Dene Babiche Bags: Tradition and Revival." Canadian Museum of Civilization Mercury Series. Ethnology Paper 141. 2004: 29
Orchard, William C. (1916). The Technique of Porcupine-Quill Decoration Among The North American Indians. The Museum of the American Indian Heye Foundation. ISBN 978-0-943604-00-8.
Penney, David W. and George Horse Capture. North American Indian Art. London: Thames &amp; Hudson, 2004. ISBN 978-0-500-20377-4.
Vincent, Gilbert T. Masterpieces of American Indian Art from the Eugene and Clare Thaw Collection. New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1995. ISBN 978-0-8109-2628-8.

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Quillwork.



Porcupine and bird quillwork, in the collection of the National Museum of the American Indian
Substantial material about quillwork from nativetech.org









v
t
e


Beadwork






Beads



Aggry beads
Bead
Chevron bead
Glass beadmaking
Faturan
Hair pipe
Heishe
Kiffa beads
Love beads
Millefiori
Murano beads
Peranakan cut beads
Powder glass beads
Seed bead
Sequin
Trade beads
Wampum











Tools and techniques



Bead crochet
Bead embroidery
Bead stringing
Bead weaving
Brick stitch
Peyote stitch
Right-angle weave
Square stitch








Bead artists



Richard Aitson
Marcus Amerman
Martha Berry
Chipeta
Juanita Growing Thunder Fogarty
Teri Greeves
Maude Kegg








Related



The Bead Museum
Dentalium shell
Quillwork
Peranakan beaded slippers
Tiger tail wire
Bead Game
















v
t
e


Embroidery






Styles



Assisi
Bargello
Berlin work
Blackwork
Broderie anglaise
Broderie perse
Candlewicking
Canvas work
Celtic cross stitch
Counted-thread
Crewel
Cross-stitch
Cutwork
Darning
Drawn thread work
Free embroidery
Goldwork
Hardanger
Machine
Needlepoint
Quillwork
Smocking
Stumpwork
Surface
Suzani
Whitework















Stitches



Backstitch
Blanket
Buttonhole
Chain stitch
Couching and laid work
Cross stitches
Embroidery stitch
Featherstitch
Holbein
Parisian
Running
Satin stitch
Sashiko
Shisha
Straight stitch
Tent stitch








Tools
and materials



Aida cloth
Embroidery hoop
Embroidery thread
Evenweave
Perforated paper
Plainweave
Plastic canvas
Sampler
Slip
Yarn








Regional
and historical



Art needlework
Bunka shishu
Brazilian
Chikan
Chinese
English
Indian
Jacobean
Kaitag
Kantha
Kasuti
Korean
Mountmellick
Nakshi kantha
Persian
Opus Anglicanum
Rushnyk
Ukrainian
Vietnamese
Vyshyvanka
Zardozi








Embroideries



Butler-Bowden Cope
Bayeux Tapestry
Bradford carpet
Hastings Embroidery
Hestia tapestry
Magna Carta (An Embroidery)
Margaret Laton's jacket
New World Tapestry
Overlord embroidery
Quaker Tapestry
Fragments of a Cope with the Seven Sacraments








Designers
and embroiderers



Emilie Bach
Leon Conrad
Kaffe Fassett
Juanita Growing Thunder Fogarty
Marilyn Leavitt-Imblum
François Lesage
Ann Macbeth
May Morris
Jessie Newbery
Charles Germain de Saint Aubin
Mary Elizabeth Turner
Teresa Wentzler
Kathleen Whyte
Erica Wilson
Lily Yeats








Organizations
and museums



Embroiderers' Guild (UK)
Embroiderer's Guild of America
Embroidery Software Protection Coalition
Needlework Development Scheme
Royal School of Needlework
Chung Young Yang Embroidery Museum
Han Sang Soo Embroidery Museum








Related



Appliqué
Crochet
Knitting
Lace
Needlework
Quilting















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Quillwork&amp;oldid=687368796"					
				Categories: EmbroideryGreat Lakes tribal cultureIndigenous culture of the Great PlainsNative American artPorcupinesIndigenous textile art of the AmericasHidden categories: Commons category with page title same as on Wikidata				
							
		
		
			