


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Realism (art movement)
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				This article is about the 19th-century art movement.  For naturalism or realism in the arts, see Realism (arts).




James Abbot McNeill Whistler, Nocturne: Blue and Gold - Old Battersea Bridge (1872), Tate Britain, London, England


Realism was an artistic movement that began in France in the 1850s, after the 1848 Revolution.[1] Realists rejected Romanticism, which had dominated French literature and art since the late 18th century. Realism revolted against the exotic subject matter and exaggerated emotionalism and drama of the Romantic movement. Instead it sought to portray real and typical contemporary people and situations with truth and accuracy, and not avoiding unpleasant or sordid aspects of life. Realist works depicted people of all classes in situations that arise in ordinary life, and often reflected the changes brought by the Industrial and Commercial Revolutions. The popularity of such "realistic" works grew with the introduction of photography — a new visual source that created a desire for people to produce representations which look objectively real.
The Realists depicted everyday subjects and situations in contemporary settings, and attempted to depict individuals of all social classes in a similar manner. Classical idealism and Romantic emotionalism and drama were avoided equally, and often sordid or untidy elements of subjects were not smoothed over or omitted. Social realism emphasizes the depiction of the working class, and treating them with the same seriousness as other classes in art, but realism, as the avoidance of artificiality, in the treatment of human relations and emotions was also an aim of Realism. Treatments of subjects in a heroic or sentimental manner were equally rejected.[2]
Realism as an art movement was led by Courbet in France. It spread across Europe and was influential for the rest of the century and beyond, but as it became adopted into the mainstream of painting it becomes less common and useful as a term to define artistic style. After the arrival of Impressionism and later movements which downgraded the importance of precise illusionistic brushwork, it often came to refer simply to the use of a more traditional and tighter painting style. It has been used for a number of later movements and trends in art, some involving careful illusionistic representation, such as Photorealism, and others the depiction of "realist" subject matter in a social sense, or attempts at both.



Contents


1 Beginnings in France
2 Beyond France
3 References
4 External links



Beginnings in France[edit]




Bonjour, Monsieur Courbet, 1854. A Realist painting by Gustave Courbet.


The Realist movement began in the mid-19th century as a reaction to Romanticism and History painting. In favor of depictions of 'real' life, the Realist painters used common laborers, and ordinary people in ordinary surroundings engaged in real activities as subjects for their works. The chief exponents of Realism were Gustave Courbet, Jean-François Millet, Honoré Daumier, and Jean-Baptiste-Camille Corot.[3][4][5]
Realists used unprettified detail depicting the existence of ordinary contemporary life, coinciding in the contemporaneous naturalist literature of Émile Zola, Honoré de Balzac, and Gustave Flaubert.[6]
Courbet was the leading proponent of Realism and he challenged the popular history painting that was favored at the state-sponsored art academy. His groundbreaking paintings A Burial at Ornans and The Stonebreakers depicted ordinary people from his native region. The paintings were done on huge canvases that would typically be used for history paintings.[7]







Gustave Courbet, A Burial At Ornans, 1849









Jean-François Millet, The Gleaners, 1857









Honoré Daumier, The Third Class Wagon, 1862–64









Gustave Courbet, The Stone Breakers, 1849









Gustave Courbet, After Dinner at Ornans, 1849









Jean-François Millet, The Sower, 1850









Gustave Courbet, Le Sommeil (Sleep), 1866, Petit Palais, Musée des Beaux-Arts de la Ville de Paris









Jean-Baptiste-Camille Corot, Young Girl Reading, 1868, National Gallery of Art[8]









Édouard Manet, Breakfast in the Studio (the Black Jacket), New Pinakothek, Munich, Germany, 1868









Jean-François Millet, A Norman Milkmaid at Gréville, 1871









Jules Breton, The Song of the Lark, 1884









Jules Breton, The End of the Working Day, 1886–87




Beyond France[edit]
The French Realist movement had stylistic and ideological equivalents in all other Western countries, developing somewhat later. In particular the Peredvizhniki or Wanderers group in Russia who formed in the 1860s and organized exhibitions from 1871 included many realists such as Ilya Repin, and had a great influence on Russian art. In Britain artists such as the American James Abbot McNeill Whistler, as well as English artists Hubert von Herkomer and Luke Fildes had great success with realist paintings dealing with social issues and depictions of the "real" world. The Ashcan School, an art movement largely based in New York City, included such artists as George Bellows and Robert Henri. It helped to define American realism in its tendency to depict the daily life of poorer members of society.







Illarion Pryanishnikov, Jokers. Gostiny Dvor in Moscow, 1865









Vladimir Makovsky, "Philanthropists", 1874









Ilya Repin, Religious Procession in Kursk Province, 1880–83









Ilya Repin, Barge Haulers on the Volga, 1870–73









Hubert von Herkomer, Hard Times, 1885









Everett Shinn, Cross Streets of New York, 1899, Corcoran Gallery of Art, Washington, DC









Robert Henri, Snow in New York, 1902, National Gallery of Art, Washington, DC









John French Sloan, McSorley's Bar, 1912, Detroit Institute of Arts




References[edit]


^ Metropolitan Museum of Art
^ Finocchio, Ross. "Nineteenth-Century French Realism". In Heilbrunn Timeline of Art History. New York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art, 2000–. online (October 2004)
^ NGA Realism movement
^ National Gallery glossary, Realism movement
^ Philosophy of Realism
^ http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/rlsm/hd_rlsm.htm
^ http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/rlsm/hd_rlsm.htm
^ National Gallery of Art


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Realism.



19th Century French Realism, Heilbrunn Timeline of Art History, Metropolitan Museum of Art









v
t
e


Art movements






Medieval



Byzantine
Merovingian
Carolingian
Ottonian
Romanesque
Gothic (International Gothic)








Renaissance



Early Netherlandish
High Renaissance
Mannerism








17th century



Baroque
Caravaggisti
Classicism
Dutch Golden Age








18th century



Rococo
Neoclassicism
Romanticism








19th century



Nazarene
Realism / Realism
Historicism
Biedermeier
Gründerzeit
Barbizon school
Pre-Raphaelites
Academic
Aestheticism
Decadent
Macchiaioli
Art Nouveau
Peredvizhniki
Impressionism
Post-Impressionism
Neo-impressionism
Divisionism
Pointillism
Cloisonnism
Les Nabis
Synthetism
Kalighat painting
Symbolism
Hudson River School








20th century



Bengal School of Art
Amazonian pop art
Cubism
Orphism
Purism
Synchromism
Expressionism
Scuola Romana
Abstract expressionism
Kinetic art
Neue Künstlervereinigung München
Der Blaue Reiter
Die Brücke
New Objectivity
Dada
Fauvism
Neo-Fauvism
Precisionism
Bauhaus
De Stijl
Art Deco
Op art
Vienna School of Fantastic Realism
Pop art
Photorealism
Futurism
Metaphysical art
Rayonism
Vorticism
Suprematism
Surrealism
Color Field
Minimalism
Minimalism (visual arts)
Nouveau réalisme
Social realism
Lyrical abstraction
Tachisme
COBRA
Action painting
International Typographic Style
Fluxus
Lettrism
Letterist International
Situationist International
Conceptual art
Installation art
Land art
Performance art
Endurance art
Systems art
Video art
Neo-expressionism
Neo-Dada
Outsider art
Lowbrow
New media art
Young British Artists








21st century



Art intervention
Hyperrealism
Neo-futurism
Stuckism International
Remodernism
Sound art
Superstroke
Superflat
Relational art
Video game art








Related articles



List of art movements
Modern art
Modernism
Late modernism
Postmodern art
Avant-garde















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Realism_(art_movement)&amp;oldid=688176414"					
				Categories: Art historyRealism (art movement)American art movementsFrench art movementsRussian art movementsSocial realismPeredvizhnikiVisual arts theoryHidden categories: Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata				
							
		
		
			