


		
		
		
			

							
						


			Seven Wonders of the Ancient World
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
This is the latest accepted revision, reviewed on 23 November 2015.



												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				



The Seven Wonders of the Ancient World (from left to right, top to bottom): Great Pyramid of Giza, Hanging Gardens of Babylon, Temple of Artemis, Statue of Zeus at Olympia, Mausoleum at Halicarnassus, Colossus of Rhodes, and the Lighthouse of Alexandria as depicted by 16th-century Dutch artist Maarten van Heemskerck.


The Seven Wonders of the World or the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World refers to remarkable constructions of classical antiquity[1] listed by various authors in guidebooks popular among ancient Hellenic tourists, particularly in the 1st and 2nd centuries BC. The most prominent of these, the versions by Antipater of Sidon[2] and an observer identified as Philo of Byzantium, comprise seven works located around the eastern Mediterranean rim. The original list inspired innumerable versions through the ages, often listing seven entries. Of the original Seven Wonders, only one—the Great Pyramid of Giza, the oldest of the ancient wonders—remains relatively intact. The Colossus of Rhodes, the Lighthouse of Alexandria, the Mausoleum at Halicarnassus, the Temple of Artemis and the Statue of Zeus were all destroyed. The location and ultimate fate of the Hanging Gardens are unknown, with speculation that they may not have existed at all.



Contents


1 Background
2 Scope
3 The Seven Ancient Wonders
4 Influence

4.1 Arts and architecture
4.2 Modern lists


5 See also
6 References
7 Further reading
8 External links



Background[edit]




The Great Pyramid of Giza, the only one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World still standing.






In this painting by Maerten van Heemskerck, the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World are depicted as a background for the abduction of Helen by Paris.[3] The Walters Art Museum.


The Greek conquest of much of the known western world in the 4th century BC gave Hellenistic travellers access to the civilizations of the Egyptians, Persians, and Babylonians.[4] Impressed and captivated by the landmarks and marvels of the various lands, these travellers began to list what they saw to remember them.[5][6]
Instead of "wonders", the ancient Greeks spoke of "theamata" (θεάματα), which means "sights", in other words "things to be seen" (Τὰ ἑπτὰ θεάματα τῆς οἰκουμένης [γῆς] Tà heptà theámata tēs oikoumenēs [gēs]). Later, the word for "wonder" ("thaumata" θαύματα, "wonders") was used.[7] Hence, the list was meant to be the Ancient World's counterpart of a travel guidebook.[4]
Each person had their own version of the list, but the best known and earliest surviving was from a poem by Greek-speaking epigrammist Antipater of Sidon from around 140 BC.[6] He named six of the seven sites on his list (leaving out the lighthouse), but was primarily in praise of the Temple of Artemis at Ephesus:

I have gazed on the walls of impregnable Babylon along which chariots may race, and on the Zeus by the banks of the Alpheus, I have seen the hanging gardens, and the Colossus of the Helios, the great man-made mountains of the lofty pyramids, and the gigantic tomb of Mausolus; but when I saw the sacred house of Artemis that towers to the clouds, the others were placed in the shade, for the sun himself has never looked upon its equal outside Olympus.
— Greek Anthology IX.58


Another 2nd century BC observer, who claimed to be the mathematician Philo of Byzantium,[8] wrote a short account entitled The Seven Sights of the World. However, the incomplete surviving manuscript only covered six of the supposedly seven places, which agreed with Antipater's list.[6]
Earlier and later lists by the historian Herodotus (484 BC–ca. 425 BC) and the architect Callimachus of Cyrene (ca. 305–240 BC), housed at the Museum of Alexandria, survived only as references.
The Colossus of Rhodes was the last of the seven to be completed, after 280 BC, and the first to be destroyed, by an earthquake in 226/225 BC. Hence, all seven existed at the same time for a period of less than 60 years. Antipater had an earlier version which replaced Lighthouse of Alexandria with the Walls of Babylon.[6] Lists which preceded the construction of Colossus of Rhodes completed their seven entries with the inclusion of the Ishtar Gate.
Scope[edit]
The list covered only the sculptural and architectural monuments of the Mediterranean and Middle Eastern regions,[8] which then comprised the known world for the Greeks. Hence, extant sites beyond this realm were not considered as part of contemporary accounts.[4]
The primary accounts, coming from Hellenistic writers, also heavily influenced the places included in the wonders list. Five of the seven entries are a celebration of Greek accomplishments in the arts and architecture (the exceptions being the Pyramids of Giza and the Hanging Gardens of Babylon).
The Seven Ancient Wonders[edit]


Name
Date of construction
Builder
Date of destruction
Cause of destruction
Modern location


Great Pyramid of Giza
2584–2561 BC
Egyptians
Still in existence, majority of façade gone
Giza Necropolis, Egypt


Hanging Gardens of Babylon
(existence unresolved) [9]

Circa 600 BC (evident)
Babylonians or Assyrians
After 1st century AD

Hillah or Nineveh, Iraq


Temple of Artemis at Ephesus
Circa 550 BC; and again at 323 BC
Greeks, Lydians
356 BC (by Herostratus)
AD 262 (by the Goths)
Arson by Herostratus, plundering
Near Selçuk, Izmir Province, Turkey


Statue of Zeus at Olympia
466–456 BC (temple)
435 BC (statue)
Greeks
5th–6th centuries AD
Disassembled and reassembled at Constantinople; later destroyed by fire
Olympia, Greece


Mausoleum at Halicarnassus
351 BC
Persians, Carians
12th-15th century AD
Earthquakes
Bodrum, Turkey


Colossus of Rhodes
292–280 BC
Greeks
226 BC
226 BC Rhodes earthquake
Rhodes, Greece


Lighthouse of Alexandria
Circa 280 BC
Greeks, Ptolemaic Egyptians
AD 1303–1480
1303 Crete earthquake
Alexandria, Egypt



Influence[edit]
Arts and architecture[edit]




A map showing the location of the seven wonders of the ancient world.


The seven wonders on Antipater's list won praises for their notable features, ranging from superlatives of the highest or largest of their types, to the artistry with which they were executed. Their architectural and artistic features were imitated throughout the Hellenistic world and beyond.
The Greek influence in Roman culture, and the revival of Greco-Roman artistic styles during the Renaissance caught the imagination of European artists and travellers.[10] Paintings and sculptures alluding to Antipater's list were made, while adventurers flocked to the actual sites to personally witness the wonders. Legends circulated to further complement the superlatives of the wonders.
Modern lists[edit]
Of Antipater's wonders, the only one that has survived to the present day is the Great Pyramid of Giza. Its brilliant white stone facing had survived intact until around 1300 AD, when local communities removed most of the stonework for building materials. The existence of the Hanging Gardens has not been proven, although theories abound.[11] Records and archaeology confirm the existence of the other five wonders. The Temple of Artemis and the Statue of Zeus were destroyed by fire, while the Lighthouse of Alexandria, Colossus, and tomb of Mausolus were destroyed by earthquakes. Among the artifacts to have survived are sculptures from the tomb of Mausolus and the Temple of Artemis in the British Museum in London.
Still, the listing of seven of the most marvellous architectural and artistic human achievements continued beyond the Ancient Greek times to the Roman Empire, the Middle Ages, the Renaissance and to the modern age. The Roman poet Martial and the Christian bishop Gregory of Tours had their versions.[4] Reflecting the rise of Christianity and the factor of time, nature and the hand of man overcoming Antipater's seven wonders, Roman and Christian sites began to figure on the list, including the Colosseum, Noah's Ark and Solomon's Temple.[4][6] In the 6th century, a list of seven wonders was compiled by St. Gregory of Tours: the list[12] included the Temple of Solomon, the Pharos of Alexandria and Noah's Ark.
Modern historians, working on the premise that the original Seven Ancient Wonders List was limited in its geographic scope, also had their versions to encompass sites beyond the Hellenistic realm—from the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World to the Seven Wonders of the World. Indeed, the "seven wonders" label has spawned innumerable versions among international organizations, publications and individuals based on different themes—works of nature, engineering masterpieces, constructions of the Middle Ages, etc. Its purpose has also changed from just a simple travel guidebook or a compendium of curious places, to lists of sites to defend or to preserve.
See also[edit]

Eighth Wonder of the World, about attempted additions to the famous ancient list.
Wonders of the World, about similar lists made throughout the ages.

References[edit]


^ Anon. (1993), The Oxford Illustrated Encyclopedia, First Edition, Oxford: Oxford University.
^ Antipater, Greek Anthology IX.58
^ "Panorama with the Abduction of Helen Amidst the Wonders of the Ancient World". The Walters Art Museum.&#160;
^ a b c d e "The Seven Wonders of the Ancient World". Retrieved 2009-09-14.&#160;
^ "History of the Past: World History".&#160;
^ a b c d e Paul Lunde (May–June 1980). "The Seven Wonders". Saudi Aramco World. Retrieved 2009-09-12.&#160;
^ Clayton, Peter; Martin J. Price (1990). The Seven Wonders of the Ancient World. Routledge. p.&#160;4. ISBN&#160;978-0-415-05036-4.&#160;
^ a b The New Encyclopædia Britannica Micropædia Volume 10. USA: Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. 1995. p.&#160;666. ISBN&#160;0-85229-605-3.&#160;
^ There is some conjecture as to whether the Hanging Gardens actually existed, or were purely legendary (see Finkel, Irving (1988) “The Hanging Gardens of Babylon,” In The Seven Wonders of the Ancient World, Edited by Peter Clayton and Martin Price, Routledge, New York, pp.&#160;38 ff. ISBN 0-415-05036-7).
^ "Wonders of Europe". Retrieved 2009-09-14.&#160;
^ Stephanie Dalley (2013), The Mystery of the Hanging Garden of Babylon: an elusive World wonder traced. OUP ISBN 978-0-19-966226-5
^ Clayton, Peter and Price, Martin: The Seven Wonders of the Ancient World (Routledge, 1988), pp. 162–163.


Further reading[edit]

D'Epiro, Peter, and Mary Desmond Pinkowish, "What Are the Seven Wonders of the World? and 100 Other Great Cultural Lists". Anchor. 1 December 1998. ISBN 0-385-49062-3
"The Seven Wonders of the World, a History of Modern Imagination" written by John &amp; Elizabeth Romer in 1995
"The Seven Wonders of the Ancient World" edited by Peter Clayton and Martin Price in 1988
Johann Conrad Orelli (ed.) Philonis Byzantini Libellus de septem orbis spectaculis. 1816. The original travel guide by Pseudo-Philo
Lendering, Jona (2007–2010). "Seven Wonders of the Ancient World". Livius.Org. Retrieved 28 July 2012.&#160;

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Seven Wonders of the World.



"Seven Ancient Wonders of the World" on The History Channel website. Also includes links to medieval, modern and natural wonders.
Parkin, Tim, Researching Ancient Wonders: A Research Guide, from the University of Canterbury, New Zealand. – a collection of books and Internet resources with information on seven ancient wonders.
"Eternal wonder of humanity's first great achievements", by Jonathan Glancey in The Guardian, 10 March 2007









v
t
e


Seven Wonders of the Ancient World









Great Pyramid of Giza
Hanging Gardens of Babylon
Statue of Zeus at Olympia
Temple of Artemis
Mausoleum at Halicarnassus
Colossus of Rhodes
Lighthouse of Alexandria













Authority control



GND: 4121670-2
SUDOC: 02977084X
BNF: cb12132325w (data)

















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Seven_Wonders_of_the_Ancient_World&amp;oldid=692081795"					
				Categories: Ancient historyFormer buildings and structuresCultural listsAncient technologyHidden categories: Wikipedia pending changes protected pages (level 1)Wikipedia protected pages without expiryArticles containing Ancient Greek-language textCommons category with local link same as on WikidataWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers				
							
		
		
			