


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Shalmaneser III
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				







This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page.








This article includes a list of references, but its sources remain unclear because it has insufficient inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (October 2012)







This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2012)










Shalmaneser III


Assyrian



Statue of Shalmaneser III at Istanbul Archaeological Museums



Reign
859–824 BC


Predecessor
Ashurnasirpal II


Successor
Shamshi-Adad V


Father
Ashurnasirpal II


Shalmaneser III (Šulmānu-ašarēdu, "the god Shulmanu is pre-eminent") was king of Assyria (859–824 BC), and son of the previous ruler, Ashurnasirpal II.[1]
His long reign was a constant series of campaigns against the eastern tribes, the Babylonians, the nations of Mesopotamia and Syria, as well as Kizzuwadna and Urartu. His armies penetrated to Lake Van and the Taurus Mountains; the Hittites of Carchemish were compelled to pay tribute, and the kingdoms of Hamath and Aram Damascus were subdued.



Contents


1 Reign

1.1 Campaigns
1.2 Against Israel
1.3 Against Tibareni
1.4 Later campaigns


2 In Biblical studies
3 Construction and the Black Obelisk
4 See also
5 References
6 Sources
7 External links



Reign[edit]




Kurkh stela of morates the battle of Carcar.






Rock relief of Shalmaneser near Tigristunnel


Campaigns[edit]
In 853 BC, a coalition was formed by 11 states, mainly by Hadadezer (Hadad-ezer) king of Damascus, Irluheni king of Hamath, Ahab king of Israel, Gindibu king of Arabs, and some other rulers who fought the Assyrian king at the Battle of Qarqar. The result of the battle was not decisive, and Shalmaneser III had to fight his enemies several times again in the coming years, which later resulted in the occupation of Syria by the Assyrians.
Against Israel[edit]





This section does not cite any references (sources). Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2015)






Jehu bows before Shalmaneser III.


In 842 BC, Shalmaneser campaigned against Hadadezer's successor Hazael, forcing him to take refuge within the walls of his capital. While Shalmaneser was unable to capture Damascus, he devastated its territory, and Jehu of Israel (whose ambassadors are represented on the Black Obelisk now in the British Museum), together with the Phoenician cities, prudently sent tribute to him in 841 BC. Babylonia had already been conquered as far as the marshes of the Chaldaeans in the south, and the Babylonian king had been put to death.
Against Tibareni[edit]





This section does not cite any references (sources). Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2015)


In 836 BC, Shalmaneser sent an expedition against the Tibareni (Tabal) which was followed by one against Cappadocia, and in 832 BC came another campaign against Urartu. In the following year, age required the king to hand over the command of his armies to the Tartan (turtānu commander-in-chief) Dayyan-Assur, and six years later, Nineveh and other cities revolted against him under his rebel son Assur-danin-pal. Civil war continued for two years; but the rebellion was at last crushed by Shamshi-Adad V, another son of Shalmaneser. Shalmaneser died soon afterwards.
Later campaigns[edit]




The Campaigns of Shalmanesar III


Despite the reverses later in his reign, Shalmanesar had proven capable of expanding the frontiers of the Neo-Assyrian Empire, stabilising its hold over the Khabur and Mountainous frontier region of the Zagros, contested with Urartu. His reign saw the first appearance in history of the camel-mounted Arabs.
In Biblical studies[edit]





This section does not cite any references (sources). Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2015)


His reign is significant to Biblical studies because two of his monuments name rulers from Hebrew Bible. The Black Obelisk names Jehu son of Omri (although Jehu was misidentified as a son of Omri), and the Kurkh Monolith names king Ahab, in reference to the Battle of Qarqar.
Construction and the Black Obelisk[edit]




Black Obelisk of Shalmaneser III in the British Museum.


He had built a palace at Calah, and left several editions of the royal annals recording his military campaigns, the last of which is engraved on the Black Obelisk from Calah.




The upper end of the Black Obelisk of Shalmaneser III, from Nimrud, Mesopotamia..


The Black Obelisk is a significant artifact from his reign. It is a black limestone, bas-relief sculpture from Nimrud (ancient Kalhu), in northern Iraq. It is the most complete Assyrian obelisk yet discovered, and is historically significant because it displays the earliest ancient depiction of an Israelite. On the top and the bottom of the reliefs there is a long cuneiform inscription recording the annals of Shalmaneser III. It lists the military campaigns which the king and his commander-in-chief headed every year, until the thirty-first year of reign. Some features might suggest that the work had been commissioned by the commander-in-chief, Dayyan-Assur.
The second register from the top includes the earliest surviving picture of an Israelite: the Biblical Jehu, king of Israel. Jehu severed Israel's alliances with Phoenicia and Judah, and became subject to Assyria. It describes how Jehu brought or sent his tribute in or around 841 BC.[citation needed] The caption above the scene, written in Assyrian cuneiform, can be translated:

"The tribute of Jehu, son of Omri: I received from him silver, gold, a golden bowl, a golden vase with pointed bottom, golden tumblers, golden buckets, tin, a staff for a king [and] spears."

It was erected as a public monument in 825 BC at a time of civil war. It was discovered by archaeologist Sir Austen Henry Layard in 1846.
See also[edit]

List of artifacts significant to the Bible
Black Obelisk of Shalmaneser III
Short chronology timeline

References[edit]


^ "Black Obelisk of Shalmaneser II". Mcadams.posc.mu.edu. Retrieved 26 October 2012.&#160;


Sources[edit]

1911 Encyclopædia Britannica

External links[edit]
 Media related to Shalmaneser III at Wikimedia Commons

Gates of Shalmanser III and Assunasirpal. Bronze Reliefs from the Gates of Shalmaneser King of Assyria
Black Obelisk of Shalmaneser III Babylonian and Assyrian Literature.
Black Obelisk of Shalmaneser III



Preceded&#160;by
Ashurnasirpal II
King of Assyria
859–824 BC
Succeeded&#160;by
Shamshi-Adad V










v
t
e


Assyrian kings






Early Bronze Age




"Kings who lived in tents"
(ca. 2500 – 2000 BC)



Tudiya
Adamu
Yangi
Suhlamu
Harharu
Mandaru
Imsu
Harsu
Didanu
Hana
Zuabu
Nuabu
Abazu
Belu
Azarah
Ushpia
Apiashal








"Kings who were forefathers"
(ca. 2000 BC)



Apiashal
Hale
Samani
Hayani
Ilu-Mer
Yakmesi
Yakmeni
Yazkur-el
Ila-kabkabu
Aminu








"Kings whose eponyms are destroyed"
(ca. 2000 – 1900 BC)



Sulili
Kikkia
Akiya
Puzur-Ashur I
Shallim-ahhe
Ilushuma











Middle Bronze Age




Old Assyrian period
(ca. 1906 – 1380 BC)



Erishum I
Ikunum
Sargon I
Puzur-Ashur II
Naram-Suen
Erishum II
Shamshi-Adad I
Ishme-Dagan I
Mut-Ashkur
Rimush
Asinum
(Seven usurpers: Ashur-dugul
Ashur-apla-idi
Nasir-Sin
Sin-namir
Ipqi-Ishtar
Adad-salulu
Adasi)
Bel-bani
Libaya
Sharma-Adad I
Iptar-Sin
Bazaya
Lullaya
Shu-Ninua
Sharma-Adad II
Erishum III
Shamshi-Adad II
Ishme-Dagan II
Shamshi-Adad III
Ashur-nirari I
Puzur-Ashur III
Enlil-nasir I
Nur-ili
Ashur-shaduni
Ashur-rabi I
Ashur-nadin-ahhe I
Enlil-nasir II
Ashur-nirari II
Ashur-bel-nisheshu
Ashur-rim-nisheshu
Ashur-nadin-ahhe II











Late Bronze Age




Middle Assyrian period
(ca. 1353 – 1180 BC)



Eriba-Adad I
Ashur-uballit I
Enlil-nirari
Arik-den-ili
Adad-nirari I
Shalmaneser I
Tukulti-Ninurta I
Ashur-nadin-apli
Ashur-nirari III
Enlil-kudurri-usur
Ninurta-apal-Ekur











Iron Age




Middle Assyrian period
(ca. 1179 – 912 BC)



Ashur-Dan I
Ninurta-tukulti-Ashur
Mutakkil-nusku
Ashur-resh-ishi I
Tiglath-Pileser I
Asharid-apal-Ekur
Ashur-bel-kala
Eriba-Adad II
Shamshi-Adad IV
Ashur-nasir-pal I
Shalmaneser II
Ashur-nirari IV
Ashur-rabi II
Ashur-resh-ishi II
Tiglath-Pileser II
Ashur-Dan II








Neo-Assyrian Empire
(ca. 912 – 609 BC)



Adad-nirari II
Tukulti-Ninurta II
Ashur-nasir-pal II
Shalmaneser III
Shamshi-Adad V
Shammu-ramat (regent)
Adad-nirari III
Shalmaneser IV
Ashur-Dan III
Ashur-nirari V
Tiglath-Pileser III
Shalmaneser V
Sargon II
Sennacherib
Esarhaddon
Ashurbanipal
Ashur-etil-ilani
Sin-shumu-lishir
Sin-shar-ishkun
Ashur-uballit II
















Authority control



VIAF: 23024171
GND: 122469747















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Shalmaneser_III&amp;oldid=685296725"					
				Categories: Assyrian kings820s BC deathsHidden categories: Articles lacking in-text citations from October 2012All articles lacking in-text citationsArticles needing additional references from October 2012All articles needing additional referencesArticles needing additional references from October 2015All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from April 2009Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersYear of birth unknown				
							
		
		
			