


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Somali art
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								  (Redirected from Art of Somalia)
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				




Part of a series on the


Culture of Somalia


Culture




Architecture
Art
Cinema
Cuisine
History
Literature
Maritime
Media
Music
Folklore
Religion
Sport
Tourism
Traditions




People




Somalis
Italian Somalis
Benadiris
Bravanese
Bajunis
Bantus




Religion




Islam
Christianity
Traditional faiths




Language




Arabic
Somali




Politics




Parliament
Military
Economy
Laws
Symbols
Transportation
Communications
Education






Somalia portal







v
t
e





Somali art is the artistic culture of the Somali people, both historic and contemporary. These include artistic traditions in pottery, music, architecture, woodcarving and other genres. Somali art is characterized by its aniconism, partly as a result of the vestigial influence of the pre-Islamic mythology of the Somalis coupled with their ubiquitous Muslim beliefs. However, there have been cases in the past of artistic depictions representing living creatures such as the golden birds on the Mogadishan canopies, the ancient rock paintings in northern Somalia, and the plant decorations on religious tombs in southern Somalia, but these are considered rare. Instead, intricate patterns and geometric designs, bold colors and monumental architecture was the norm.



Contents


1 History

1.1 Carving
1.2 Textile
1.3 Pottery
1.4 Metalwork
1.5 Architecture


2 References



History[edit]




Ancient rock art depicting a camel.


The oldest evidence of art in the Somali peninsula are pre-historic rock paintings. The rock art of Laas Geel are thought to be some of the best preserved in Africa, representing cows in ceremonial robes accompanied by humans. The necks of the cows are embellished with a kind of plastron, some of the cows are depicted as wearing decorative robes. The paintings not only show cows, but also a domesticated dogs, several paintings of canidae and a giraffe.[1]
Aspects of ancient Somali styles of architecture and art can be seen in the various Somali civilizations that flourished under Islam, particularly during the Mogadishan Golden Age and the Empire of Ajuran period (especially in the domain of architecture). In the early modern and contemporary era, poetry and theatrical ventures shaped much of today's Somali artistic culture.
Carving[edit]
Carving, known in Somali as qoris, is a much respected profession in Somalia both in historic and modern times. Many wealthy urbanites in the medieval period regularly employed the finest wood and marble carvers in Somalia to work on their interiors and houses. The carvings on the mihrabs and pillars of ancient Somali mosques are some of the oldest on the continent. Artistic carving was considered the province of men similar to how the Somali textile industry was mainly a women's business. Amongst the nomads, carving, especially woodwork, was widespread and could be found on the most basic objects such as spoons, combs and bowls, but it also included more complex structures such as the portable nomadic house, the aqal. In the last several decades, traditional carving of windows, doors and furniture has taken a backseat to the introduction of workshops employing electrical machinery which deliver the same results in a far shorter time period.[2]
Textile[edit]
The textile culture of Somalia is an ancient one, and the Somali textile center in Mogadishu was, from at least the 13th century to the late 19th century, considered to be one of the main textile hubs in the Indian Ocean. It competed with those of the Indians and later the Americans in domestic and foreign markets such as Egypt and Syria.[3]
Pottery[edit]



This section is empty. You can help by adding to it. (January 2011)


Metalwork[edit]
The goldsmiths and blacksmiths of the urban cities, though often shunned by the dominant nomadic culture for their occupation, fashioned the city-dwellers' traditional display of wealth and power through ornaments such as jewelry in the case of women, or the intricately designed Somali dagger (toraay) in the case of men.
Architecture[edit]
Main article: Architecture of Somalia




Almnara Tower, Somalia.


Somali architecture is a rich and diverse tradition of engineering and designing multiple different construction types such as stone cities, castles, citadels, fortresses, mosques, temples, aqueducts, lighthouses, towers and tombs during the ancient, medieval and early modern periods in Somalia, as well as the fusion of Somalo-Islamic architecture with Occidental designs in contemporary times.
In ancient Somalia, pyramidical structures known in Somali as taalo were a popular burial style, with hundreds of these drystone monuments scattered around the country today. Houses were built of dressed stone similar to the ones in Ancient Egypt,[4] and there are examples of courtyards and large stone walls such as the Wargaade Wall enclosing settlements.
The adoption of Islam in the early medieval era of Somalia's history brought Islamic architectural influences from Arabia and Persia, which stimulated a shift from drystone and other related materials in construction to coral stone, sundried bricks, and the widespread use of limestone in Somali architecture. Many of the new architectural designs such as mosques were built on the ruins of older structures, a practice that would continue over and over again throughout the following centuries.[5]
Visual Art is not new to the Somali communities. Visual art namely paintings focus on rural landscapes,and colorful paintings of the cultural life. Some of the known visual artists display their skills through their presence on Somali web sites. Visual Art is emerging as a new chapter in the history of Somali culture. When we talk about art, our attention is immediately drawn into performing art. Indeed for some people, visual art is interpreted as anti religion, since it involves a corporal creation of a human being. There are very few Somali Visual Artists. They are under represented in the world of Modern African Art. Some of the known Somali Visual artists had created their own web sites such as www.osmanart.net/ This webpage is run by a Somali Physician Artist and writer - Mohamed Buwe Osman. There are many Somali visual artists like the well known to most of the Somals Mr. Amin Amir and Abdul Arts. There are as well visual with college degree in Art like Mr. Ali Halane Kulmiye and Mr. Aziz.
References[edit]


^ The Journal of African Archeology Volume 1.2 (2003) Chapter 3
^ Culture and customs of Somalia By Mohamed Diriye Abdullahi pg 97
^ Mohamed Diriye Abdullahi(2001) pg 100
^ Man, God and Civilization pg 216
^ Diriye, p.102










v
t
e


African art






Sovereign states



Algeria
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of the Congo
Ivory Coast
Djibouti
Egypt
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gabon
The Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
São Tomé and Príncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
South Sudan
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Tunisia
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe









States with limited
recognition




Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic
Somaliland









Dependencies and
other territories




Canary Islands&#160;/ Ceuta&#160;/ Melilla&#160;/ Plazas de soberanía&#160;(Spain)
Madeira&#160;(Portugal)
Mayotte&#160;/ Réunion&#160;(France)
Saint Helena&#160;/ Ascension Island&#160;/ Tristan da Cunha&#160;(United Kingdom)















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Somali_art&amp;oldid=690781285"					
				Categories: Somalian cultureHidden categories: Articles to be expanded from January 2011All articles to be expandedArticles with empty sections from January 2011All articles with empty sectionsRegion topic template using suffix				
							
		
		
			