


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Sudan
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				This article is about the country.  For the geographical region, see Sudan (region).
"North Sudan" redirects here. For the Kingdom of North Sudan, see Bir Tawil.
For other uses, see Sudan (disambiguation).


Republic of the Sudan
جمهورية السودان
Jumhūrīyat as-Sūdān










Flag
Emblem





Motto:&#160;النصر لنا&#160;(Arabic)
"An-Naṣr lanā"
"Victory is ours"


Anthem:&#160;


نحن جند الله، جند الوطن
Naḥnu Jund Allah, Jund Al-waṭan&#160;&#160;(transliteration)
We are the Soldiers of God, the Soldiers of the Motherland


Sorry, your browser either has JavaScript disabled or does not have any supported player.
You can download the clip or download a player to play the clip in your browser.











Sudan in dark green, disputed regions in light green.











Capital
Khartoum
15°38′N 032°32′E﻿ / ﻿15.633°N 32.533°E﻿ / 15.633; 32.533


Largest city
Omdurman[1][2]


Official languages



Arabic, English[3]





Religion
Islam


Demonym
Sudanese


Government
Dominant-party federal presidential republic


&#160;•&#160;
President
Omar al-Bashir (NCP)


&#160;•&#160;
Vice President
Bakri Hassan Saleh


Legislature
National Legislature


&#160;•&#160;
Upper house
Council of States


&#160;•&#160;
Lower house
National Assembly


Formation


&#160;•&#160;
Nubian kingdoms
3500 BC&#160;


&#160;•&#160;
Sennar dynasty
1504[4]&#160;


&#160;•&#160;
Unified with Egypt
1820&#160;


&#160;•&#160;
Anglo-Egyptian Sudan
1899&#160;


&#160;•&#160;
Independence (from the United Kingdom and Egypt)
1 January 1956&#160;


&#160;•&#160;
Current constitution
9 January 2005&#160;


&#160;•&#160;
Secession of South Sudan
15 January 2011&#160;


Area


&#160;•&#160;
Total
1,886,068&#160;km2 (16th)
728,215&#160;sq&#160;mi


Population


&#160;•&#160;
2015&#160;estimate
40,235,000[5] (35th)


&#160;•&#160;
2008&#160;census
30,894,000 (disputed)&#160;[6]


&#160;•&#160;
Density
16.4/km2
42.4/sq&#160;mi


GDP&#160;(PPP)
2014&#160;estimate


&#160;•&#160;
Total
$159.5 billion[7]


&#160;•&#160;
Per capita
$4,521[7]


GDP&#160;(nominal)
2014&#160;estimate


&#160;•&#160;
Total
$70.0 billion[7]


&#160;•&#160;
Per capita
$1,985[7]


Gini&#160;(2009)
35.3[8]
medium


HDI (2013)
&#160;0.473[9]
low&#160;· 166th


Currency
Sudanese pound (SDG)


Time zone
EAT (UTC+3)


Date format
dd/mm/yyyy


Drives on the
right


Calling code
+249


ISO 3166 code
SD


Internet TLD
.sd, سودان.


Sudan (Arabic: السودان‎ as-Sūdān i/suˈdaːn/),[10][11] officially the Republic of the Sudan[12] (Arabic: جمهورية السودان‎ Jumhūrīyat as-Sūdān), is a country in the Nile Valley of North Africa or East Africa, bordered by Egypt to the north, the Red Sea, Eritrea, and Ethiopia, to the east, South Sudan to the south, the Central African Republic to the southwest, Chad to the west and Libya to the northwest. It is the third largest country in Africa. The River Nile divides the country into eastern and western halves.[13] Its predominant religion is Islam.[14]
Sudan was home to numerous ancient civilizations, such as the Kingdom of Kush, Kerma, Nobatia, Alodia, Makuria, Meroë and others, most of which flourished along the Nile. During the pre-dynastic period Nubia and Nagadan Upper Egypt were identical, simultaneously evolved systems of pharaonic kingship by 3300 BC.[15] By virtue of its proximity to Egypt, the Sudan participated in the wider history of the Near East inasmuch as it was Christianized by the 6th century, and Islamized in the 15th. As a result of Christianization, the Old Nubian language stands as the oldest recorded Nilo-Saharan language (earliest records dating to the 9th century). Sudan was the largest country in Africa and the Arab world until 2011, when South Sudan separated into an independent country, following an independence referendum. Sudan is now the third largest country in Africa (after Algeria and the Democratic Republic of the Congo) and also the third largest country in the Arab world (after Algeria and Saudi Arabia).
Sudan is a member of the United Nations, the African Union, the Arab League, the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation and the Non-Aligned Movement, as well as an observer in the World Trade Organization.[12][16] Its capital is Khartoum, the political, cultural and commercial centre of the nation. It is a federal presidential representative democratic republic. The politics of Sudan is regulated by a parliamentary organization called the National Assembly.[17] The Sudanese legal system is based on Islamic law.



Contents


1 Name
2 History

2.1 Prehistoric Sudan
2.2 Kingdom of Kush
2.3 Christianity and Islam
2.4 Turkiyah and Mahdist Sudan
2.5 Anglo-Egyptian Sudan
2.6 Independence


3 Geography
4 Government and politics

4.1 Sharia law
4.2 Foreign relations
4.3 Armed Forces
4.4 International organizations in Sudan
4.5 Human rights

4.5.1 Darfur


4.6 Disputed areas and zones of conflict


5 States and regions

5.1 Regional bodies and areas of conflict


6 Economy
7 Demographics

7.1 Urbanisation
7.2 Ethnic groups
7.3 Religion
7.4 Languages


8 Culture

8.1 Music
8.2 Sport
8.3 Clothing


9 Education
10 See also
11 References
12 Bibliography
13 External links



Name[edit]
The country's place name Sudan is a name given to a geographical region to the south of the Sahara, stretching from Western to eastern Central Africa. The name derives from the Arabic bilād as-sūdān (بلاد السودان), or "the lands of the Blacks", an expression denoting West Africa and northern-Central Africa.[18]
History[edit]
Main article: History of Sudan
Prehistoric Sudan[edit]




The large mud brick temple, known as the shrek or Western Deffufa, in the ancient city of Kerma


By the eighth millennium&#160;BC, people of a Neolithic culture had settled into a sedentary way of life there in fortified mud-brick villages, where they supplemented hunting and fishing on the Nile with grain gathering and cattle herding.[19] During the fifth millennium BC migrations from the drying Sahara brought neolithic people into the Nile Valley along with agriculture. The population that resulted from this cultural and genetic mixing developed social hierarchy over the next centuries become the Kingdom of Kush (with the capital at Kerma) at 1700 BC.
Anthropological and archaeological research indicate that during the predynastic period Nubia and Nagadan Upper Egypt were ethnically, and culturally nearly identical, and thus, simultaneously evolved systems of pharaonic kingship by 3300 BC.[15]
Kingdom of Kush[edit]
Main article: Kingdom of Kush




Nubian pyramids in Meroë.


The Kingdom of Kush was an ancient Nubian state centered on the confluences of the Blue Nile and White Nile, and the Atbara River and the Nile River. It was established after the Bronze Age collapse and the disintegration of the New Kingdom of Egypt, centered at Napata in its early phase.
After King Kashta ("the Kushite") invaded Egypt in the 8th century BC, the Kushite kings ruled as Pharaohs of the Twenty-fifth dynasty of Egypt for a century before being defeated and driven out by the Assyrians. At the height of their glory, the Kushites conquered an empire that stretched from what is now known as South Kordofan all the way to the Sinai. King Piye attempted to expand the empire into the Near East, but was thwarted by the Assyrian king Sargon II. The Kingdom of Kush is mentioned in the Bible as having saved the Israelites from the wrath of the Assyrians, although disease among the besiegers was the main reason for the failure to take the city.[20][page&#160;needed]
The war that took place between King Taharqa and the Assyrian King Sennacherib was a decisive event in western history, with the Nubians being defeated in their attempts to gain a foothold in the Near East by Assyria. Sennacherib's successor Esarhaddon went further, and invaded Egypt itself, deposing Taharqa and driving the Nubians from Egypt entirely. Taharqa fled back to his homeland where he died two years later. Egypt became an Assyrian colony; however, king Tantamani, after succeeding Taharqa, made a final determined attempt to regain Egypt. Esarhaddon died while preparing to leave the Assyrian capital of Nineveh in order to eject him. However, his successor Ashurbanipal sent a large army into southern Egypt and routed Tantamani, ending all hopes of a revival of the Nubian Empire.
During Classical Antiquity, the Nubian capital was at Meroë. In early Greek geography, the Meroitic kingdom was known as Ethiopia (a term also used earlier by the Assyrians when encountering the Nubians). The civilization of Kush was among the first in the world to use iron smelting technology. The Nubian kingdom at Meroë persisted until the 4th century AD. After the collapse of the Kushite empire several states emerged in its former territories, among them Nubia.
Christianity and Islam[edit]





This section does not cite any references (sources). Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2011)






Ruins of Old Dongola.


By the 6th century, fifty states had emerged as the political and cultural heirs of the Meroitic Kingdom. Nobatia in the north, also known as Ballanah, had its capital at Faras; the central kingdom, Muqurra (Makuria), was centred at Tungul (Old Dongola), about 13 kilometres (8 miles) south of modern Dunqulah; and Alawa (Alodia), in the heartland of old Meroë, which had its capital at Sawba (Soba) (now a suburb of modern-day Khartoum). In all three kingdoms, warrior aristocracies ruled Meroitic populations from royal courts where functionaries bore Greek titles in emulation of the Byzantine court. A missionary sent by Byzantine empress Theodora arrived in Nobatia and started preaching Christianity about 540&#160;AD. The Nubian kings became Monophysite Christians. However, Makuria was of the Melkite Christian faith, unlike Nobatia and Alodia.




Fresco of Faras Cathedral, 10th–11th century


After many attempts at military conquest failed, the Arab commander in Egypt concluded the first in a series of regularly renewed treaties known as al-baqṭ (pactum) with the Nubians that governed relations between the two peoples for more than 678 years. Islam progressed in the area over a long period of time through intermarriage and contacts with Arab merchants, sufi ascetics and settlers. Additionally, exemption from taxation in regions under Muslim rule were also a powerful incentive for conversion.[21] In 1093, a Muslim prince of Nubian royal blood ascended the throne of Dunqulah as king. The two most important Arab tribes to emerge in Nubia were the Jaali and the Juhayna. Today's northern Sudanese culture often combines Nubian and Arabic elements.
During the 16th century, a people called the Funj, under a leader named Amara Dunqus, appeared in southern Nubia and supplanted the remnants of the old Christian kingdom of Alwa, establishing As-Saltana az-Zarqa (the Blue Sultanate), also called the Sultanate of Sennar. The Blue Sultanate eventually became the keystone of the Funj Empire. By the mid-16th century, Sennar controlled Al Jazirah and commanded the allegiance of vassal states and tribal districts north to the Third Cataract and south to the rainforests. The government was substantially weakened by a series of succession arguments and coups within the royal family. In 1820, Muhammad Ali of Egypt sent 4,000 troops to invade Sudan. His forces accepted Sennar's surrender from the last Funj sultan, Badi VII.
Turkiyah and Mahdist Sudan[edit]
Main articles: History of Sudan (1821–1885) and History of Mahdist Sudan




Ismail Pasha, Sultan of Egypt &amp; Sudan


In 1821, the Ottoman ruler of Egypt, Muhammad Ali, had invaded and conquered northern Sudan. Although technically the Wāli of Egypt under the Ottoman Sultan, Muhammad Ali styled himself as Khedive of a virtually independent Egypt. Seeking to add Sudan to his domains, he sent his third son Ismail (not to be confused with Ismail the Magnificent mentioned later) to conquer the country, and subsequently incorporate it into Egypt. This policy was expanded and intensified by Ibrahim's son, Ismail I, under whose reign most of the remainder of modern-day Sudan was conquered.
The Egyptian authorities made significant improvements to the Sudanese infrastructure (mainly in the north), especially with regard to irrigation and cotton production. In 1879, the Great Powers forced the removal of Ismail and established his son Tewfik I in his place. Tewfik's corruption and mismanagement resulted in the Orabi Revolt, which threatened the Khedive's survival. Tewfik appealed for help to the British, who subsequently occupied Egypt in 1882. Sudan was left in the hands of the Khedivial government, and the mismanagement and corruption of its officials.[22][23]




Muhammad Ahmad al-Mahdi ruler of Sudan.


During the Khedivial period, wide spread dissent had spread due to harsh taxation's imposed on most activities. Taxation on irrigation wells and farming lands were so high most farmers abandoned their farms and live stock. During the 1870s, European initiatives against the slave trade had an adverse impact on the economy of northern Sudan, precipitating the rise of Mahdist forces.[24] Muhammad Ahmad ibn Abd Allah, the Mahdi (Guided One), offered to the ansars (his followers) and those who surrendered to him a choice between adopting Islam or being killed. The Mahdiyah (Mahdist regime) imposed traditional Sharia Islamic laws.
From his announcement of the Mahdiyya in June 1881 until the fall of Khartoum in January 1885, Muhammad Ahmad led a successful military campaign against the Turco-Egyptian government of the Sudan (known as the Turkiyah). Muhammad Ahmad died on 22 June 1885, a mere six months after the conquest of Khartoum. After a power struggle amongst his deputies, Abdallahi ibn Muhammad, with the help primarily of the Baqqara Arabs of western Sudan, overcame the opposition of the others and emerged as unchallenged leader of the Mahdiyah. After consolidating his power, Abdallahi ibn Muhammad assumed the title of Khalifa (successor) of the Mahdi, instituted an administration, and appointed Ansar (who were usually Baqqara) as emirs over each of the several provinces.
Regional relations remained tense throughout much of the Mahdiyah period, largely because of the Khalifa's brutal methods to extend his rule throughout the country. In 1887, a 60,000-man Ansar army invaded Ethiopia, penetrating as far as Gondar. In March 1889, king Yohannes IV of Ethiopia, marched on Metemma; however, after Yohannes fell in battle, the Ethiopian forces withdrew. Abd ar Rahman an Nujumi, the Khalifa's general, attempted an invasion of Egypt in 1889, but British-led Egyptian troops defeated the Ansar at Tushkah. The failure of the Egyptian invasion broke the spell of the Ansar's invincibility. The Belgians prevented the Mahdi's men from conquering Equatoria, and in 1893, the Italians repelled an Ansar attack at Akordat (in Eritrea) and forced the Ansar to withdraw from Ethiopia.




The Flight of the Khalifa after his Defeat at the Battle of Omdurman


In the 1890s, the British sought to re-establish their control over Sudan, once more officially in the name of the Egyptian Khedive, but in actuality treating the country as a British colony. By the early 1890s, British, French and Belgian claims had converged at the Nile headwaters. Britain feared that the other powers would take advantage of Sudan's instability to acquire territory previously annexed to Egypt. Apart from these political considerations, Britain wanted to establish control over the Nile to safeguard a planned irrigation dam at Aswan.
Lord Kitchener led military campaigns against the Mahdists from 1896 to 1898. Kitchener's campaigns culminated in a decisive victory in the Battle of Omdurman on 2 September 1898.
Anglo-Egyptian Sudan[edit]
Main article: Anglo-Egyptian Sudan





This section does not cite any references (sources). Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (May 2012)






The Mahdist War was fought between a radical group of Muslim dervishes, called Mahdists, who had over-run much of Sudan, and the British forces


In 1899, Britain and Egypt reached an agreement under which Sudan was run by a governor-general appointed by Egypt with British consent. In reality Sudan was effectively administered as a British colony. The British were keen to reverse the process, started under Muhammad Ali Pasha, of uniting the Nile Valley under Egyptian leadership, and sought to frustrate all efforts aimed at further uniting the two countries.
During World War II, Sudan was directly involved militarily in the East African Campaign. Formed in 1925, the Sudan Defence Force (SDF) played an active part in responding to the early incursions (occupation by Italian troops of Kassala and other border areas) into the Sudan from Italian East Africa during 1940. In 1942, the SDF also played a part in the invasion of the Italian colony by British and Commonwealth forces. From 1924 until independence in 1956, the British had a policy of running Sudan as two essentially separate territories, the north and south. The last British Governor-General was Sir Robert Howe.




Camel soldier of the native forces of the British army, early 20th century


The continued British administration of Sudan fueled an increasingly strident nationalist backlash in Egypt, with Egyptian nationalist leaders determined to force Britain to recognise a single independent union of Egypt and Sudan. With the formal end of Ottoman rule in 1914, Hussein Kamel was declared Sultan of Egypt and Sudan, as was his brother and successor Fuad I. They continued their insistence of a single Egyptian-Sudanese state even when the Sultanate was retitled as the Kingdom of Egypt and Sudan, but the British continued to frustrate such reaches for independence.
The Egyptian Revolution of 1952 finally heralded the beginning of the march towards Sudanese independence. Having abolished the monarchy in 1953, Egypt's new leaders, Muhammad Naguib, whose mother was Sudanese, and later Gamal Abdel-Nasser, believed the only way to end British domination in Sudan was for Egypt to officially abandon its claims of sovereignty over Sudan.
The British on the other hand continued their political and financial support for the Mahdi successor Sayyid Abdel Rahman who, they believed, could resist the Egyptian pressures for Sudanese independence. Rahman was able to resist the pressures, but his regime was plagued with political ineptitude, which garnered him a loss of support in northern and central Sudan. Egypt and Britain both sensed a great political instability forming, and opted to allow the Sudanese in the north and south to have a free vote on independence to see whether they wished for a British withdrawal.
Independence[edit]
Main articles: History of Sudan (1956–1969), History of Sudan (1969–85) and History of Sudan (1986–present)




Sudan's flag raised at independence ceremony on 1 January 1956 by the Prime Minister Ismail al-Azhari and in presence of opposition leader Mohamed Ahmed Almahjoub


A polling process was carried out resulting in composition of a democratic parliament and Ismail al-Azhari was elected first Prime Minister and led the first modern Sudanese government.[25] On 1 January 1956, in a special ceremony held at the People's Palace, the Egyptian and British flags were lowered and the new Sudanese flag, composed of green, blue and yellow stripes, was raised in their place by the prime minister Ismail al-Azhari.
Dissatisfaction culminated in a second coup d'état on 25 May 1969. The coup leader, Col. Gaafar Nimeiry, became prime minister, and the new regime abolished parliament and outlawed all political parties.
Disputes between Marxist and non-Marxist elements within the ruling military coalition resulted in a briefly successful coup in July 1971, led by the Sudanese Communist Party. Several days later, anti-communist military elements restored Nimeiry to power.
In 1972, the Addis Ababa Agreement led to a cessation of the north-south civil war and a degree of self-rule. This led to ten years hiatus in the civil war.
Until the early 1970s, Sudan's agricultural output was mostly dedicated to internal consumption. In 1972, the Sudanese government became more pro-Western, and made plans to export food and cash crops. However, commodity prices declined throughout the 1970s causing economic problems for Sudan. At the same time, debt servicing costs, from the money spent mechanizing agriculture, rose. In 1978, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) negotiated a Structural Adjustment Program with the government. This further promoted the mechanized export agriculture sector. This caused great economic problems for the pastoralists of Sudan (See Nuba Peoples).
In 1976, the Ansars mounted a bloody but unsuccessful coup attempt. In July 1977, President Nimeiry met with Ansar leader Sadiq al-Mahdi, opening the way for reconciliation. Hundreds of political prisoners were released, and in August a general amnesty was announced for all opponents of Nimeiry’s government.
On 30 June 1989, Colonel Omar al-Bashir led a bloodless military coup.[26] The new military government suspended political parties and introduced an Islamic legal code on the national level.[27] Later al-Bashir carried out purges and executions in the upper ranks of the army, the banning of associations, political parties, and independent newspapers, and the imprisonment of leading political figures and journalists.[28] On 16 October 1993, al-Bashir appointed himself "President" and disbanded the Revolutionary Command Council. The executive and legislative powers of the council were taken by al-Bashir.[29]
In the 1996 general election he was the only candidate by law to run for election.[30] Sudan became a single-party state under the National Congress Party (NCP).[31] During the 1990s, Hassan al-Turabi, then Speaker of the National Assembly, reached out to Islamic fundamentalist groups, invited Osama bin Laden to the country.[32] The United States subsequently listed Sudan as a state sponsor of terrorism.[33] American U.S. started a war against Sudan and bombed Sudan in 1998. Later, al-Turabi's influence waned, in favor of more pragmatic leaders who focused on trying to change international isolation.[34] Sudan worked to appease its critics by expelling members of the Egyptian Islamic Jihad and encouraging bin Laden to leave.[35]




Government Militia in Darfur


Before the 2000 presidential election, al-Turabi introduced a bill to reduce the President's powers, prompting al-Bashir to dissolve parliament and declare a state of emergency. When al-Turabi urged a boycott of the President's re-election campaign and signed an agreement with Sudan People's Liberation Army, al-Bashir suspected they were plotting to overthrow him and the government,[36] which resulted in the jailing of Hassan al-Turabi that same year.[37]
In February 2003, the Sudan Liberation Movement/Army (SLM/A) and Justice and Equality Movement (JEM) groups in Darfur took up arms, accusing the Sudanese government of oppressing non-Arab Sudanese in favor of Sudanese Arabs, precipitating the War in Darfur. The conflict has since been described as a genocide,[38] and the International Criminal Court (ICC) has issued two arrest warrants for al-Bashir.[39][40] Arabic-speaking nomads militias known as the Janjaweed have been accused of many atrocities.
On 9 January 2005, the Nairobi Comprehensive Peace Agreement was signed between the Sudan People's Liberation Movement (SPLM) and the government, with the objective of ending the Second Sudanese Civil War. The United Nations Mission in Sudan (UNMIS) was established under the UN Security Council Resolution 1590 to support its implementation. The peace agreement led to the 2011 referendum which resulted in the secession of South Sudan; the region of Abyei is to hold its own referendum in the future.




South Sudanese independence referendum, 2011


The Sudan People's Liberation Army (SPLA) was the primary member of the Eastern Front, a coalition of rebel groups operating in eastern Sudan. After the peace agreement, their place was taken in February 2004 after the merger of the larger Hausa and Beja Congress with the smaller Rashaida Free Lions.[41] A peace agreement between the Sudanese government and the Eastern Front was signed on 14 October 2006, in Asmara.
On 5 May 2006, the Darfur Peace Agreement was signed, aiming at ending the three-year-long conflict.[42] The Chad–Sudan Conflict (2005–2007) erupted after the Battle of Adré, which led to the declaration of war by Chad.[43] The leaders of Sudan and Chad signed an agreement in Saudi Arabia on 3 May 2007 to stop fighting from the Darfur conflict along their countries' 1,000-kilometre (600&#160;mi) border.[44]
In July 2007 the country was hit by flooding,[45] with over 400,000 people being directly affected.[46] Since 2009, a series of ongoing conflicts between rival nomadic tribes in Sudan and South Sudan have resulted in a large number of casualties. The Sudan internal conflict in the early 2010s between the Army of Sudan and the Sudan Revolutionary Front started as a dispute over the oil-rich region of Abyei in the months leading up to South Sudanese independence, though it is also related to the nominally resolved war in Darfur.
Geography[edit]
Main article: Geography of Sudan
See also: List of cities in Sudan




Jebel Barkal mountain in Nubia, a UNESCO World Heritage Site.






Satellite image of Sudan


Sudan is situated in northern Africa, with a 853&#160;km (530&#160;mi) coastline bordering the Red Sea.[47] It has land borders with Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, South Sudan, the Central African Republic, Chad, and Libya. With an area of 1,886,068&#160;km2 (728,215&#160;sq&#160;mi), it is the third largest country on the continent (after Algeria and Democratic Republic of the Congo) and the sixteenth largest in the world. Sudan lies between latitudes 8° and 23°N. The terrain is generally flat plains, broken by several mountain ranges; in the west the Deriba Caldera (3,042&#160;m or 9,980&#160;ft), located in the Marrah Mountains, is the highest point in Sudan; in the east are the Red Sea Hills.[48]
The Blue and White Nile rivers meet in Khartoum to form the River Nile, which flows northwards through Egypt to the Mediterranean Sea. The Blue Nile's course through Sudan is nearly 800&#160;km (497&#160;mi) long and is joined by the Dinder and Rahad Rivers between Sennar and Khartoum. The White Nile within Sudan has no significant tributaries.
The amount of rainfall increases towards the south. The central and the northern part have extremely dry desert areas such as the Nubian Desert to the northeast and the Bayuda Desert to the east; in the south there are swamps and rainforest. Sudan’s rainy season lasts for about three months (July to September) in the north, and up to six months (June to November) in the south. The dry regions are plagued by sandstorms, known as haboob, which can completely block out the sun. In the northern and western semi-desert areas, people rely on the scant rainfall for basic agriculture and many are nomadic, travelling with their herds of sheep and camels. Nearer the River Nile, there are well-irrigated farms growing cash crops.[49] The sunshine duration is very high all over the country but especially in deserts where it could soar to over 4,000 h per year.
There are several dams on the Blue and White Niles. Among them are the Sennar and Roseires Dams on the Blue Nile, and the Jebel Aulia Dam on the White Nile. There is also Lake Nubia on the Sudanese-Egyptian border.
Rich mineral resources are available in Sudan including asbestos, chromite, cobalt, copper, gold, granite, gypsum, iron, kaolin, lead, manganese, mica, natural gas, nickel, petroleum, silver, tin, uranium and zinc.[50]
Desertification is a serious problem in Sudan.[51] There is also concern over soil erosion. Agricultural expansion, both public and private, has proceeded without conservation measures. The consequences have manifested themselves in the form of deforestation, soil desiccation, and the lowering of soil fertility and the water table.[52]
The nation's wildlife is threatened by hunting. As of 2001, twenty-one mammal species and nine bird species are endangered, as well as two species of plants. Endangered species include: the waldrapp, northern white rhinoceros, tora hartebeest, slender-horned gazelle, and hawksbill turtle. The Sahara oryx has become extinct in the wild.[53]
Government and politics[edit]
Main article: Politics of Sudan
Officially, the politics of Sudan takes place in the framework of a federal presidential representative democratic republic, where the President of Sudan is head of state, head of government and commander-in-chief of the Sudan People's Armed Forces in a multi-party system. Legislative power is vested in both the government and the bicameral parliament—the National Legislature, with its National Assembly (lower chamber) and the Council of States (upper chamber). The judiciary is independent and obtained by the Constitutional Court.[12] It is part of the Northern Africa grouping of the UN geoscheme.[54]
However, following the Second Sudanese Civil War (1983–2005) and the now-low-scale war in Darfur, Sudan is widely recognized as an authoritarian state where all effective political power is obtained by President Omar al-Bashir and the ruling National Congress Party (NCP).
In 1993, Sudan was transformed into an Islamic authoritarian single-party state as al-Bashir abolished the Revolutionary Command Council and created the National Islamic Front (NIF) with a new parliament and government obtained solely by members of the NIF. At the same time, the structure of regional administration was replaced by the creation of twenty-six states, each headed by a governor, thus making Sudan a federal republic.




JEM rebels in Darfur. Both the government and the rebels have been accused of atrocities.


Executive posts are divided between the NCP, the SPLA, the Sudanese Eastern Front and factions of the Umma Party and Democratic Unionist Party (DUP).
According to the new 2005 constitution, the bicameral National Legislature is the official Sudanese parliament and is divided between two chambers—the National Assembly, a lower house with 450 seats, and the Council of States, an upper house with 50 seats. Thus the parliament consists of 500 appointed members altogether, where all are indirectly elected by state legislatures to serve six-year terms.[12]
Despite his international arrest warrant, al-Bashir was a candidate in the 2010 Sudanese presidential election, the first democratic election with multiple political parties participating in twenty-four years.[55] In the build-up to the vote, Sudanese pro-democracy activists say they faced intimidation by the government[56] and the International Crisis Group reported that the ruling party had gerrymandered electoral districts.[57] A few days before the vote, the main opposition candidate, Yasir Arman from the SPLM, withdrew from the race.[58] The U.S.-based Carter Center, which helped monitor the elections, described the vote tabulation process as "highly chaotic, non-transparent and vulnerable to electoral manipulation."[59] Al-Bashir was declared the winner of the election with sixty-eight percent of the vote.[55]
Sharia law[edit]
The legal system in Sudan is based on Islamic Sharia law. The 2005 Naivasha Agreement, ending the civil war between north and south Sudan, established some protections for non-Muslims in Khartoum. Sudan's application of Sharia law is random.[60]
Stoning remains a judicial punishment in Sudan. Between 2009 and 2012, several women were sentenced to death by stoning.[61][62][63] Flogging is a legal punishment. Between 2009 and 2014, many people were sentenced to 40–100 lashes.[64][65][66][67][68][69] In August 2014, several Sudanese men died in custody after being flogged.[70][71][72] 53 Christians were flogged in 2001.[73] Sudan's public order law allows police officers to publicly whip women who are accused of public indecency.[74]
Crucifixion is a legal punishment. In 2002, 88 people were sentenced to death for crimes relating to murder, armed robbery, and participating in ethnic clashes, Amnesty International wrote that they could be executed by either hanging or crucifixion.[75]
International Court of Justice jurisdiction is accepted, though with reservations. Under the terms of the Naivasha Agreement, Islamic law did not apply in South Sudan.[76] Since the secession of South Sudan there is some uncertainty as to whether Sharia law will now apply to the non-Muslim minorities present in Sudan, especially because of contradictory statements by al-Bashir on the matter.[77]
The judicial branch of the Sudanese government consists of a Constitutional Court of nine justices, the National Supreme Court, the Court of Cassation,[78] and other national courts; the National Judicial Service Commission provides overall management for the judiciary.
Foreign relations[edit]
Main article: Foreign relations of Sudan




Sudanese President Omar al-Bashir, wanted by the ICC for war crimes and crimes against humanity.[79]


Sudan has had a troubled relationship with many of its neighbours and much of the international community, owing to what is viewed as its radical Islamic stance. For much of the 1990s, Uganda, Kenya and Ethiopia formed an ad-hoc alliance called the "Front Line States" with support from the United States to check the influence of the National Islamic Front government. The Sudanese Government supported anti-Ugandan rebel groups such as the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA).
As the National Islamic Front regime in Khartoum gradually emerged as a real threat to the region and the world, the U.S. began to list Sudan on its list of State Sponsors of Terrorism. After the US listed Sudan as a state sponsor of terrorism, the NIF decided to develop relations with Iraq, and later Iran, the two most controversial countries in the region.
From the mid-1990s, Sudan gradually began to moderate its positions as a result of increased U.S. pressure following the 1998 U.S. embassy bombings, in Tanzania and Kenya, and the new development of oil fields previously in rebel hands. Sudan also has a territorial dispute with Egypt over the Hala'ib Triangle. Since 2003, the foreign relations of Sudan had centered on the support for ending the Second Sudanese Civil War and condemnation of government support for militias in the war in Darfur.
Sudan has extensive economic relations with China. China obtains ten percent of its oil from Sudan. According to a former Sudanese government minister, China is Sudan's largest supplier of arms.[80]
In December 2005, Sudan became one of the few states to recognize Moroccan sovereignty over Western Sahara.[81]
In 2015, Sudan participated in the Saudi Arabian-led intervention in Yemen against the Shia Houthis and forces loyal to former President Ali Abdullah Saleh,[82] who was deposed in the 2011 uprising.[83]
Armed Forces[edit]
Main article: Sudan People's Armed Forces




Sudanese Air Force Hongdu JL-8


The Sudan People's Armed Forces is the regular forces of Sudan and is divided into five branches; the Sudanese Army, Sudanese Navy (including the Marine Corps), Sudanese Air Force, Border Patrol and the Internal Affairs Defense Force, totalling about 200,000 troops. The military of Sudan has become a well-equipped fighting force, thanks to increasing local production of heavy and advanced arms. These forces are under the command of the National Assembly and its strategic principles include defending Sudan's external borders and preserve internal security.
However, since the Darfur crisis in 2004, safe-keeping the central government from the armed resistance and rebellion of paramilitary rebel groups such as the Sudan People's Liberation Army (SPLA), the Sudanese Liberation Army (SLA) and the Justice and Equality Movement (JEM) have been important priorities. While not official, the Sudanese military also uses nomad militias, the most prominent being the Janjaweed, in executing a counter-insurgency war.[84] Somewhere between 200,000[85] and 400,000[12][86][87] people have died in the violent struggles.
International organizations in Sudan[edit]
Several UN agents are operating in Sudan such as the World Food Program (WFP); the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nation (FAO); the United Nations Development Program (UNDP); the United Nations Industrial Development Organizations (UNIDO); the United Nations Children Fund (UNICEF); the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR); the United Nations Mine Service (UNMAS), the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and the World Bank. Also present is the International Organization for Migration (IOM).[88][89]
Since Sudan has experienced civil war for many years, many Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs) are also involved in humanitarian efforts to help internally displaced people. The NGOs are working in every corner of Sudan, especially in the southern part and western parts. During the civil war, international nongovernmental organizations such as the Red Cross were operating mostly in the south but based in the capital Khartoum.[90] The attention of NGOs shifted shortly after the war broke out in the western part of the Sudan known as Darfur. The most visible organization in South Sudan is the Operation Lifeline Sudan (OLS) consortium.[91]
Even though most of the international organizations are substantially concentrated in both South Sudan and Darfur region, some of them are working in the northern part as well. For example, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization is successfully operating in Khartoum, the capital. It is mainly funded by the European Union and recently opened more vocational training. The Canadian International Development Agency is operating largely in northern Sudan.[92]
Human rights[edit]
Main articles: Human rights in Sudan, Freedom of religion in Sudan and Slavery in Sudan
Since 1983, a combination of civil war and famine has taken the lives of nearly 2 million people in Sudan.[93] It is estimated that as many as 200,000 people had been taken into slavery during the Second Sudanese Civil War.[94]
Sudan ranks 172 of 180 countries in terms of freedom of the press according to Reporters Without Borders, yet more curbs of press freedom to report official corruption are planned.[95]
Muslims who convert to Christianity can face the death penalty for apostasy, see Persecution of Christians in Sudan and the death sentence against Mariam Yahia Ibrahim Ishag (who actually was raised as Christian). According to a 2013 UNICEF report, 88% of women in Sudan had undergone female genital mutilation.[96] Sudan's Personal Status law on marriage has been criticized for restricting women's rights and allowing child marriage.[97][98]
Darfur[edit]




Darfur refugee camp in Chad, 2005


A letter dated 14 August 2006, from the executive director of Human Rights Watch found that the Sudanese government is both incapable of protecting its own citizens in Darfur and unwilling to do so, and that its militias are guilty of crimes against humanity. The letter added that these human-rights abuses have existed since 2004.[99] Some reports attribute part of the violations to the rebels as well as the government and the Janjaweed. The U.S. State Department's human-rights report issued in March 2007 claims that "[a]ll parties to the conflagration committed serious abuses, including widespread killing of civilians, rape as a tool of war, systematic torture, robbery and recruitment of child soldiers."[100]
Over 2.8 million civilians have been displaced and the death toll is estimated at 300,000 killed.[101] Both government forces and militias allied with the government are known to attack not only civilians in Darfur, but also humanitarian workers. Sympathizers of rebel groups are arbitrarily detained, as are foreign journalists, human-rights defenders, student activists and displaced people in and around Khartoum, some of whom face torture. The rebel groups have also been accused in a report issued by the U.S. government of attacking humanitarian workers and of killing innocent civilians.[102] According to UNICEF, in 2008, there were as many as 6,000 child soldiers in Darfur.[103]
Disputed areas and zones of conflict[edit]

In mid-April 2012, the South Sudanese army captured the Heglig oil field from Sudan.
In mid-April 2012 the Sudanese army recaptured Heglig.
Kafia Kingi and Radom National Park was a part of Bahr el Ghazal in 1956.[104] Sudan has recognized South Sudan independence according to the borders for 1 January 1956.[105]
The Abyei Area is disputed region between Sudan and South Sudan. It is currently under Sudan rule.
The states of South Kurdufan and Blue Nile are to hold "popular consultations" to determine their constitutional future within the Sudan.
The Hala'ib triangle is disputed region between Sudan and Egypt. It is currently under Egyptian administration.
Bir Tawil is a terra nullius occurring on the border between Egypt and Sudan, claimed by neither state.

States and regions[edit]
Main articles: States of Sudan, List of Sudan's state governors and Districts of Sudan




Political map of Sudan. The Hala'ib Triangle has been under Egyptian administration since 2000.


Sudan is divided into 18 states (wilayat, sing. wilayah). They are further divided into 133 districts.




Al Jazirah
Al Qadarif
Blue Nile
Central Darfur
East Darfur
Kassala





Khartoum
North Darfur
North Kurdufan
Northern
Red Sea
River Nile





Sennar
South Darfur
South Kurdufan
West Darfur
West Kurdufan
White Nile




Regional bodies and areas of conflict[edit]
In addition to the states, there also exist regional administrative bodies established by peace agreements between the central government and rebel groups.




&#160;&#160;Central and northern states
&#160;&#160;Darfur
&#160;&#160;Eastern Front
&#160;&#160;Abyei area
&#160;&#160;South Kurdufan and Blue Nile states




The Darfur Regional Authority was established by the Darfur Peace Agreement to act as a co-ordinating body for the states that make up the region of Darfur.
The Eastern Sudan States Coordinating Council was established by the Eastern Sudan Peace Agreement between the Sudanese Government and the rebel Eastern Front to act as a coordinating body for the three eastern states.
The Abyei Area, located on the border between South Sudan and the Republic of the Sudan, currently has a special administrative status and is governed by an Abyei Area Administration. It was due to hold a referendum in 2011 on whether to join an independent South Sudan or remain part of the Republic of the Sudan.

Economy[edit]
Main article: Economy of Sudan
See also: Communications in Sudan, Transport in Sudan and List of companies based in Sudan




Oil and gas concessions in Sudan – 2004






Development in Khartoum.


In 2010, Sudan was considered the 17th-fastest-growing economy[106] in the world and the rapid development of the country largely from oil profits even when facing international sanctions was noted by The New York Times in a 2006 article.[107] Over a four-year period to 2014, the Sudanese government's budget was yearly on the order of £140M, while UKAid provided £30M to £54M per annum.[108] Because of the secession of South Sudan, which contained over 80 percent of Sudan's oilfields, the economic forecast for Sudan in 2011 and beyond is uncertain.
Even with the oil profits before the secession of South Sudan, Sudan still faced formidable economic problems, and its growth was still a rise from a very low level of per capita output. In any case, the economy in the Sudan has been slowly growing over the last ten years, and according to a World Bank report the overall growth in GDP in 2010 was 5.2 percent compared to 2009 growth of 4.2 percent.[12] This growth was sustained even during the crisis in Darfur and period of southern autonomy preceding South Sudan's independence.[109][110]
While historically agriculture remains the main source of income and employment hiring of over 80 percent of Sudanese, and makes up a third of the economic sector, oil production drove most of Sudan's post-2000 growth. Currently, the International Monetary Fund IMF is working hand in hand with Khartoum government to implement sound macroeconomic policies.This follows a turbulent period in the 1980s when debt-ridden Sudan's relations with the IMF and World Bank soured, culminating in its eventual suspension from the IMF.[111][page&#160;needed] The program has been in place since the early 1990s, and also work-out exchange rate and reserve of foreign exchange.[12] Since 1997, Sudan has been implementing the macroeconomic reforms recommended by the International Monetary Fund.[citation needed]
In 1999, Sudan began exporting crude oil and in the last quarter of 1999, recorded its first trade surplus. Increased oil production (the current[when?] production is about 520,000 barrels per day (83,000&#160;m3/d)) revived light industry, and expanded export processing zones helped sustain gross domestic product (GDP) growth at 6.1 percent in 2003. These gains, along with improvements to monetary policy, have stabilized the exchange rate. The People's Republic of China is a major trading partner, and owns a 40 percent share in the Greater Nile Petroleum Operating Company.[112] The country also sells Sudan small arms, which have been used in military operations such as the conflicts in Darfur and South Kordofan.[113]
Oil was Sudan's main export, with production increasing dramatically during the late 2000s, in the years before South Sudan gained independence in July 2011. With rising oil revenues, the Sudanese economy was booming, with a growth rate of about nine percent in 2007. Sustained growth was expected the next year in 2008 because of not only increasing oil production, but also to the boost of hydroelectricity (annual electricity yield of 5.5 TWh) provided by the Merowe Dam. The independence of oil-rich South Sudan, however, placed most major oilfields out of the Sudanese government's direct control. In order to export oil, South Sudan must rely on a pipeline to Port Sudan on Sudan's Red Sea coast, as South Sudan itself is landlocked, as well as on Sudan's superior refinery infrastructure. The exact terms of a revenue-splitting agreement between Juba and Khartoum have yet to be established, but Sudan will likely receive a significant portion of the income from South Sudan's oil sales as a fee for the use of Sudanese pipelines, refineries, and port facilities, perhaps as much as 50 percent of the profits.[114]




Market in Omdurman


Agriculture production remains Sudan's most-important sector, employing 80 percent of the workforce and contributing 39 percent of GDP, but most farms remain rain-fed and susceptible to drought. Instability, adverse weather and weak world-agricultural prices ensures that much of the population will remain at or below the poverty line for years.
The Merowe Dam, also known as Merowe Multi-Purpose Hydro Project or Hamdab Dam, is a large construction project in Northern Sudan, about 350 kilometres (220&#160;mi) north of the capital, Khartoum. It is situated on the River Nile, close to the Fourth Cataract where the river divides into multiple smaller branches with large islands in between. Merowe is a city about 40 kilometres (25&#160;mi) downstream from the dam's construction site.
The main purpose of the dam will be the generation of electricity. Its dimensions make it the largest contemporary hydropower project in Africa. The construction of the dam was finished December 2008, supplying more than 90 percent of the population with electricity. Other gas-powered generating stations are operational in Khartoum State and other States.
According to the Corruptions Perception Index, Sudan is perceived as one of the most corrupt nations in the world.[115] According to the Global Hunger Index of 2013, Sudan has an GHI indicator value of 27.0 indicating that the nation has an 'Alarming Hunger Situation' and earning the nation the distinction of being the 5th hungriest nation in the world.[116] According to the 2013 Human Development Index (HDI) Sudan ranked the 171st place in Human Development, indicating Sudan still has one of the lowest human development in the world.[117] Almost one-fifth of Sudan's population lives below the international poverty line which means living on less than US$1.25 per day.[118]
Demographics[edit]




Student from Khartoum


Main article: Demographics of Sudan
In Sudan's 2008 census, the population of Northern, Western and Eastern Sudan was recorded to be over 30 million.[119] This puts present estimates of the population of Sudan after the secession of South Sudan at a little over 30 million people. This is a significant increase over the past two decades as the 1983 census put the total population of Sudan, including present-day South Sudan, at 21.6 million.[120] The population of Greater Khartoum (including Khartoum, Omdurman, and Khartoum North) is growing rapidly and was recorded to be 5.2 million.
Despite being a refugee-generating country, Sudan also hosts a refugee population. According to the World Refugee Survey 2008, published by the U.S. Committee for Refugees and Immigrants, 310,500 refugees and asylum seekers lived in Sudan in 2007. The majority of this population came from Eritrea (240,400 persons), Chad (45,000), Ethiopia (49,300) and the Central African Republic (2,500).[121] The Sudanese government UN High Commissioner for Refugees in 2007 forcibly deported at least 1,500 refugees and asylum seekers during the year. Sudan is a party to the 1951 Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees.[121]
Urbanisation[edit]



&#160;


v
t
e


Largest cities or towns in Sudan
http://www.geonames.org/SD/largest-cities-in-sudan.html




Rank
Name
State
Pop.




Khartoum

Omdurman
1
Khartoum
Khartoum
1 974 647

Port Sudan

Kassala


2
Omdurman
Khartoum
1 200 000


3
Port Sudan
Red Sea
489 725


4
Kassala
Kassala
401 477


5
El Obeid
North Kordofan
393 311


6
Kosti
White Nile
345 068


7
Wad Madani
Al Jazirah
332 714


8
El Fasher
North Darfur
252 609


9
Ad-Damazin
Blue Nile
186 051


10
Geneina
West Darfur
162 981


Ethnic groups[edit]




Sudanese Arab of Al-Manasir


The Arab presence is estimated at 70% of the Sudanese population.[12] Others include the Arabized ethnic groups of Nubians, Zaghawa, and Copts.[122][123]
Sudan has 597 groups that speak over 400 different languages and dialects.[124] Sudanese Arabs are by far the largest ethnic group in Sudan. They are almost entirely Muslims; while the majority speak Sudanese Arabic, some other Arab tribes speak different Arabic dialects like Awadia and Fadnia tribes and Bani Arak tribes who speak Najdi Arabic; and Rufa'a, Bani Hassan, Al-Ashraf, Kinanah and Rashaida who speak Hejazi Arabic. In addition, the Western province comprises various ethnic groups, while a few Arab Bedouin of the northern Rizeigat and others who speak Sudanese Arabic share the same culture and backgrounds of the Sudanese Arabs.
The majority of Arabized and indigenous tribes like the Fur, Zaghawa, Borgo, Masalit and some Baggara ethnic groups, who speak Chadian Arabic, show less cultural integration because of cultural, linguistic and genealogical variations with other Arab and Arabized tribes.[125]
Sudanese Arabs of Northern and Eastern parts descend primarily from migrants from the Arabian Peninsula and intermarriages with the pre-existing indigenous populations of Sudan, especially the Nubian people, who also share a common history with Egypt. Additionally, a few pre-Islamic Arabian tribes existed in Sudan from earlier migrations into the region from Western Arabia, although most Arabs in Sudan are dated from migrations after the 12th century.[126]
The vast majority of Arab tribes in Sudan migrated into the Sudan in the 12th century, intermarried with the indigenous Nubian and other African populations and introduced Islam.[127]
In common with much of the rest of the Arab world, the gradual process of Arabization in Sudan following these Arabian migrations after the 12th century led to the predominance of the Arabic language and aspects of Arab culture, leading to the shift among a majority of Sudanese today to an Arab ethnic identity. This process was furthered both by the spread of Islam and an emigration to Sudan of ethnic Arabs from the Arabian Peninsula, and their intermarriage with the Arabized indigenous peoples of the country.[citation needed]
Sudan consists of numerous other non-Arabic groups, such as the Masalit, Zaghawa, Fulani, Northern Nubians, Nuba, and the Beja people.
Religion[edit]




Minaret in Port Sudan


Main article: Religion in Sudan
Further information: Islam in Sudan and Christianity in Sudan



Religion in Sudan[128]


religion


percent



Islam

&#160; 

97%


African Traditional Religion

&#160; 

1.5%


Christianity

&#160; 

1.5%



At the 2011 division which split off South Sudan, over 97% of the population in the remaining Sudan adheres to Islam.[129] Muslims are divided between two groups Sufi and Salafi (Ansar Al Sunnah) Muslim. Two popular divisions, the Ansar and the Khatmia, are associated with the opposition Umma and Democratic Unionist parties, respectively.
Significant, long-established groups of Coptic Orthodox and Greek Orthodox Christians exist in Khartoum and other northern cities. Ethiopian and Eritrean Orthodox communities also exist in Khartoum and eastern Sudan, largely made up of refugees and migrants from the past few decades. The largest groups affiliated with Western Christian denominations are Roman Catholic and Anglican. Other Christian groups with smaller followings in the country include the Africa Inland Church, the Armenian Apostolic Church, the Sudan Church of Christ, the Sudan Interior Church, Jehovah's Witnesses, the Sudan Pentecostal Church, the Sudan Evangelical Presbyterian Church (in the North).
Religious identity plays a role in the country's political divisions. Northern and western Muslims have dominated the country's political and economic system since independence. The NCP draws much of its support from Islamists, Salafis/Wahhabis and other conservative Arab Muslims in the north. The Umma Party has traditionally attracted Arab followers of the Ansar sect of Sufism as well as non-Arab Muslims from Darfur and Kordofan. The Democratic Unionist Party (DUP) includes both Arab and non-Arab Muslims in the north and east, especially those in the Khatmia Sufi sect.
Languages[edit]
See also: Languages of Sudan




The Arabic-speaking Rashaida came to Sudan from Arabia about 170 years ago.


Approximately 70 languages are native to Sudan.[130]
Sudanese Arabic is the most widely spoken language in the country. It is the variety of Arabic, an Afroasiatic language of the Semitic branch, that is spoken throughout Sudan. The dialect has borrowed much vocabulary from local Nilo-Saharan languages (Nobiin, Fur, Zaghawa, Borgo). This has resulted in a variety of Arabic that is unique to Sudan, reflecting the way in which the country has been influenced by Nilotic, Arab, and western cultures. Few nomads in Sudan still have similar accents to the ones in Saudi Arabia. Other important languages include Beja (AKA Bedawi) along the Red Sea, with perhaps 2 million speakers. It is the only language from the Afroasiatic family's Cushitic branch that is today spoken in the territory.
As with South Sudan, a number of Nilo-Saharan languages are also spoken in Sudan. Fur speakers inhabit the west (Darfur), with perhaps a million speakers. There are likewise various Nubian languages, with over 6 million speakers along the Nile in the north. The most linguistically diverse region in the country is the Nuba Hills area in Kordofan, inhabited by speakers of multiple language families, with Darfur and other border regions being second.
The Niger-Congo family is represented by many of the Kordofanian languages, and Indo-European by Domari (Gypsy) and English. Historically, Old Nubian, Greek, and Coptic were the languages of Christian Nubia, while Meroitic was the language of the Kingdom of Kush, which conquered Egypt.
Sudan also has multiple regional sign languages, which are not mutually intelligible. A 2009 proposal for a unified Sudanese Sign Language had been worked out, but was not widely known.[131]
Prior to 2005, Arabic was the nation's sole official language.[132] In the 2005 constitution, Sudan's official languages became Arabic and English.[3]
Culture[edit]
Further information: Music of Sudan, List of Sudanese writers and List of Sudanese singers
Sudanese culture melds the behaviors, practices, and beliefs of about 578 ethnic groups, communicating in 145 different languages, in a region microcosmic of Africa, with geographic extremes varying from sandy desert to tropical forest. Recent evidence suggests that while most citizens of the country identify strongly with both Sudan and their religion, Arab and African supranational identities are much more polarising and contested.[133]
Music[edit]
Main article: Music of Sudan




A Sufi dervish drums up the Friday afternoon crowd in Omdurman.


Sudan has a rich and unique musical culture that has been through chronic instability and repression during the modern history of Sudan. Beginning with the imposition of strict Salafi interpretation of sharia law in 1989, many of the country's most prominent poets, like Mahjoub Sharif, were imprisoned while others, like Mohammed el Amin (returned to Sudan in the mid-1990s) and Mohammed Wardi (returned to Sudan 2003), fled to Cairo. Traditional music suffered too, with traditional Zār ceremonies being interrupted and drums confiscated [1]. At the same time, however, the European militaries contributed to the development of Sudanese music by introducing new instruments and styles; military bands, especially the Scottish bagpipes, were renowned, and set traditional music to military march music. The march March Shulkawi No 1, is an example, set to the sounds of the Shilluk.
Sport[edit]
The most popular sports in Sudan are athletics (track and field) and football. Though not as successful as football, handball, basketball, and volleyball are also popular in Sudan.
Sudanese football has a long history. Sudan was one of the four African nations – the others being Egypt, Ethiopia and South Africa – which formed African football. Sudan hosted the first African Cup of Nations in 1956, and has won the African Cup Of Nations once, in 1970. Two years later, the Sudan National Football Team participated in the 1972 Olympic Games in Munich. The nation's capital is home to the Khartoum League, which is considered to be the oldest football league in Africa.
Sudanese football teams such as Al-Hilal and El-Merreikh are among the nation's strongest teams. Other teams like Khartoum, El-Neel, Al-Nidal El-Nahud and Hay-Al Arab, are also starting to grow in popularity.
Clothing[edit]
Most individual Sudanese wear either traditional or western attire. A traditional garb widely worn in Sudan is the jalabiya, which is a loose-fitting, long-sleeved, collarless ankle-length garment also common to Egypt. The jalabiya is accompanied by a large scarf worn by women, and the garment may be white, colored, striped, and made of fabric varying in thickness, depending on the season of the year and personal preferences.
A similar garment common to Sudan is the thobe or thawb. Like the jalabiya, the thawb is a long, tunic-like garment, although it may have a collar, be less loose-fitting, or have shorter sleeves or length than the jalabiya. The word "thawb" means "garment" in Arabic, and the thawb itself is the traditional Arab dress for men, although the word may also refer to similar tunic-like garments worn by women.







Sudanese Arab writer Leila Aboulela









Sudanese tourists by the Meroë pyramids in various types of clothing.









Sudanese women in Darfur









Herders at the camel market on the far west side of Omdurman




Education[edit]



This section requires expansion. (January 2013)






Khartoum University established in 1902


Main article: Education in Sudan
Education in Sudan is free and compulsory for children aged 6 to 13 years. Primary education consists of eight years, followed by three years of secondary education. The former educational ladder 6 + 3 + 3 was changed in 1990. The primary language at all levels is Arabic. Schools are concentrated in urban areas; many in the West have been damaged or destroyed by years of civil war. In 2001 the World Bank estimated that primary enrollment was 46 percent of eligible pupils and 21 percent of secondary students. Enrollment varies widely, falling below 20 percent in some provinces. Sudan has 19 universities; instruction is primarily in Arabic. Education at the secondary and university levels has been seriously hampered by the requirement that most males perform military service before completing their education.[134]
The literacy rate is 70.2% of total population, male: 79.6%, female: 60.8%.[12]
See also[edit]





Book: Sudan





List of heads of government of Sudan
Outline of Sudan









Sudan portal









Lost Boys of Sudan

References[edit]


^ "Population of capital cities and cities of 100 000 or more inhabitants: latest available year, 1990–2009". Demographic Yearbook 2009 – 2010. United Nations. 2011. pp.&#160;288–289. Retrieved 12 May 2012.&#160; (Table 8)
^ "Sudan: States, Major Cities, Towns &amp; Agglomeration – Statistics &amp; Maps on City Population". City Population. 2011. Retrieved 12 May 2012.&#160;
^ a b "2005 constitution in English" (PDF). Retrieved 31 May 2013.&#160;
^ Rayah, Mubarak B. (1978). Sudan civilization. Democratic Republic of the Sudan, Ministry of Culture and Information. p.&#160;64.&#160;
^ "United Nations world population prospects"(PDF) 2015 revision
^ "Discontent over Sudan census". News24 (Cape Town). Agence France-Presse. 21 May 2009. Retrieved 8 July 2011.&#160;
^ a b c d "Sudan". International Monetary Fund. Retrieved 1 October 2014.&#160;
^ "Gini Index". World Bank. Retrieved 2 March 2011.&#160;
^ "2014 Human Development Report Summary" (PDF). United Nations Development Programme. 2014. pp.&#160;21–25. Retrieved 27 July 2014.&#160;
^ Wells, John C. (2008), Longman Pronunciation Dictionary (3rd ed.), Longman, ISBN&#160;9781405881180&#160;
^ Roach, Peter (2011), Cambridge English Pronouncing Dictionary (18th ed.), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN&#160;9780521152532&#160;
^ a b c d e f g h i "The World Factbook: Sudan". U.S. Central Intelligence Agency. ISSN&#160;1553-8133. Retrieved 10 July 2011.&#160;
^ Collins, Robert O. (2008). A History of Modern Sudan. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-85820-5.
^ Davison, Roderic H. (1960). "Where is the Middle East?". Foreign Affairs 38 (4): 665–675. doi:10.2307/20029452.&#160;
^ a b Keita, S.O.Y. (1993). "Studies and Comments on Ancient Egyptian Biological Relationships". History in Africa 20: 129–54. doi:10.2307/3171969. JSTOR&#160;317196.&#160;
^ "WTO – Understanding the WTO – members". Retrieved 15 February 2015.&#160;
^ "الموقع مغلق للصيانة". Retrieved 15 February 2015.&#160;
^ International Association for the History of Religions (1959), Numen, Leiden: EJ Brill, p.&#160;131, West Africa may be taken as the country stretching from Senegal in the West, to the Cameroons in the East; sometimes it has been called the central and western Sudan, the Bilad as-Sūdan, ‘Land of the Blacks’, of the Arabs&#160;.
^ "Sudan A Country Study". Countrystudies.us.&#160;
^ Roux, Georges (1992). Ancient Iraq. Penguin Books Limited. ISBN&#160;978-0-14-193825-7.&#160;
^ Metz, Helen C. (1991). Sudan: a Country Study. Washington: GPO for the Library of Congress. pp.&#160;"The Coming of Islam".&#160;
^ Churchill, Winston (1902). "The Rebellion of the Mahdi". The River War.&#160;
^ Rudolf Carl Freiherr von Slatin; Sir Francis Reginald Wingate (1896). Fire and Sword in the Sudan. E. Arnold. Retrieved 26 June 2013.&#160;
^ Domke, D. Michelle (November 1997). "ICE Case Studies; Case Number: 3; Case Identifier: Sudan; Case Name: Civil War in the Sudan: Resources or Religion?". Inventory of Conflict and Environment (via the School of International Service at the American University). Retrieved 8 January 2011.&#160;
^ "Brief History of the Sudan". Sudan Embassy in London. 20 November 2008. Archived from the original on 20 November 2008. Retrieved 31 May 2013.&#160;
^ "Factbox — Sudan's President Omar Hassan al-Bashir". Reuters. 14 July 2008. Retrieved 8 January 2011.&#160;
^ Bekele, Yilma (12 July 2008). "Chickens Are Coming Home To Roost!". Ethiopian Review (Addis Ababa). Retrieved 13 January 2011.&#160;
^ Kepel, Gilles (2002). Jihad: The Trail of Political Islam. Harvard University Press. p.&#160;181. ISBN&#160;978-0-674-01090-1.&#160;
^ Walker, Peter (14 July 2008). "Profile: Omar al-Bashir". The Guardian (London). Retrieved 13 January 2011.&#160;
^ The New York Times. 16 March 1996. p. 4.
^ "History of the Sudan". HistoryWorld. n.d. Retrieved 13 January 2011.&#160;
^ Shahzad, Syed Saleem (23 February 2002). "Bin Laden Uses Iraq To Plot New Attacks". Asia Times (Hong Kong). Retrieved 14 January 2011.&#160;
^ "Families of USS Cole Victims Sue Sudan for $105 Million". Fox News Channel. Associated Press. 13 March 2007. Retrieved 14 January 2011.&#160;
^ Fuller, Graham E. (2004). The Future of Political Islam. Palgrave Macmillan. p.&#160;111. ISBN&#160;978-1-4039-6556-1.&#160;
^ Wright, Lawrence (2006). The Looming Tower. Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group. pp.&#160;221–223. ISBN&#160;978-0-307-26608-8.&#160;
^ "Profile: Sudan's President Bashir". BBC News. 25 November 2003. Retrieved 8 January 2011.&#160;
^ Ali, Wasil (12 May 2008). "Sudanese Islamist Opposition Leader Denies Link with Darfur Rebels". Sudan Tribune (Paris). Retrieved 31 May 2013.&#160;
^ "ICC Prosecutor Presents Case Against Sudanese President, Hassan Ahmad al Bashir, for Genocide, Crimes Against Humanity and War Crimes in Darfur" (Press release). Office of the Prosecutor, International Criminal Court. 14 July 2008. Archived from the original on 25 March 2009.&#160;
^ "Warrant issued for Sudan's Bashir". BBC News. 4 March 2009. Retrieved 14 January 2011.&#160;
^ Lynch, Colum; Hamilton, Rebecca (13 July 2010). "International Criminal Court Charges Sudan's Omar Hassan al-Bashir with Genocide". The Washington Post. Retrieved 14 January 2011.&#160;
^ "UNMIS Media Monitoring Report" (PDF). United Nations Mission in Sudan. 4 January 2006. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 March 2006.&#160;
^ "Darfur Peace Agreement". US Department of State. 8 May 2006. Archived from the original on 2 August 2006.&#160;
^ "Restraint Plea to Sudan and Chad". Al Jazeera. Agence France-Presse. 27 December 2005. Archived from the original on 12 March 2008.&#160;
^ "Sudan, Chad Agree To Stop Fighting". China Daily (Beijing). Associated Press. 4 May 2007.&#160;
^ "UN: Situation in Sudan could deteriorate if flooding continues". International Herald Tribune (Paris). Associated Press. 6 August 2007. Archived from the original on 26 February 2008.&#160;
^ "Sudan Floods: At Least 365,000 Directly Affected, Response Ongoing" (Press release). UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. Relief Web. 6 August 2007. Retrieved 13 January 2011.&#160;
^ "Sudan geography". Institute for Security Studies. 12 January 2005. Archived from the original on 13 May 2011.&#160;
^ "Sudan". Country Studies. n.d. Retrieved 26 June 2010.&#160;
^ "Sudan — Geography &amp; Environment". Oxfam GB. n.d. Retrieved 13 January 2011.&#160;
^ "Geography of Sudan". Sudan Embassy in London. n.d. Archived from the original on 30 September 2005.&#160;
^ "Desertification &amp; Desert Cultivation Studies Institute". University of Khartoum. n.d. Retrieved 31 May 2013.&#160;
^ "Soil conservation and land reclamation in the Sudan". United Nations University. n.d. Retrieved 26 June 2010.&#160;
^ [unreliable source?] "Sudan — Environment". Encyclopedia of the Nations. n.d. Retrieved 13 January 2011.&#160;
^ "Composition of macro geographical (continental) regions, geographical sub-regions, and selected economic and other groupings". United Nations Statistics Division. 11 February 2013. Retrieved 20 July 2013.&#160;
^ a b "President Omar al-Bashir Declared Winner of Sudan Poll". BBC News. 26 April 2010. Retrieved 8 January 2011.&#160;
^ Hamilton, Rebecca (13 August 2010). "In Challenge to Sudanese Ruling Party, Student Activists Rally for Democracy". The Washington Post (via the Pulitzer Center for Crisis Reporting). Retrieved 8 January 2010.&#160;
^ Mazen, Maram (31 March 2010). "Sudan's Ruling Party Rigged Upcoming Vote, Crisis Group Says". Bloomberg BusinessWeek (New York). Retrieved 8 January 2011.&#160;
^ Butty, James (1 April 2010). "Yasir Arman's Sudan Expert Says Yasir Arman's Withdrawal from Election Significant". Voice of America. Retrieved 8 January 2011.&#160;
^ "Chaotic Sudan Count Open to Manipulation — Observers". Reuters. 10 May 2010. Retrieved 4 June 2013.&#160;
^ "Sudan's haphazard Sharia legal system has claimed too many victims". The Guardian.&#160;
^ "Sudanese woman sentenced to stoning death over adultery claims".&#160;
^ "Woman faces death by stoning in Sudan".&#160;
^ "Rights Group Protests Stoning of Women in Sudan".&#160;
^ "Woman faces 40 lashes for wearing trousers".&#160;
^ "Sudanese woman who married a non-Muslim sentenced to death".&#160;
^ "Pregnant woman sentenced to death and 100 lashes".&#160;
^ "Sudan&#160;: Man gets 40 lashes for sharing 'rape' video".&#160;
^ "Detainee dies in custody in Port Sudan after court-ordered flogging".&#160;
^ "Sudan: Pair accused of kissing face 40 lashes".&#160;
^ "Detainee dies in custody in Port Sudan after court-ordered flogging". Sudan Tribune.&#160;
^ "Two Sudanese men died after being detained and flogged 40 times each, says rights group". The Journal.&#160;
^ "Two Sudan men die after floggings: rights group". Agence France-Presse.&#160;
^ "Sudanese authorities flog 53 Christians on rioting charges". The BG News.&#160;
^ "Shocking video: Sudanese woman flogged for getting into car with man who isn't related to her".&#160;
^ "Sudan: Imminent Execution/Torture/Unfair trial". Amnesty International. 17 July 2002. Archived from the original on 5 June 2008. Retrieved 19 December 2009.&#160;
^ "Field Listing — Legal System". The World Factbook. US Central Intelligence Agency. n.d. Retrieved 14 January 2011.&#160;
^ "Sharia law to be tightened if Sudan splits – president". BBC News. 19 December 2010. Retrieved 4 October 2011.&#160;
^ http://www.nydailynews.com/news/world/sudanese-woman-sentenced-death-christian-freed-court-article-1.1840177
^ "The world's enduring dictators". CBS News. 16 May 2011.
^ Goodman, Peter S. (23 December 2004). "China Invests Heavily In Sudan's Oil Industry — Beijing Supplies Arms Used on Villagers". The Washington Post. Retrieved 31 May 2013.&#160;
^ "Sudan supports Moroccan sovereignty over Southern Provinces". Morocco Times (Casablanca). 26 December 2005. Archived from the original on 26 February 2006.&#160;
^ "U.S. Backs Saudi-Led Yemeni Bombing With Logistics, Spying". Bloomberg. 26 March 2015.
^ "Saudi-led coalition strikes rebels in Yemen, inflaming tensions in region". CNN. 27 March 2015.
^ "Sudan: National Security". Mongabay. n.d. Retrieved 14 January 2011.&#160;
^ "Q&amp;A: Sudan's Darfur Conflict". BBC News. 23 February 2010. Retrieved 13 January 2011.&#160;
^ "Darfur Peace Talks To Resume in Abuja on Tuesday: AU". People's Daily (Beijing). Xinhua News Agency. 28 November 2005. Retrieved 14 January 2011.&#160;
^ "Hundreds Killed in Attacks in Eastern Chad — U.N. Agency Says Sudanese Militia Destroyed Villages". The Washington Post. Associated Press. 11 April 2007. Retrieved 14 January 2011.&#160;
^ "Sudan". International Organization for Migration. 2 May 2013. Retrieved 31 May 2013.&#160;
^ "The Sudans". Gatineau, Quebec: Canadian International Development Agency. 29 January 2013. Retrieved 31 May 2013.&#160;
^ "Darfur – overview". Unicef. n.d. Retrieved 31 May 2013.&#160;
^ "South Sudan, Nuba Mountains, May 2003 – WFP delivered food aid via road convoy". World Food Programme. 8 May 2003. Retrieved 31 May 2013.&#160;
^ "EU, UNIDO set up Centre in Sudan to develop industrial skills, entrepreneurship for job creation" (Press release). UN Industrial Development Organization. 8 February 2011. Retrieved 4 June 2013.&#160;
^ Staff writer (April 2001). Sudan: Nearly 2 Million Dead as a Result of the World's Longest Running Civil War at the Wayback Machine (archived 10 December 2004). U.S. Committee for Refugees. Archived 10 December 2004 on the Internet Archive.
^ "SUDAN: CSI highlights 'slavery and manifestations of racism'". IRIN. September 2001.
^ "allAfrica.com: Sudanese Authorities Urged Not to Introduce "Censorship Bureau"". allAfrica.com. Retrieved 15 February 2015.&#160;
^ UNICEF 2013, p. 27.
^ "Time to Let Sudan’s Girls Be Girls, Not Brides". Retrieved 15 February 2015.&#160;
^ "Sudan worst in Africa with legal marriage at age 10". Thomson Reuters Foundation. Retrieved 15 February 2015.&#160;
^ "Letter to the U.N. Security Council on Sudan Sanctions and Civilian Protection in Darfur". Human Rights Watch. 15 August 2006. Retrieved 4 June 2013.&#160;
^ "Darfur Tops U.S. List of Worst Human Rights Abuses". USA Today (Washington DC). Associated Press. 6 March 2007. Retrieved 8 January 2011.&#160;
^ "Q&amp;A: Sudan's Darfur conflict". BBC News. 8 February 2010.&#160;
^ "Sudan – Report 2006". Amnesty International.&#160;
^ "Africa – Sudan 'has 6,000 child soldiers'". Retrieved 15 February 2015.&#160;
^ "Memorial of the Government of Sudan" (PDF). The Hague: Permanent Court of Arbitration. 18 December 2008. p.&#160;xii.&#160;
^ "South Sudan ready to declare independence" (Press release). Menas Associates. 8 July 2011. Retrieved 4 June 2013.&#160;
^ "Economy". Government of South Sudan. 20 October 2009. Archived from the original on 13 July 2011.&#160;
^ (registration required) Gettleman, Jeffrey (24 October 2006). "War in Sudan? Not Where the Oil Wealth Flows". The New York Times. Retrieved 24 May 2010.&#160;
^ DfID Sudan: "Operational Plan 2011–2015"
^ "South Sudan Gets Ready for Independence". Al Jazeera. 21 June 2011. Retrieved 23 June 2011.&#160;
^ Gettleman, Jeffrey (20 June 2011). "As Secession Nears, Sudan Steps Up Drive to Stop Rebels". The New York Times. Retrieved 23 June 2011.&#160;
^ Richard P. C. Brown (1992). Public Debt and Private Wealth: Debt, Capital Flight and the Imf in Sudan. Macmillan Press. ISBN&#160;978-0-333-57543-7.&#160;
^ "The 'Big 4' – How oil revenues are connected to Khartoum". Amnesty International USA. Retrieved 14 March 2009.&#160;
^ Herbst, Moira (14 March 2008). "Oil for China, Guns for Darfur". Bloomberg BusinessWeek (New York). Retrieved 14 March 2009.&#160;
^ Trivett, Vincent (8 July 2011). "Oil-Rich South Sudan Has Hours To Choose Between North Sudan, China And The U.S.". Business Insider (New York). Retrieved 9 July 2011.&#160;
^ Corruption Perceptions Index 2013. Full table and rankings. Transparency International. Retrieved 4 December 2013.
^ Welthungerhilfe, IFPRI, and Concern Worldwide: 2013 Global Hunger Index – The challenge of hunger: Building Resilience to Achieve Food and Nutrition Security. Bonn, Washington D. C., Dublin. October 2013.
^ "The 2013 Human Development Report – "The Rise of the South: Human Progress in a Diverse World"". HDRO (Human Development Report Office) United Nations Development Programme. pp.&#160;144–147. Retrieved 15 January 2014.&#160;
^ "Sudan:Population living below $1.25 PPP per day (%)". undp.org. Retrieved 1 January 2014.&#160;
^ Heavens, Andrew (21 May 2009). "Southerners dismiss Sudan pre-poll census count". Reuters. Retrieved 28 May 2013.&#160;
^ "Sudan – Population". Library of Congress Country Studies.&#160;
^ a b "World Refugee Survey 2008". U.S. Committee for Refugees and Immigrants. 19 June 2008.&#160;
^ "World Directory of Minorities and Indigenous Peoples – Sudan: Copts". Minority Rights Group International. 2008. Retrieved 21 December 2010.&#160;
^ "Copts migration". Sudanupdate.org.&#160;
^ Bechtold, Peter R. (1991). "More Turbulence in Sudan". In Voll, John. Sudan: State and Society in Crisis. Boulder, CA: Westview Press. p.&#160;1.&#160;
^ Suliman, Osman (2010). The Darfur Conflict: Geography or Institutions?. Taylor &amp; Francis. p.&#160;115. ISBN&#160;978-0-203-83616-3.&#160;
^ وزير خارجية السودان الاسبق حسين ابوصالح ل"الشرق"&#160;: التهديدات الامريكية للسودان كانت تصلنا في ورقة صغيرة دون ترويسة اوامضاء (in Arabic). Almshaheer.com.&#160;
^ Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland (1888). Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland 17. p.&#160;16. Retrieved 8 May 2011.&#160;
^ Religion in Sudan according to the CIA World Factbook
^ "Sudan Overview". UNDP Sudan. Retrieved 20 June 2012.&#160;
^ Gordon, Raymond G., Jr. (ed.), 2009. Ethnologue: Languages of the World, 16th ed. Dallas: SIL International. Online version: "Languages of Sudan"
^ Karen Andrae (2009) Language for inclusion (Sign language in Sudan) on YouTube
^ Leclerc, Jacques. "L'aménagement linguistique dans le monde, "Soudan"" (in French). Trésor de la langue française au Québec. Retrieved 31 May 2013.&#160;
^ "Hamilton, A. and Hudson, J. (2014) Bribery and Identity: Evidence from Sudan. Bath Economic Research Papers, No 21/14"
^ "Sudan country profile" (PDF). Library of Congress Federal Research Division. December 2004. Retrieved 31 May 2013.&#160;


Bibliography[edit]
Books

Brown, Richard P.C. (1992) Public Debt and Private Wealth: debt, capital flight and the IMF in Sudan. Macmillan Publishers London ISBN 0-333-57543-1.
Churchill, Winston (1899; 2000). The River War — An Historical Account of the Reconquest of the Soudan. Carroll &amp; Graf Publishers (New York City). ISBN 978-0-7867-0751-5.
Clammer, Paul (2005). Sudan — The Bradt Travel Guide. Bradt Travel Guides (Chalfont St. Peter); Globe Pequot Press. (Guilford, Connecticut). ISBN 978-1-84162-114-2.
Evans-Pritchard, Blake; Polese, Violetta (2008). Sudan — The City Trail Guide. City Trail Publishing. ISBN 978-0-9559274-0-9.
El Mahdi, Mandour. (1965). A Short History of the Sudan. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-913158-9.
Fadlalla, Mohamed H. (2005). The Problem of Dar Fur, iUniverse (New York City). ISBN 978-0-595-36502-9.
Fadlalla, Mohamed H. (2004). Short History Of Sudan. iUniverse (New York City). ISBN 978-0-595-31425-6.
Fadlalla, Mohamed H. (2007). UN Intervention in Dar Fur, iUniverse (New York City). ISBN 978-0-595-42979-0.
Jok, Jok Madut (2007). Sudan — Race, Religion and Violence. Oneworld Publications (Oxford). ISBN 978-1-85168-366-6.
Mwakikagile, Godfrey (2001). Slavery in Mauritania and Sudan — The State Against Blacks, in The Modern African State — Quest for Transformation. Nova Science Publishers (Huntington, New York). ISBN 978-1-56072-936-5.
O'Fahey, Rex Seán; Spauling, Jay Lloyd (1974). Kingdoms of the Sudan. Methuen Publishing (London). ISBN 978-0-416-77450-4. Covers Sennar and Darfur.
Peterson, Scott (2001). Me Against My Brother — At War in Somalia, Sudan and Rwanda — A Journalist Reports from the Battlefields of Africa. Routledge (London; New York City). ISBN 978-0-203-90290-5.
Prunier, Gérard (2005). Darfur — The Ambiguous Genocide. Cornell University Press (Ithaca, New York). ISBN 978-0-8014-4450-0.
Welsby, Derek A. (2002). The Medieval Kingdoms of Nubia — Pagans, Christians and Muslims Along the Middle Nile. British Museum Press (London). ISBN 978-0-7141-1947-2.
Zilfū, ʻIṣmat Ḥasan (translation: Clark, Peter) (1980). Karari — The Sudanese Account of the Battle of Omdurman. Frederick Warne &amp; Co (London). ISBN 978-0-7232-2677-2.

Article

"Quo Vadis bilad as-Sudan? The Contemporary Framework for a National Interim Constitution". Law in Africa (Cologne; 2005). Vol. 8, pp.&#160; 63–82. ISSN&#160;1435-0963.

External links[edit]



Find more about
Sudan
at Wikipedia's sister projects




Definitions from Wiktionary



Media from Commons



News stories from Wikinews



Quotations from Wikiquote



Source texts from Wikisource



Textbooks from Wikibooks



Travel guide from Wikivoyage



Learning resources from Wikiversity



Government of Sudan website
Sudan web resources provided by GovPubs at the University of Colorado–Boulder Libraries
Sudan at DMOZ
 Wikimedia Atlas of Sudan
Sudan entry at The World Factbook
Sudan profile from the BBC News
CIMIC activities in the African Union Mission in Sudan






&#160;
Articles relating to Sudan
















v
t
e


Countries and territories of Africa






Sovereign states



Algeria
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of the Congo
Djibouti
Egypt
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gabon
The Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Ivory Coast (Côte d'Ivoire)
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
São Tomé and Príncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
South Sudan
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Tunisia
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe












Territories and
dependencies




Îles Éparses&#160;/ Mayotte&#160;/ Réunion

France


Pantelleria&#160;/ Pelagie Islands

Italy


Madeira

Portugal


Canary Islands&#160;/ Ceuta&#160;/ Melilla&#160;/ Plazas de soberanía

Spain


Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha

UK


Socotra

Yemen


Western Sahara1









States with limited
recognition




Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic
Somaliland









1 Unclear sovereignty.











&#160;
&#160;Geographic locale







Lat. and Long. 15°37′59″N 32°31′59″E﻿ / ﻿15.63306°N 32.53306°E﻿ / 15.63306; 32.53306 (Khartoum)








v
t
e


Middle East









Bahrain
Cyprus
Egypt
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Jordan
Kuwait
Lebanon
Northern Cyprus
Oman
Palestine
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Syria
Turkey
United Arab Emirates
Yemen














Conflicts
Cuisine
Etiquette
History

timeline


Music
















v
t
e


Countries bordering the Red Sea









&#160;Djibouti
&#160;Egypt
&#160;Eritrea
&#160;Ethiopia
&#160;Israel
&#160;Jordan
&#160;Saudi Arabia
&#160;Somalia
&#160;Sudan
&#160;Yemen
















v
t
e


Countries and territories bordering the Indian Ocean






Africa



Comoros
Djibouti
Egypt
Eritrea
France

Mayotte
Réunion


Kenya
Madagascar
Mauritius
Mozambique
Rodrigues (Mauritius)
Seychelles
Somalia
Somaliland (Unrecognized)
South Africa
Sudan
Tanzania
Zanzibar, Tanzania











Asia



Bahrain
Bangladesh
British Indian Ocean Territory

Chagos Archipelago - United Kingdom


Christmas Island (Australia)
Cocos (Keeling) Islands (Australia)
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Jordan
Kuwait
Malaysia
Maldives
Myanmar
Oman
Pakistan
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Sri Lanka
Thailand
Timor-Leste
United Arab Emirates
Yemen








Other



Antarctica

Australian Antarctic Territory
French Southern and Antarctic Lands
Heard Island and McDonald Islands


Australia




















&#160;
International membership
















v
t
e


African Union (AU)






History







Pan-Africanism
Casablanca Group
Abuja Treaty
Sirte Declaration
Lome Summit








Organisation of African Unity



Chairperson
Secretary General














Geography



Borders
Extreme points
Member states
Regions








Organs







Executive Council
Permanent Representatives' Committee
Specialized Technical Committees








Assembly



Chairperson








Commission



Chairperson
Deputy Chairperson
AUCC








Pan-African Parliament



Bureau
Secretariat
Gallagher Estate








African Court of Justice



African Court on Human and Peoples' Rights








ECOSOCC Committees



Peace and Security
Political Affairs
Infrastructure and Energy
Social Affairs and Health
HR, Sciences and Technology
Trade and Industry
Rural Economy and Agriculture
Economic Affairs
Women and Gender
Cross-Cutting Programs








Financial Institutions



African Central Bank
African Monetary Fund
African Investment Bank








Peace and Security Council



ACIRC
African Standby Force
Panel of the Wise
UNAMID
AMIB
AMIS
AMISOM
MISCA











Politics







APRM
Foreign relations
African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights
African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights
Enlargement








Symbols



Anthem
Emblem
Flag











Economy



Currencies
Development Bank
African Economic Community
NEPAD
African Free Trade Zone
Tripartite Free Trade Area








Culture



Africa Day
Languages








Theory



Afro
United States of Africa
United States of Latin Africa











 Category
















v
t
e


Community of Sahel-Saharan States









Benin
Burkina Faso
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Djibouti
Egypt
Eritrea
The Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Ivory Coast
Liberia
Libya
Mali
Morocco
Niger
Nigeria
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Somalia
Sudan
Togo
Tunisia
















v
t
e


Arab League









 Arab League
 Lists








Politics



Charter
Council
Enlargement
Flag
Geography
Headquarters
History
Military
Joint Defence Council
Parliament
Arab Union











Membership




Members



Algeria
Bahrain
Comoros
Djibouti
Egypt
Iraq
Jordan
Kuwait
Lebanon
Libya
Mauritania
Morocco
Oman
Palestine
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Somalia
Sudan
Syria (opposition)
Tunisia
United Arab Emirates
Yemen








Observers



Brazil
Eritrea
India
Turkey
Venezuela








Suspended



Ba'athist Syria








Candidates



Chad
South Sudan











Diplomacy



Arab Peace Initiative
Arab League monitors in Syria
Arab League–European Union relations
Foreign relations








Life



Demographics
Economy

GDP
Economic and Social Council


Institutions
Sport
Transport











Pan-Arabism
Union of Arab National Olympic Committees

Arab Games






















&#160;
Languages
















v
t
e


English-speaking world









Click on a coloured area to see an article about English in that country or region








































































&#160;
Further links










Articles



English-speaking world
History of the English language
British Empire
English in the Commonwealth of Nations








Lists



List of countries by English-speaking population
List of countries where English is an official language












&#160;







Countries and territories where English (or English Creole) is the national language or the native language of the majority








Africa



Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha








Americas



Anguilla
Antigua and Barbuda
The Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Bermuda
British Virgin Islands
Canada
Cayman Islands
Dominica
Falkland Islands
Grenada
Guyana
Jamaica
Montserrat
Saba
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Martin
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Sint Eustatius
Sint Maarten
South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands
Trinidad and Tobago
Turks and Caicos Islands
United States
United States Virgin Islands








Europe



Guernsey
Ireland
Isle of Man
Jersey
United Kingdom








Oceania



Australia
New Zealand
Norfolk Island
Pitcairn Islands











&#160;







Countries and territories where English is an official language, but not the majority first language








Africa



Botswana
Cameroon
The Gambia
Ghana
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Malawi
Mauritius
Namibia
Nigeria
Rwanda
Sierra Leone
Somaliland
South Africa
South Sudan
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe








Americas



Puerto Rico








Asia



Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Hong Kong S.A.R.
India
Pakistan
Philippines
Singapore








Europe



Gibraltar
Malta








Oceania



American Samoa
Cook Islands
Fiji
Guam
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Micronesia
Nauru
Niue
Northern Mariana Islands
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Tokelau
Tuvalu
Vanuatu















Dependencies shown in italics.


























Coordinates: 15°N 032°E﻿ / ﻿15°N 32°E﻿ / 15; 32





Authority control



VIAF: 150756275
GND: 4058378-8
BNF: cb11880521p (data)
NDL: 00571512
NKC: ge131030















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sudan&amp;oldid=691606483"					
				Categories: SudanCountries in AfricaNorth African countriesEast African countriesArabic-speaking countries and territoriesEnglish-speaking countries and territoriesFederal countriesFederal republicsFormer British coloniesIslamic statesLeast developed countriesMember states of the African UnionMember states of the Arab LeagueMember states of the Organisation of Islamic CooperationMember states of the United NationsMilitary dictatorshipsStates and territories established in 1956Muslim-majority countriesHidden categories: All articles lacking reliable referencesArticles lacking reliable references from January 2011Pages with login required references or sourcesCS1 uses Arabic-language script (ar)CS1 Arabic-language sources (ar)CS1 French-language sources (fr)Use dmy dates from March 2015Articles containing Arabic-language textArticles including recorded pronunciationsWikipedia articles needing page number citations from June 2013Articles needing additional references from January 2011All articles needing additional referencesArticles needing additional references from May 2012All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from January 2011Vague or ambiguous time from January 2011Articles with unsourced statements from February 2013Articles to be expanded from January 2013All articles to be expandedArticles with DMOZ linksCoordinates on WikidataWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers				
							
		
		
			