


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Tate
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								  (Redirected from Tate Gallery)
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				This article is about the UK art galleries.  For other uses, see Tate (disambiguation).




The logo of Tate, used in several similar versions and colours, was designed by Wolff Olins in 2000.


The Tate is an institution that houses the United Kingdom's national collection of British art, and international modern and contemporary art. It is a network of four art museums: Tate Britain, London (until 2000 known as the Tate Gallery, founded 1897), Tate Liverpool (founded 1988), Tate St Ives, Cornwall (founded 1993) and Tate Modern, London (founded 2000), with a complementary website, Tate Online (created 1998). Tate is not a government institution, but its main sponsor is the Department for Culture, Media and Sport.[1][2]
Tate is used as the operating name for the corporate body, which was established by the Museums and Galleries Act 1992 as The Board of Trustees of the Tate Gallery.
The gallery was founded in 1897, as the National Gallery of British Art. When its role was changed to include the national collection of modern art as well as the national collection of British art, in 1932, it was renamed the Tate Gallery after sugar magnate Henry Tate of Tate &amp; Lyle, who had laid the foundations for the collection. The Tate Gallery was housed in the current building occupied by Tate Britain, which is situated in Millbank, London. In 2000, the Tate Gallery transformed itself into the current-day Tate, or the Tate Modern, which consists of a federation of four museums: Tate Britain, which displays the collection of British art from 1500 to the present day; Tate Modern, which is also in London, houses the Tate's collection of British and international modern and contemporary art from 1900 to the present day. Tate Liverpool has the same purpose as Tate Modern but on a smaller scale, and Tate St Ives displays modern and contemporary art by artists who have connections with the area. All four museums share the Tate Collection. One of the Tate's most publicised art events is the awarding of the annual Turner Prize, which takes place at Tate Britain.



Contents


1 History and development
2 Tate Online
3 Administration and funding
4 Controversies
5 Logo and brand
6 See also
7 References
8 External links



History and development[edit]




The original Tate Gallery, now renamed Tate Britain


The original Tate art gallery was called the National Gallery of British Art, situated on Millbank, Pimlico, London at the site of the former Millbank Prison. The idea of a National Gallery of British Art was first proposed in the 1820s by Sir John Leicester, Baron de Tabley. It took a step nearer when Robert Vernon gave his collection to the National Gallery in 1847. A decade later John Sheepshanks gave his collection to the South Kensington Museum (later the Victoria &amp; Albert Museum), known for years as the National Gallery of Art (the same title as the Tate Gallery had). Forty years later Sir Henry Tate who was a sugar magnate and a major collector of Victorian art, offered to fund the building of the gallery to house British Art on the condition that the State pay for the site and revenue costs. Henry Tate also donated his own collection to the gallery. It was initially a collection solely of modern British art, concentrating on the works of modern—that is Victorian era—painters. It was controlled by the National Gallery until 1954.
In 1915, Sir Hugh Lane bequeathed his collection of European modern art to Dublin, but controversially this went to the Tate, which expanded its collection to include foreign art and continued to acquire contemporary art. In 1926 and 1937, the art dealer and patron Joseph Duveen paid for two major expansions of the gallery building. His father had earlier paid for an extension to house the major part of the Turner Bequest, which in 1987 was transferred to a wing paid for by Sir Charles Clore. Henry Courtauld also endowed Tate with a purchase fund. By the mid 20th century, it was fulfilling a dual function of showing the history of British art as well as international modern art. In 1954, the Tate Gallery was finally separated from the National Gallery.




Tate Liverpool opened in 1988.


During the 1950s and 1960s, the visual arts department of the Arts Council of Great Britain funded and organised temporary exhibitions at the Tate Gallery including, in 1966, a retrospective of Marcel Duchamp. Later, the Tate began organising its own temporary exhibition programme. In 1979 with funding from a Japanese bank a large modern extension was opened that would also house larger income generating exhibitions. In 1987, the Clore Wing opened to house the major part of the Turner bequest and also provided a 200-seat auditorium. (The "Centenary Development," in 2001, provided improved access and public amenities)




Tate St Ives opened in 1993.


In 1988, an outpost in north west England opened as Tate Liverpool. This shows various works of modern art from the Tate collection as well as mounting its own temporary exhibitions. In 2007, Tate Liverpool hosted the Turner Prize, the first time this has been held outside London. This was an overture to Liverpool's being the European Capital of Culture 2008.
In 1993, another offshoot opened, Tate St Ives. It exhibits work by modern British artists, particularly those of the St Ives School. Additionally the Tate also manages the Barbara Hepworth Museum and Sculpture Garden, which opened in 1980.




Tate Modern opened in 2000.


Neither of these two new Tates had a significant effect on the functioning of the original London Tate Gallery, whose size was increasingly proving a constraint as the collection grew. It was a logical step to separate the "British" and "Modern" aspects of the collection, and they are now housed in separate buildings in London. The original gallery is now called Tate Britain and is the national gallery for British art from 1500 to the present day, as well as some modern British art. Tate Modern, in Bankside Power Station on the south side of the Thames, opened in 2000 and now exhibits the national collection of modern art from 1900 to the present day, including some modern British art. In its first year, the Tate Modern was the most popular museum in the world, with 5,250,000 visitors.
Sir Nicholas Serota has been the director of the Tate since 1988, when he took over from Sir Alan Bowness.
In the late 2000s, the Tate announced a new development project to the south of the existing building. According to the museum: "This new development will transform Tate Modern. An iconic new building will be added at the south of the existing gallery. It will create more spaces for displaying the collection, performance and installation art and learning, all allowing visitors to engage more deeply with art, as well as creating more social spaces for visitors to unwind and relax in the gallery."[3] Arts philanthropist John Studzinski donated more than £6&#160;million to the project.[4][4][5]
Tate Online[edit]
Tate Online is the Tate's website. Since its launch in 1998, the site has provided information on all four physical Tate galleries (Tate Britain, Tate St Ives, Tate Liverpool and Tate Modern) under the same domain. Tate Online helps visitors prepare and extend visits to the physical sites but also acts as a destination in its own right. Other resources include illustrated information on all works in Tate's Collection of British and Modern international art, structured and informal e-learning opportunities for all visitors, over 600 hours of archived webcast events, all articles from the magazine Tate Etc., and a series of bespoke net art commissions. BT was the primary sponsor of Tate Online from 2001 to 2009.
In addition to providing information about the galleries and organisation, Tate Online has been used as a platform for Internet art exhibits, termed Net Art,[6] which are organised as part of Tate's Intermedia Art initiative[7] covering new media art. So far, 13 net art exhibitions have been shown since the initiative started in 2000 including Tate in Space[8] (2002) which was nominated in the Interactive Art category for the 2003 BAFTA Interactive awards.
The Tate Online Shop[9] sits under the main Tate site and offers a wide range of books, prints and products that reflect and support the primary goal of Tate: to promote the knowledge, understanding and enjoyment of art. Profits from the online shop help to support the work of the galleries.
Administration and funding[edit]
The Tate receives annual funding from the Department for Culture, Media &amp; Sport. It is administered by a board of trustees, who are responsible for the running of the gallery and appoint the Director (for a period of seven years). Under the Charities Act 1993, the Tate is an exempt charity accountable directly to Government rather than the Charity Commission for financial returns etc. However, the Trustees are still expected to follow the broad responsibilities of charity trustees, and may be subject to Charity Commission oversight on these elements of their activities.
Various bodies have been set up to support the Tate including Tate Members for the general public, where a yearly fee gives rights such as free entry to charging exhibitions and members rooms. There is also Tate Patrons for a higher subscription fee and the Tate Foundation. There are a number of corporate sponsors. In addition individual shows are often sponsored.
Tate now spends around £1 million of its general funds each year on purchasing acquisitions and their related costs. The Outset Contemporary Art Fund was established in 2003, by Tate patrons Yana Peel and Candida Gertler. In collaboration with the Frieze Art Fair, the fund buys works from the fair for the Tate's collections. Other funds for acquisitions are raised by Tate funding groups such as the Members, the Patrons and the American Patrons of Tate and its sub-committees, the North American Acquisitions Committee and Latin American Acquisitions Committee. The American Patrons were renamed in 2013 to reflect their expanding geographical base of support; since 1999, this support group alone has raised more than $100 million.[10]
In 2010, a photography acquisitions committee was launched.[11] In 2012, the Tate established a South Asian acquisitions committee to collect contemporary and modern art from India and surrounding countries, as well as a committee for works from Russia, Eastern Europe and the CIS (Commonwealth of Independent States).[12]
Controversies[edit]

In the 19th century, there was dispute over the acquisitions made with the Chantrey bequest and accusations that favouritism resulted in the purchase of dull work by Royal Academicians.[citation needed]
In 1971, an exhibition by Robert Morris called Bodyspacemotionthings was closed after five days due to health and safety concerns.[13]
In 1972, the Tate Gallery purchased a work by Carl Andre called Equivalent VIII. During a 1976 exhibition of the work, The Times newspaper published an article using the work to complain about institutional waste of taxpayers' money. The article made the piece infamous and it was subjected to ridicule in the media and vandalism. The work is still popularly known as "The Bricks," and has entered the British public lexicon.[citation needed]
Each year, the Turner Prize is held at a Tate Gallery (historically at Tate Britain) and is awarded to an artist under 50 who is either British or primarily working in Great Britain. It is the subject of great controversy and creates much media attention for contemporary British art, as well as attracting demonstrations.[14]
In 1995, it was revealed that the Tate had accepted a gift of £20,000 from art fraudster John Drewe. The gallery had given Drewe access to its archives which he then used to forge documents authenticating fake modern paintings that he then sold.[15]
In 1998, Sir Nicholas Serota, director of Tate, conceived 'Operation Cobalt', the secret and ultimately successful buyback of two of the Tate's paintings by JMW Turner that had been stolen from a German gallery in 1994. See Frankfurt art theft (1994).
In 2006, it was revealed that the Tate was the only national-funded museum not to be accredited to the Museums, Libraries and Archives Council (MLA), as it did not wish to abide by guidelines that deaccessioned work should first be offered to other museums. The MLA threatened to bar the Tate from acquiring works under the Acceptance in Lieu (AIL) scheme, whereby works are given to the nation to settle inheritance tax. A total of 1,800 museums are accredited with the MLA.[16]
Tate has been criticised for accepting sponsorship from BP. Justice and climate change campaigners including Platform London, Art Not Oil and Liberate Tate have called for a protest against the petrol company's sponsorship of the gallery, including the 2012 Cultural Olympiad.[17]

Logo and brand[edit]
The Tate logo was designed by international brand consultancy Wolff Olins in 2000 as part of a larger rebranding effort focused around the idea "look again, think again." The museum uses a range of logos that move in and out of focus, "suggesting the dynamic nature of Tate – always changing but always recognizable"[18] Variations include a standard logo, a blurred version, a faded version and a halftone version consisting of dots rather than smooth fading.[19]
See also[edit]

Tate Etc.
Turner Prize
Tate Publishing Ltd, a publisher of art books associated with the Tate Gallery
Tate Images, the picture library of Tate which licenses images of artwork from Tate's collection, the Unilever Series, Hyundai Commission, Tate Archive and internal and external shots of all four Tate galleries.

References[edit]


^ Tate Trustee, gov.uk
^ Funding, Tate
^ http://www.tate.org.uk/about/projects/tate-modern-project
^ a b "Donation provides cornerstone for new Transforming Tate Modern development". Tate Modern. 22 May 2007.
^ Nayeri, Farah. "Blackstone’s Studzinski to Give Tate $1.57 Million More". Bloomberg. 31 July 2012.
^ Intermedia Art Archive: Net Art by Date
^ Intermedia Art Tate
^ Tate in Space Tate
^ Tate Online Shop
^ Adrian Dannatt (11 May 2013), Starry night for Tate in New York The Art Newspaper.
^ Mark Brown (11 May 2010), Tate Modern marks 10th birthday by expanding collection The Guardian.
^ Gareth Harris and Georgina Adam (12 October 2012), Tate to launch two new acquisitions committees The Art Newspaper.
^ Tate Modern's Turbine Hall recreates a 1971 art sensation The Guardian, 6 April 2009
^ Chappet, Marie-Claire (20 October 2011). "The Turner Prize’s most controversial moments". The Telegraph.&#160;
^ Carter, R. G. (2007). Tainted archives: Art, archives, and authenticity. Archivaria, 63, 75.
^ "Tate Is Not a Museum", The Art Newspaper, 14 August 2006. Retrieved from the Internet Archive, 14 March 2010.[1]
^ Needham, Alex (13 December 2011). "Tate may not renew BP sponsorship deal after environmental protests". The Guardian.&#160;
^ http://www.wolffolins.com/work/tate
^ http://www.logodesignlove.com/tate-logo-design


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Tate.



Tate Online 65,000 works from the Tate Collection online, information on Tate's exhibitions and events programmes, and online learning resources
TATE ETC. Magazine
Tate online shop Classic, modern and contemporary design products for adults and children, including items produced exclusively by Tate and items represented in its collection.
Turner Worldwide - an ongoing online cataloguing of JMW Turner's work around the world
Turner Collection Online The online catalogue of Tate's collection of nearly 300 oil paintings and 30,000 works on paper by JMW Turner
Tate Public Records Tate's own historical records
Tate Podcasts Audio and video podcasts from Tate
Tate in Space
Turner Museum
Tate Channel Filmed artist talks and interviews, studio visits, and exhibitions









v
t
e


Tate






Galleries



Tate Britain
Tate Liverpool
Tate Modern
Tate St Ives
Barbara Hepworth Museum








Directors



Sir Charles Holroyd (Keeper)
D. S. MacColl (Keeper)
Charles Aitken
J. B. Manson
Sir John Rothenstein
Sir Norman Reid
Sir Alan Bowness
Sir Nicholas Serota








Benefactors



Sir Henry Tate
Sir Hugh Lane
Sir Joseph Duveen, Bt.
Sir Charles Clore
Outset Contemporary Art Fund








Exhibitions



Turner Prize

2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2014
2015


List of Turner Prize winners and nominees
The Weather Project
Embankment
Test Site
Shibboleth








Other



Frankfurt Art Theft
Tate Etc.
Purchase of The Upper Room
















v
t
e


Museums and galleries in London







List of museums in London






National museums



British Library
British Museum
Geffrye Museum
Horniman Museum
National Army Museum
National Gallery
National Portrait Gallery
Natural History Museum
Royal Air Force Museum
Science Museum
Sir John Soane's Museum
Wallace Collection




Imperial War Museums



Churchill War Rooms
HMS Belfast
Imperial War Museum London








Royal Museums Greenwich



Cutty Sark
National Maritime Museum
Queen's House
Royal Observatory








Tate



Tate Britain
Tate Modern








Victoria and Albert Museum



V&amp;A Museum of Childhood











Designated collections



Courtauld Gallery
Dulwich Picture Gallery
Firepower – The Royal Artillery Museum
Hunterian Museum
Jewish Museum
Library and Museum of Freemasonry
London Transport Museum
Museum of Domestic Design and Architecture
Petrie Museum of Egyptian Archaeology
Royal Academy of Arts




Museum of London



Museum of London Docklands











Royal Collection Trust



Queen's Gallery
Royal Mews








Historic Royal Palaces



Banqueting House, Whitehall
Hampton Court Palace
Kensington Palace
Kew Palace
Tower of London








National Trust



2 Willow Road
575 Wandsworth Road
Blewcoat School
Carlyle's House
Eastbury Manor House
Fenton House
George Inn
Lindsey House

restricted


Morden Hall Park
Osterley Park
Rainham Hall
Red House
Roman Baths
Sutton House








English Heritage



Apsley House
Chiswick House
Down House
Eltham Palace
Jewel Tower
Kenwood House (Iveagh Bequest)
London Wall
Marble Hill House
Ranger's House (Wernher Collection)
Winchester Palace








The London Museums of
Health &amp; Medicine (selected)



Florence Nightingale Museum
Foundling Museum
Freud Museum
Museum of the Order of St John
Old Operating Theatre Museum and Herb Garret
Wellcome Collection








Other



Bank of England Museum
Barbican Art Gallery
Benjamin Franklin House
Bruce Castle
Charles Dickens Museum
Dennis Severs' House
Design Museum
Dr. Johnson's House
Estorick Collection of Modern Italian Art
Garden Museum
Guildhall Art Gallery
Handel House Museum
Hayward Gallery
Hogarth's House
Institute of Contemporary Arts
Leighton House Museum
London Museum of Water &amp; Steam
Museum of Brands, Packaging and Advertising
Museum of Croydon
Museum of Richmond
Orleans House Gallery
Royal Academy of Music Museum
Saatchi Gallery
Serpentine Galleries
Sherlock Holmes Museum
Whitechapel Gallery
William Morris Gallery











 Category
 Commons
















v
t
e


Department for Culture, Media and Sport of the United Kingdom







Headquarters: 100 Parliament Street, London, SW1A 2BQ






Executive agencies



The Royal Parks
The National Archives








Non-departmental
public bodies





Advisory




Reviewing Committee on the Export of Works of Art and Objects of Cultural Interest
Theatres Trust
Treasure Valuation Committee









Executive




Arts Council England
British Film Institute
British Library
British Museum
Equality and Human Rights Commission
Gambling Commission
Geffrye Museum
Historic England
Horniman Museum
Horserace Betting Levy Board
Imperial War Museum
Information Commissioner's Office
National Gallery
National Heritage Memorial Fund
National Maritime Museum
National Museums Liverpool
National Portrait Gallery
Natural History Museum
Royal Armouries
Science Museum Group
Sir John Soane's Museum
Sport England
Sports Grounds Safety Authority
Tate
UK Anti-Doping
UK Sport
Victoria and Albert Museum
VisitBritain
VisitEngland
Wallace Collection









Tribunal


Horserace Betting Levy Appeal Tribunal









Public corporations



BBC

BBC Trust


Channel Four Television Corporation
Historic Royal Palaces
Ofcom
S4C

S4C Authority










Ministers





Secretary of State




John Whittingdale









Minister of State




Culture and the Digital Economy: Ed Vaizey









Under-Secretaries of State




Sport, Tourism and Heritage: Tracey Crouch
Internet Safety and Security: Joanna Shields, Baroness Shields
Intellectual Property: Lucy Neville-Rolfe, Baroness Neville-Rolfe












 Category






Coordinates: 51°29′28″N 0°07′37″W﻿ / ﻿51.491°N 0.127°W﻿ / 51.491; -0.127







					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tate&amp;oldid=691520371"					
				Categories: Tate galleriesArt museums established in 1897Art museums and galleries in LondonMuseums sponsored by the Department for Culture, Media and SportTurner PrizeContemporary art galleries in the United KingdomModern art museumsNon-departmental public bodies of the United Kingdom governmentExempt charitiesCharities based in LondonOrder of Arts and Letters of Spain recipientsArt museums and galleries in Merseyside1897 establishments in EnglandHidden categories: Use dmy dates from August 2015Use British English from August 2015All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from December 2013Commons category with local link same as on WikidataCoordinates on Wikidata				
							
		
		
			