


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Thai art
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								  (Redirected from Art of Thailand)
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				




This article does not cite any references (sources). Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2015)







This article needs attention from an expert in Visual arts. Please add a reason or a talk parameter to this template to explain the issue with the article. WikiProject Visual arts (or its Portal) may be able to help recruit an expert. (August 2009)






Garudas in Wat Phra Kaew, Bangkok


Traditional Thai art is primarily composed of Buddhist art and scenes from the Indian epics. Traditional Thai sculpture almost exclusively depicts images of the Buddha. Traditional Thai paintings usually consist of book illustrations, and painted ornamentation of buildings such as palaces and temples.



Contents


1 History

1.1 Sukhothai period
1.2 Ayutthaya period
1.3 Bangkok period
1.4 Contemporary


2 Painting

2.1 Architecture


3 Ceramics
4 See also
5 References
6 Further reading
7 External links



History[edit]
Sukhothai period[edit]




Phra Achana, Wat Si Chum, Big Buddha image in Sukhothai


The Sukhothai period began in the 14th century in the Sukhothai kingdom. Buddha images of the Sukhothai period are elegant, with sinuous bodies and slender, oval faces. This style emphasized the spiritual aspect of the Buddha, by omitting many small anatomical details. The effect was enhanced by the common practice of casting images in metal rather than carving them. This period saw the introduction of the "walking Buddha" pose. Everything has its own purposes.
Sukhothai artists tried to follow the canonical defining marks of a Buddha, as they are set out in ancient Pali texts:

Skin so smooth that dust cannot stick to it
Legs like a deer
Thighs like a banyan tree
Shoulders as massive as an elephant's head
Arms round like an elephant's trunk, and long enough to touch the knees
Hands like lotuses about to bloom
Fingertips turned back like petals
head like an egg
Hair like scorpion stingers
Chin like a mango stone
Nose like a parrot's beak
Earlobes lengthened by the earrings of royalty
Eyelashes like a cow's
Eyebrows like drawn bows

Sukhothai also produced a large quantity of glazed ceramics in the Sawankhalok style, which were traded throughout south-east Asia.
Ayutthaya period[edit]



This section requires expansion. (May 2011)


The surviving art from this period was primarily executed in stone, characterised by juxtaposed rows of Buddha figures. In the middle period, Sukhothai influence dominated, with large bronze or brick and stucco Buddha images, as well as decorations of gold leaf in free-form designs on a lacquer background. The late period was more elaborate, with Buddha images in royal attire, set on decorative bases.
Bangkok period[edit]



This section requires expansion. (May 2011)


This period is characterized by the further development of the Ayutthaya style, rather than by more great innovation. One important element was the Krom Chang Sip Mu (Organization of the Ten Crafts), originally founded in Ayutthaya, which was responsible for improving the skills of the country's craftsmen. Paintings from the mid-19th century show the influence of Western art.
Contemporary[edit]



This section requires expansion. (May 2011)


Main article: Thai contemporary art
Painting[edit]




A depiction of a white elephant in 19th century Thai art.


Traditional Thai paintings showed subjects in two dimensions without perspective. The size of each element in the picture reflected its degree of importance. The primary technique of composition is that of apportioning areas: the main elements are isolated from each other by space transformers. This eliminated the intermediate ground, which would otherwise imply perspective. Perspective was introduced only as a result of Western influence in the mid-19th century.
The most frequent narrative subjects for paintings were or are: the Jataka stories, episodes from the life of the Buddha, the Buddhist heavens and hells, themes derived from the Thai versions of the Ramayana and Mahabharata, not to mention scenes of daily life. Some of the scenes are influenced by Thai folklore instead of following strict Buddhist iconography.
Architecture[edit]
Main article: Architecture of Thailand
Ceramics[edit]
Main article: Thai ceramics
Ceramics in Thailand were mostly used for domestic purposes such as holding food and water. Thai ceramics in the pattern of nature and animals were popular between the 11th and 13th centuries.
See also[edit]




Thailand portal




Culture of Thailand
Buddha images in Thailand
Music of Thailand

References[edit]

Further reading[edit]

Lerner, Martin (1984). The flame and the lotus: Indian and Southeast Asian art from the Kronos collections. New York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art. ISBN&#160;0870993747.&#160; External link in |title= (help)
Piriya Krairiksh (Edited by Peter Sharrock; Translated by Narisa Chakrabongse; Photography Paisarn Piemmettawat) (2012). The Roots of Thai Art. Bangkok: River Books. ISBN&#160;9786167339115.&#160; External link in |title= (help)

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Art of Thailand.



Rama IX Art Museum Virtual museum of Thai contemporary artists. Listings of museums, galleries, exhibitions and venues. Contains lots of information on Thai artists and art activities.
Golden Triangle Art Introduction of contemporary art and artists living and working in Northern Thailand and Myanmar. Guide to art galleries, art News and exhibitions with focus on Chiang Mai.
Thai Art Gallery
Thai Buddhist Art Thai Buddhist Art Website Project to Promote and play a part in the growth of the Thai Fine Art Community of Collectors and Aficionados. Representing a host of Thailand's Most Outstanding Artists.









v
t
e


Thailand&#160;articles






History



Prehistory
Peopling
Khun Borom
Tai peoples
Early history
Initial states
Sukhothai era
Ayutthaya era
Thonburi era
Rattanakosin era
Siamese Revolution
Military period
Democratic period













Geography







Cities and towns
Climate
Ecoregions
Environmental issues
Islands
Mountains
Protected areas
Regions
Rivers
Volcanoes
Wildlife
World Heritage Sites











Politics







Constitution
Monarchy (list)
Elections
Parliament
Government
Prime Minister (list)
Cabinet
Ministries
Administrative divisions
Foreign relations
Human rights
Judiciary
Law
Localism
Military
Police
Political parties











Economy







Agriculture
Banks

central bank


Baht (currency)
Car industry
Energy
Stock Exchange
Telecommunications

Internet
telephone numbers


Tourism
Transport











Society







Crime
Demographics
Education
Ethnic groups
Languages
Health
Religion
Women
LGBT








Culture



Architecture
Art
Birth
Cinema
Cuisine
Dance
Etiquette
Folklore
Literature
Names
Marriage
Media

television


Music
Thai people
Prostitution
Public holidays
Sports
Symbols

anthem
emblem
flag


Time

lunar calendar
solar calendar


Video gaming















Outline
Index



Book
Category
Portal
WikiProject
















v
t
e


Asian art






Sovereign states



Afghanistan
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei
Burma (Myanmar)
Cambodia
Chinese
East Timor (Timor-Leste)
Egypt
Georgia
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
North Korea
South Korea
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Lebanon
Malaysia
Maldives
Mongolia
Nepal
Oman
Pakistan
Philippines
Qatar
Russia
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Syria
Tajikistan
Thailand
Turkey
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen









States with limited
recognition




Abkhazia
Nagorno-Karabakh
Northern Cyprus
Palestine
South Ossetia
Taiwan









Dependencies and
other territories




Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Hong Kong
Macau















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Thai_art&amp;oldid=685153640"					
				Categories: Thai artArt by nationalityHidden categories: Articles lacking sources from August 2015All articles lacking sourcesArticles needing expert attention with no reason or talk parameterArticles needing expert attention from August 2009All articles needing expert attentionVisual arts articles needing expert attentionArticles to be expanded from May 2011All articles to be expandedCS1 errors: external linksCommons category with local link same as on WikidataRegion topic template using suffix				
							
		
		
			