


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Ukrainian culture
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								  (Redirected from Art of Ukraine)
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				

Part of a series on the


Culture of Ukraine







History


History of Ukraine
Science and Technology








People


Demographics
Ukrainians
Poles
Russians
Turks








Languages


Ukrainian








Traditions


Culture








Mythology and folklore


Mythology






Cuisine


Festivals




Religion


Religion
Protestant Reformation
New Apostolic Church
Evangelical-Lutheran Church
Roman Catholicism
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints
Islam
History of the Jews in Ukraine
Buddhism
Hinduism
Bahá'í Faith








Art


Architecture
Art (painters)
Cinema
Music
Theatre








Literature


Literature








Music and performing arts


Music








Media


Television
Cinema
Media
Television








Sport


Football
Golf
Handball
Volleyball








Monuments


World Heritage Sites
Castles








Symbols


Flag
Coat of arms









 Ukraine  portal







v
t
e






Ukrainian culture and customs of Ukraine and ethnic Ukrainians contain a blend of Eastern European and Western European[citation needed] elements. Ukraine has a shared culture and history with neighboring nations, dating back to the 9th century and the Land of Rus. Mutual customs are shared among the cultures of Russia, Ukraine, Poland, Belarus, Ukrainian Cossacks and Turkic peoples of Central Asia. Ukrainian customs are heavily influenced by the Eastern Orthodox Church and traditions from Slavic mythology. The Soviet era unified the cultures of many unrelated nations with a common language.



Contents


1 Customs

1.1 Holidays and celebrations

1.1.1 Weddings


1.2 Education
1.3 Language
1.4 Religion


2 Cuisine
3 Art

3.1 Architecture

3.1.1 Vernacular architecture


3.2 Ornamental and visual art

3.2.1 Jewelry
3.2.2 Painting
3.2.3 Traditional costume
3.2.4 Weaving and embroidery


3.3 Performance art

3.3.1 Dance
3.3.2 Music
3.3.3 Theatre


3.4 Museums and libraries

3.4.1 Literature




4 Popular Culture

4.1 Cinema
4.2 Mass media
4.3 Sports
4.4 Tourism


5 See also
6 References
7 Print sources



Customs[edit]
Holidays and celebrations[edit]




Christmas icon, Adoration of the Shepherds, from the Ivan Honchar Museum collection. Artist unknown, c. 1670.


See also: Public holidays in Ukraine
Social gatherings like Vechornytsi have a long history in Ukrainian culture, and so do traditional holidays like Ivan Kupala Day, Maslenitsa, Koledovanie, and Malanka, where people gather in large groups. "Razom nas bahato, nas ne podolaty" is a popular cultural and political statement of both traditional and modern Ukrainians. It translates as "Together we are many! We cannot be defeated!"
Weddings[edit]
Main article: Ukrainian wedding traditions
Traditional Ukrainian wedding celebrations have many rituals that involve music and dancing, drinking and eating, and crowds of people. The wedding consists of three separate parts that can last for days or even weeks. First there's a betrothal, then a ceremony, followed by a big celebration. The betrothal involves the groom going to the bride's parents to bargain for ransom he will pay for the bride and to seek the blessing of her parents. There are many stories in Ukrainian folklore of a bride being stolen without the groom paying ransom. Often, the stolen bride is a willing participant and the couple elopes without her parents permission. Alternatively, the bride can refuse an offer of marriage, in which case, it is customary for the parents to meet the groom at the door with a pumpkin to convey the message. After they reach an agreement, the official wedding takes place in a church, often in a group ceremony with other couples. A celebration follows at home with the entire community participating.
Education[edit]
Main article: Education in Ukraine




Chernivtsi University.


Language[edit]
Main article: Ukrainian language
The main language is Ukrainian.
Religion[edit]
Main article: Religion in Ukraine
Religion is practiced throughout the country. Eastern Orthodox Christianity and Eastern Catholicism and Roman Catholic are the three most widely practiced religions. The Ukrainian Orthodox Church[1] is the largest in the country.[2] Faithful of the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church, the second largest, practice Byzantine rites, but are united with the Roman Catholic Church.

Cuisine[edit]




Ukrainian borscht with smetana


Main article: Ukrainian cuisine
See also: Ukrainian wine
Food is an important part to the Ukrainian culture. Special foods are used at Easter, as well as Christmas. During Christmas, for example, people prepare kutia, which is a mixture of cooked wheat groats, poppy seeds, honey, and special sweet breads.
An average Ukrainian diet consists of fish, cheese, and a variety of sausages. Head cheese is also quite popular in Ukraine, as well as Kolbasa (Ukrainian: Ковбаса́, Kovbasa), a type of sausage. Typically bread is a core part of every meal, and must be included for the meal to be "complete." During Christmas, for example, it is the tradition to have a twelve-course meal. Included at Easter are the famous pysanky, which are colored and patterned eggs. Making these eggs is a long process, and they are used for display at the center of the table rather than consumed.
Ukrainians often toast to good health, linger over their meal, and engage in lively conversation with family and friends. Often they will drink tea (chai), wine, or coffee afterwards with a simple dessert, such as a fruit pastry. Popular foods include salo, borscht,[2] chicken kiev,[2] pierogi,and pilaf.
Art[edit]
Architecture[edit]




Golden-Domed Baroque architecture. St. Michael's Golden-Domed Monastery.


Main article: Ukrainian architecture
Ukrainian architecture reflects distinct features of that particular location and time period. Design and architecture are influenced by the existing political and economic climate.
Vernacular architecture[edit]
Different regions in Ukraine have their own distinctive style of vernacular architecture, based on local traditions and the knowledge handed down through generations. The Museum of Folk Architecture and Way of Life of Central Naddnipryanshchyna is located in Pereiaslav-Khmelnytskyi. The open-air museum contains 13 theme museums, 122 examples of national architecture, and over 30,000 historical cultural objects. The Museum of Decorative Finishes is one of the featured museums that preserves the handiwork of decorative architectural applications in Ukrainian architecture. Decorative finishes use ancient traditional design patterns.
Ornamental and visual art[edit]




Christmas card by Jacques Hnizdovsky


On special occasions, every aspect of ordinary life is transformed into ornamental art form of artistic expression. Ornamentation and design motifs are steeped in symbolism, religious ritual and meaning. From the illuminated manuscripts of the Peresopnytsia Gospel to the famous pysanky and vytynanky, intricate details have ancient meaning. Much of the oral history was lost during the past 300 years of Russification of Ukraine when Ukrainian culture and language were forbidden. Organizations like the Ivan Honchar Museum, Pysanka Museum and the Ukrainian Museum are dedicated to historic preservation. Different regions of Ukraine have their own traditional ornamentation with their own variation of style and meaning. Examples can be seen in Petrykivsky Painting, ornamental architecture, Ukrainian embroidery, and textile motifs from various Ukrainian historical regions.
Jewelry[edit]




Vyshyvanka dress. Ornamental art often has a hidden meaning in ancient symbolism


Main article: History of jewellery in Ukraine
Painting[edit]
Main articles: List of Ukrainian painters and Ukrainian avant-garde
Traditional costume[edit]
For men, traditional dress includes Kozhukh, Kontusz, Żupan and Sharovary. For women, traditional dress includes Vyshyvanka, Kozhushanka, Ochipok for married women, and Ukrainian wreath for unmarried girls. Garments are made using elaborate structural design, complicated weaving techniques, extensive embroidery, and cutwork needlework.
Weaving and embroidery[edit]
Artisan textile arts play an important role in Ukrainian culture,[3] especially in Ukrainian wedding traditions. Ukrainian embroidery, weaving, and lace-making are used in traditional folk dress and in traditional celebrations. Ukrainian embroidery varies depending on the region of origin,[4] and the designs have a long history of motifs, compositions, choice of colors, and types of stitches.[5] Use of color is very important and has roots in Ukrainian folklore. Embroidery motifs found in different parts of Ukraine are preserved in the Rushnyk Museum in Pereiaslav-Khmelnytskyi.
National dress is woven and highly decorated. Weaving with handmade looms is still practiced in the village of Krupove, situated in Rivne Oblast. The village is the birthplace of two famous personalities in the scene of national crafts fabrication. Nina Myhailivna[6] and Uliana Petrivna[7] with international recognition. In order to preserve this traditional knowledge, the village is planning to open a local weaving center, museum, and weaving school.
Performance art[edit]
Dance[edit]
Main article: Ukrainian dance




The Hopak is often popularly referred to as the "National Dance of Ukraine".


Traditional dances are popular within Ukraine, many of which derive from rural Cossack villages.[8] One Ukrainian style of dancing is called the kalyna. Both men and women participate in this type of dancing.

The women wear colourful costumes, sometimes featuring a solid-coloured (usually blue, green, red, or black) tunic and matching apron, and under that an open skirt, and below that a white skirt with an embroidered hem that should reach an inch or so below the knee. If they wear a tunic, then under that they wear a long-sleeved richly embroidered white shirt. Traditionally, women wear a type of red leather boots to dance in. They also wear a flower head piece (vinok), that is a headband covered with flowers and has long flowing ribbons down the back that flow when they dance, and plain red coral necklaces.
The men wear baggy trousers (usually blue, white, black or red) and a shirt (usually white, but sometimes black) embroidered at the neck and down the stomach. Over the shirt they sometimes will wear a richly embroidered vest. Around their waist they wear a thick sash with fringed ends. Like the women, they wear boots, but these can be black or white in addition to red.
Kalyna dancing involves partner dancing. One dance, called the pryvitannia, is a greeting dance. It is slow and respectful, the women bow to the audience and present bread with salt on a cloth and flowers. Another, called the hopak is much more lively, and involves many fast-paced movements. Hence hopak as a dance is derived from hopak martial art of Cossacks.

Music[edit]
Main article: Music of Ukraine
Theatre[edit]
Main article: Theater in Ukraine




National Art Museum of Ukraine. Established in 1898.


Museums and libraries[edit]
Main article: Western European paintings in Ukrainian museums
There are nearly 5,000 different museums in Ukraine,[9] including National Art Museum of Ukraine, National Historical Museum of Ukraine, Museum of Western and Oriental Art, Ukrainian National Chernobyl Museum in Kyiv, Lviv National Art Gallery, Poltava Art Museum, Simferopol Art Museum, and many others of art, history, traditions or dedicated to different issues.
There are 14 libraries of state significance (Vernadsky National Library of Ukraine, National Parliamentary Library of Ukraine, National historical library of Ukraine in Kyiv, Korolenko State Scientific Library in Kharkiv, and others), and 45,000 public libraries all over Ukraine. All these institutions own 700 millions of books.[10]
Literature[edit]
Main article: Ukrainian literature
Ukrainian literature had a difficult development because, due to constant foreign domination over Ukrainian territories, there was often a significant difference between the spoken and written language. At times the use of the Ukrainian language was even partly prohibited to be printed. However, foreign rule by Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Russia, Austria-Hungary, and the Ottoman Turkey, left behind new words thereby enriching Ukrainian. Despite tsarist and soviet repression, Ukrainian authors were able to produce a rich literary heritage.
Many Ukrainians also contributed to the closely related literature in Russian language.
Popular Culture[edit]
Cinema[edit]
Main article: Cinema of Ukraine
Mass media[edit]
Main article: Mass media of Ukraine
Sports[edit]




Match of Ukraine national football team in UEFA Euro 2012.


Main article: Sport in Ukraine
Ukraine greatly benefitted from the Soviet emphasis on physical education, which left Ukraine with hundreds of stadiums, swimming pools, gymnasiums, and many other athletic facilities.
Football is the most popular sport in Ukraine. The top professional league is the Vyscha Liha, also known as the Ukrainian Premier League. The two most successful teams in the Vyscha Liha are rivals FC Dynamo Kyiv and FC Shakhtar Donetsk. Although Shakhtar is the reigning champion of the Vyscha Liha, Dynamo Kyiv has been much more successful historically, winning the UEFA Cup Winners' Cup two times, the UEFA Super Cup once, the USSR Championship a record 13 times, and the Ukrainian Championship a record 12 times; while Shakhtar only won four Ukrainian Championships and one and last UEFA Cup.
Many Ukrainians also played for the USSR national football team, most notably Igor Belanov and Oleg Blokhin, winners of the prestigious Golden Ball Award for the best footballers of the year. This award was only presented to one Ukrainian after the collapse of the Soviet Union, Andriy Shevchenko, the current captain of the Ukraine national football team. The national team made its debut in the 2006 FIFA World Cup, and reached the quarter-finals before losing to eventual champions, Italy.
Ukrainian brothers Vitaliy Klychko and Volodymyr Klychko have held world heavyweight champion titles in boxing.
Ukraine made its debut at the 1994 Winter Olympics. So far, Ukraine has been much more successful in the Summer Olympics (96 medals in four appearances) than in the Winter Olympics (Five medals in four appearances). Ukraine is currently ranked 35th by the number of gold medals won in the All-time Olympic Games medal count, with every country above it, except for Russia, having more appearances.
Other popular sports in Ukraine include handball, tennis, rugby union, basketball, gymnastics, and ice hockey.
Tourism[edit]
Main article: Tourism in Ukraine
Ukraine attracts more than 20 million visitors a year from around the world.[11] Seven Natural Wonders of Ukraine and Seven Wonders of Ukraine are popular destinations as well as modern urban cities, festivals, ecotourism, and medical tourism.

See also[edit]

Russification of Ukraine
The Seven Wonders of Ukraine are the seven historical and cultural monuments of Ukraine
List of museums in Ukraine

References[edit]


^ "CIA World Factbook". Retrieved 16 March 2012.&#160;
^ a b c Ukraine Culture. Ukraine People. Education. Religion
^ "Travel to Ukraine. Ukraine country guide, information about Ukraine. Visit Ukraine, places, tourism, tours". Ua-travelling.com. Retrieved 2010-12-30.&#160;[dead link]
^ "Podvyzhnytsi narodnoho mystetstva", Kyiv 2003 and 2005, by Yevheniya Shudra, Welcome to Ukraine Magazine
^ Ukrainian Museum Archives. Online exhibit on loan from the D.Dmytrykiw Ukrainian Ethnographic Research Collection, Library &amp; Archives of Westlake, Ohio
^ "Рівненська обласна державна адміністрація – Обласний центр народної творчості". Rv.gov.ua. Retrieved 2010-12-30.&#160;
^ "ПІСНІ ТА ВИШИВКИ УЛЯНИ КОТ – Мистецька сторінка". Storinka-m.kiev.ua. Retrieved 2010-12-30.&#160;
^ Culture in Ukraine | By Ukraine Channel
^ УНIАН - Культура - Україна – музейна Країна
^ Бібліотеки та науково-інформаційні центри України
^ Туристичні потоки (Ukrainian), State Statistics Committee of Ukraine


Print sources[edit]

Dubrovytskyi Visnyk. November 2007. “…I ne pereshkoda letu lita”









v
t
e


Ukraine&#160;articles






History




Chronology



East Slavs
Kuyaba
Kievan Rus'
Mongol invasion
Galicia–Volhynia
Grand Duchy of Lithuania
Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth
Zaporozhian Cossacks
Russian Empire
Galicia
After the Russian Revolution

Ukrainian People's Republic
West Ukrainian People's Republic


Ukrainian SSR
Chernobyl disaster
Independence
Orange Revolution
Ukrainian crisis

2013–14 Euromaidan
2014 Ukrainian revolution
Annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation
2014 pro-Russian unrest
War in Donbass










By topic



Christianity
Economic
Military











Geography







Biosphere Reserves

Seven Natural Wonders of Ukraine


Rivers
Mountains
Waterfalls
Islands and sandbars











Politics







Constitution
Flag
Government

President
Foreign relations
Military
Political parties
Elections


Judicial system

Law
Law enforcement













Economy







Hryvnia (currency)
National Bank

Banking
Banks


Stock exchanges

UX
PFTS

index




Energy
Telecommunications

Internet


Tourism
Transport

Ukrainian Railways
Automobile roads













Society







Languages
Religion
Education
Health
Crime
Human rights
LGBT history
Admin. divisions

Oblasts

regions by area
by population
by income


Cities
Raions
Urban-type settlements










Culture



Vyshyvanka
Pysanka
Literature

Taras Shevchenko


Dance
Architecture

Seven Wonders of Ukraine


Cinema

Shadows of Forgotten Ancestors


Gogolfest festival
Cuisine

wine
Borshch


Holidays
Media

television


Music
Sport








Demographics



Ukrainian people

Rus' people
diaspora


Censuses

2001
2016

















Outline



Book
Category
Portal
WikiProject
















v
t
e


Culture of Europe






Sovereign states



Albania
Andorra
Armenia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Kazakhstan
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Malta
Moldova
Monaco
Montenegro
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
San Marino
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom

England
Northern Ireland
Scotland
Wales


Vatican City








States with limited
recognition



Abkhazia
Kosovo
Nagorno-Karabakh
Northern Cyprus
South Ossetia
Transnistria








Dependencies and
other territories



Åland Islands
Faroe Islands
Gibraltar
Guernsey
Jersey
Isle of Man
Svalbard








Other entities



European Union















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ukrainian_culture&amp;oldid=690975452#Art"					
				Categories: Ukrainian cultureUkrainian studiesSlavic cultureEuropean cultureHidden categories: All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from December 2010Articles with Ukrainian-language external linksAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from July 2015Articles containing Ukrainian-language text				
							
		
		
			