


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Venezuelan art
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								  (Redirected from Art of Venezuela)
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				







This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page.








This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2013)







This article's tone or style may not reflect the encyclopedic tone used on Wikipedia. See Wikipedia's guide to writing better articles for suggestions. (January 2008)








Venezuelan art has a long and eventful history. Venezuela's museums and galleries are well on the way to forming a new discourse in which the public can experience and interact. Capturing the Venezuelan public view and interact with the installations and collections within a museum setting, re-establishes a new base for understanding the Venezuelan patron. This considered, the museum visitor is better understood and served as it is realized that a modern Venezuela, is represented as a diverse culture, intertwined with the traditional. The proactive cultural center strives to reacquaint itself with its audience, who in fact, are participants and beneficiaries of such cultural and heritage organizations. An effort by the Venezuelan government to connect its people to its cultural organizations, is a response to a cultural diversity and changes within.
Venezuelan art is gaining prominence. Initially dominated by religious motifs, it began emphasizing historical and heroic representations in the late nineteenth century, a move led by Martín Tovar y Tovar. Modernism took over in the twentieth century. Notable Venezuelan artists include Arturo Michelena, Cristóbal Rojas, Armando Reverón, Manuel Cabré, the kinetic artists Jesús-Rafael Soto and Carlos Cruz-Diez, the Meta-realism artist Pajaro and Yucef Merhi.



Contents


1 The largest museum in Venezuela
2 Venezuelan artitsts
3 References
4 External links



The largest museum in Venezuela[edit]

The National Art Gallery. Located at Caracas, it has the most comprehensive collection of paintings of the nineteenth century in the country. It is possible to enjoy paintings such as "Miranda Carraca the" Arturo Michelena, as well as other works of mas ters of academic painting and traveling artists of the nineteenth.

Mexico Avenue between stations Bellas Artes and Parque Carabobo. La Candelaria, Caracas.[1]

Museum of Fine Arts opened in Caracas February 20, 1938, it has a permanent collection whose pieces were classified as follows: European Medieval and Modern Art, Contemporary Art European and North American Cubism and similar trends Latin American art (painting and sculpture), Drawings and Prints, Egyptian Art and Ceramics.


Museum of Contemporary Art of Caracas (MACC). This is one of Venezuela's major museums, it opened its doors on 20 February 1974. Since then he has presented exhibitions of national and international visual artists of all genres: painting, sculpture, drawing, film, video and photography. It is a building that houses parts of the highest quality, are distributed among the seventeen rooms located in Central Park, near the Teresa Carreño Theatre. It has, moreover, a cabinet paper, a comprehensive library specializing in art, a creative workshop, a covered, media room, a gallery and a spectacular sculpture garden.

Its portfolio consists of more than 3000 works of famous artists. Among the most important there is the "Odalisque in red pants" by Henri Matisse "lesson Sky" Joan Miró "Portrait of Dora Maar" Pablo Picasso "Carnival Night" by Marc Chagall, among other Reverón, Jean Arp, Botero, Victor Vasarely, Riverse, Auguste Rodin, Magdalena Abakanowicz, Jacobo Borges and Fernando Botero.

Contemporary Art Museum Jesús Soto. A museum really avant-garde and international level. This space is the result of the will of the Venezuelan artist to promote art and culture in his country and hometown.

The renowned architect Carlos Raúl Villanueva has designed the museum, and it shows once again its ability creative ability to integrate architectural design with painting, sculpture, landscape and man. The museum displays important works from the personal collection of the master Soto, created during the 50s and 60s during his stay in Europe.

Museum of Contemporary Art of Zulia (Maczul). It was inaugurated on 24 October 1998 and its permanent collection consists of works by various expressive genres created by artists first line.

Venezuelan artitsts[edit]







La Divina Pastora, Juan Lovera, Galeria de Arte Nacional.









Estudio para Dante Beatriz. 1889 Cristóbal Rojas, Coleccion the Galería de Arte Nacional, Caracas - Venezuela.









Antonio Herrera Toro, Ricaurte in San Mateo. 1898. Galeria de Arte Nacional. Caracas - Venezuela.









Antonio Herrera Toro, Self Portrait 1880.









La Joven Madre (Young Mother), by Arturo Michelena 1889.





Arturo Michelena
Tito Salas
Martín Tovar y Tovar
Juan Lovera
Cristóbal Rojas
Antonio Herrera Toro (1857 - 1914)
Armando Reverón
Carlos Cruz-Díez
Virgilio Trómpiz
Alejandro Otero
Jesus Soto
Jacobo Borges
Marisol Escobar
Yucef Merhi

References[edit]

^ http://www.venezuelaturismo.gob.ve/fr/cultura.php

External links[edit]

Venezuela Streets Brim with Revolutionary Art by Reuters, May 2010









v
t
e


South American art






Sovereign states



Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Ecuador
Guyana
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Suriname
Trinidad and Tobago
Uruguay
Venezuela









Dependencies and
other territories




Aruba
Bonaire
Curaçao
Falkland Islands
French Guiana
South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Venezuelan_art&amp;oldid=679190984"					
				Categories: Venezuelan artArt by nationalityHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from December 2013All articles needing additional referencesWikipedia articles needing style editing from January 2008All articles needing style editingRegion topic template using suffix				
							
		
		
			