


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Visual culture
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				"Visual studies" redirects here. For the academic journal, see Visual Studies (journal).





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2011)


Visual culture is the aspect of culture expressed in visual images. Many academic fields study this subject, including cultural studies, art history, critical theory, philosophy, and anthropology.



Contents


1 Overview
2 Visualism
3 Relationship with other areas of study
4 History
5 Differentiating Between Visual Culture Studies and Image Studies
6 See also
7 References
8 Further reading (Books)
9 External links



Overview[edit]
Among theorists working within contemporary culture, this field of study often overlaps with film studies, psychoanalytic theory, sex studies, queer theory, and the study of television; it can also include video game studies, comics, traditional artistic media, advertising, the Internet, and any other medium that has a crucial visual component.
The field’s versatility stems from the range of objects contained under the term “visual culture,” which aggregates “visual events in which information, meaning or pleasure is sought by the consumer in an interface with visual technology.” The term “visual technology” refers any media designed for purposes of perception or with the potential to augment our visual capability.[1]
Because of the changing technological aspects of visual culture as well as a scientific method-derived desire to create taxonomies or articulate what the "visual" is, many aspects of Visual Culture overlap with the study of science and technology, including hybrid electronic media, cognitive science, neurology, and image and brain theory. In an interview with the Journal of Visual Culture, academic Martin Jay explicates the rise of this tie between the visual and the technological: “Insofar as we live in a culture whose technological advances abet the production and dissemination of such images at a hitherto unimagined level, it is necessary to focus on how they work and what they do, rather than move past them too quickly to the ideas they represent or the reality they purport to depict. In so doing, we necessarily have to ask questions about . . . technological mediations and extensions of visual experience.”[2]
Visualism[edit]
The term "Visualism" was developed by the German anthropologist Johannes Fabian to criticise the dominating role of vision in scientific discourse, through such terms as observation. He points to an under theorised approach to the use of visual representation which leads to a corpuscular theory of knowledge and information which leads to their atomisation.[3]
Relationship with other areas of study[edit]
It also may overlap with another emerging field, that of Performance Studies. As “the turn from art history to visual culture studies parallels a turn from theater studies to performance studies,” it is clear that the perspectival shift that both emerging fields embody is comparable.[4] "Visual Culture" goes by a variety of names at different institutions, including Visual and Critical Studies, Visual and Cultural Studies, and Visual Studies.[citation needed] There has appeared analysis which applies method with computational media. For example, in 2008, Yukihiko Yoshida did a study called [5] “Leni Riefenstahl and German expressionism: research in Visual Cultural Studies using the trans-disciplinary semantic spaces of specialized dictionaries.” The study took databases of images tagged with connotative and denotative keywords (a search engine) and found Riefenstahl’s imagery had the same qualities as imagery tagged “degenerate” in the title of Degenerate Art Exhibition, Germany at 1937.
History[edit]
Early work on visual culture has been done by John Berger (Ways of Seeing, 1972) and Laura Mulvey (Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema, 1975) that follows on from Jacques Lacan's theorization of the unconscious gaze. Twentieth-century pioneers such as György Kepes and William Ivins, Jr. as well as iconic phenomenologists like Maurice Merleau-Ponty also played important roles in creating a foundation for the discipline. For the history of art, Svetlana Alpers published a pioneering study on The Art of Describing: Dutch Art in the Seventeenth Century (Chicago 1983) in which she took up an earlier implus of Michael Baxandall to study the visual culture of a whole region of early-modern Europe in all its facets: landscape painting and perception, optics and perspectival studies, geography and topographic measurements, united in a common mapping impulse.
Major works on visual culture include those by W. J. T. Mitchell, [Griselda Pollock], Giuliana Bruno, Stuart Hall, Roland Barthes, Jean-François Lyotard, Rosalind Krauss, Paul Crowther and Slavoj Žižek. Continuing work has been done by Lisa Cartwright, Margaret Dikovitskaya, Nicholas Mirzoeff, and Jackie Stacey. The first book titled Visual Culture (Vizuális Kultúra) was written by Pál Miklós in 1976.[6] For history of science and technology, Klaus Hentschel has published a systematic comparative history in which various patterns of their emergence, stabilization and diffusion are identified.[7]

In the German-speaking world, analoguous discussions about "Bildwissenschaft" (image studies) are conducted, a.o., by Gottfried Boehm, Hans Belting, and Horst Bredekamp.
Visual Culture studies have been increasingly important in religious studies through the work of David Morgan, Sally Promey, Jeffrey F. Hamburger, and S. Brent Plate.
Differentiating Between Visual Culture Studies and Image Studies[edit]
While the image remains a focal point in visual culture studies, it is the relations between images and consumers that are evaluated for their cultural significance, not just the image in and of itself. Martin Jay clarifies, “Although images of all kinds have long served as illustrations of arguments made discursively, the growth of visual culture as a field has allowed them to be examined more in their own terms as complex figural artifacts or the stimulants to visual experiences.”[2]
Likewise, W. J. T. Mitchell explicitly distinguishes the two fields in his claim that visual culture studies “helps us to see that even something as broad as the image does not exhaust the field of visuality; that visual studies is not the same thing as image studies, and that the study of the visual image is just one component of the larger field.”[8]
See also[edit]

Art education
Art history
Asemic writing
Media influence
Mediascape
Visual anthropology
Visual rhetoric
Visual literacy
Visual arts
Visual ethics
Gaze
Sublime
Visual sociology
Visual Studies
Visual communication

References[edit]

^ Mirzoeff, Nicholas. "What is Visual Culture?" (PDF). The Visual Culture Reader (2nd ed.). ISBN&#160;978-0-415-14134-5. Retrieved 2 November 2011.&#160;
^ a b "That Visual Turn" (PDF). Journal of Visual Culture. Retrieved 2 November 2011.&#160;
^ Rarey, Matthew (2012). "Visualism". In Elkins, James; McGuire, Kristi; Burns, Maureen; Chester, Alicia; Kuennen, Joel. Theorizing Visual Studies: Writing Through the Discipline. Routledge. pp.&#160;278–281. ISBN&#160;9781136159169.&#160;
^ Jackson, Shannon. "Performing Show and Tell: Disciplines of Visual Culture and Performance Studies". Retrieved 2 November 2011.&#160;
^ Yoshida,Yukihiko, Leni Riefenstahl and German Expressionism: A Study of Visual Cultural Studies Using Transdisciplinary Semantic Space of Specialized Dictionaries ,Technoetic Arts: a journal of speculative research (Editor Roy Ascott),Volume 8, Issue3,intellect,2008
^ Miklós, Pál (1976). Vizuális Kultúra: Elméleti és kritikai tanulmányok a képzőművészet köréből. Magvető. ISBN&#160;9632702980.&#160;
^ See Klaus Hentschel: Visual Cultures in Science and Technology - A Comparative History, Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press 2014.
^ "Visual Culture/Visual Studies: Inventory of Recent Definitions". Retrieved 2 November 2011.&#160;

Further reading (Books)[edit]

Bartholeyns, Gil, Dierkens, Alain &amp; Golsenne, Thomas (ed.) (2010). La Performance des images (1st ed.). Brussels: Editions de l'université de Bruxelles. ISBN&#160;978-2-8004-1474-4.&#160;
Alloa, Emmanuel (ed.), Gottfried Boehm, Marie-José Mondzain, Jean-Luc Nancy, Emanuele Coccia, W. J. T. Mitchell, Horst Bredekamp, Georges Didi-Huberman, Hans Belting (2011). Penser l'image (2nd ed.). Dijon: Presses du réel. ISBN&#160;978-2840663430.&#160;
Dikovitskaya, Margaret (2005). Visual Culture: The Study of the Visual after the Cultural Turn (1st ed.). Cambridge, Ma: The MIT Press. ISBN&#160;0-262-04224-X.&#160;
Elkins, James (2003). Visual Studies: A Skeptical Introduction. New York: Routledge. ISBN&#160;0-415-96681-7.&#160;
Ewen, Stuart (1988). All Consuming Images: The Politics of Style in Contemporary Culture (1st ed.). New York, NY: Basic Books. ISBN&#160;978-0-465-00101-9.&#160;
Fuery, Kelli &amp; Patrick Fuery (2003). Visual Culture and Critical Theory (1st ed.). London: Arnold Publisher. ISBN&#160;0-340-80748-2.&#160;
Oliver Grau: Virtual Art. From Illusion to Immersion. MIT-Press, Cambridge/Mass. 2003.
Oliver Grau, Andreas Keil (Hrsg.): Mediale Emotionen. Zur Lenkung von Gefühlen durch Bild und Sound. Fischer, Frankfurt am Main 2005.
Oliver Grau (Hrsg.): Imagery in the 21st Century. MIT-Press, Cambridge 2011.
Klaus Hentschel: Visual Cultures in Science and Technology - A Comparative History, Oxford, Oxford Univ. Press, 2014. ISBN 978-0-19-871787-4.
Manghani, Sunil; Jon Simons; Arthur Piper (2006). Images: A Reader. London: Sage. ISBN&#160;978-1-4129-0045-4.&#160;
Manghani, Sunil (2008). Image Critique. London: Intellect Books. ISBN&#160;978-1-84150-190-1.&#160;
Jay, Martin (ed.), 'The State of Visual Culture Studies', themed issue of Journal of Visual Culture, vol.4, no.2, August 2005, London: Sage. ISSN 14704129. eISSN 17412994
Mirzoeff, Nicholas (1999). An Introduction to Visual Culture. London: Routledge. ISBN&#160;0-415-15876-1.&#160;
Mirzoeff, Nicholas (ed.) (2002). The Visual Culture Reader (2nd ed.). London: Routledge. ISBN&#160;0-415-25222-9.&#160;
Michael Ann, Holly &amp; Moxey, Keith (2002). Art History, Aesthetics, Visual Studies (1st ed.). Massachusetts: Clark Art Institute and Yale University Press. ISBN&#160;0-300-09789-1.&#160;
Morra, Joanne &amp; Smith, Marquard (eds.) (2006). Visual Culture: Critical Concepts in Media and Cultural Studies, 4 vols. London: Routledge. ISBN&#160;0-415-32641-9.&#160;
Plate, S. Brent, Religion, Art, and Visual Culture. (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2002) ISBN 0-312-24029-5
Smith, Marquard, 'Visual Culture Studies: Questions of History, Theory, and Practice' in Jones, Amelia (ed.) A Companion to Contemporary Art Since 1945, Oxford: Blackwell, 2006. ISBN 978-1-4051-3542-9
Yoshida,Yukihiko, Leni Riefenstahl and German Expressionism: A Study of Visual Cultural Studies Using Transdisciplinary Semantic Space of Specialized Dictionaries, Technoetic Arts: a journal of speculative research (Editor Roy Ascott),Volume 8, Issue3,intellect,2008
Sturken, Marita; Lisa Cartwright (2007). Practices of Looking: An Introduction to Visual Culture (2nd ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN&#160;0-19-531440-9.&#160;

External links[edit]

Journal of Visual Culture | Publisher's Website
Visual Studies journal
Culture Visuelle social media
viz.: Rhetoric, Visual Culture, Pedagogy
William Blake and Visual Culture: A Special Issue of the Journal Imagetext
Material collection from Introduction to Media Theory and Visual Culture, by Professor Martin Irvine
Visual Culture Collective
Duke University Visual Studies Initiative
Visual Studies @ University of Houston
International Visual Sociology Association
Visual Studies @ University of California, Irvine
Centre for Visual &amp; Cultural Studies, Edinburgh College of Art, Scotland
Visual Culture in Britain, Journal
Visual Studies @ University of California, Santa Cruz
Interfaces: Studies in Visual Culture book series
Contemporary International Visual Culture









v
t
e


Culture







Outline






Sciences



Anthropology
Cultural astronomy
Cultural ecology
Cultural entomology
Cultural neuroscience
Cultural studies
Culturology
Culture theory
Neuroculture








Subfields



Cultural anthropology
Cultural economics
Cultural geography
Cultural history
Cultural psychology
Intercultural relations
Philosophy of culture
Popular culture studies
Semiotics of culture
Sociology of culture
Theology of culture


Sound culture
Visual culture








Types



Constructed culture
Dominant culture
Folk culture
High culture
Low culture
Official culture
Political culture

Civic


Popular culture

Urban


Primitive culture
Subculture

Alternative culture
list


Super culture
Vernacular culture
Culture by location








Aspects



Acculturation
Cultural appropriation
Cultural artifact
Cultural baggage
Cultural behavior
Cultural capital
Cultural communication
Cultural conflict
Cultural cringe
Cultural deprivation
Cultural dissonance
Cultural framework
Cultural heritage
Cultural icon
Cultural identity
Cultural industry
Cultural invention
Cultural landscape
Cultural learning
Cultural memory
Cultural pluralism
Cultural practice
Cultural property
Cultural area
Cultural reproduction
Cultural system
Cultural universal
Enculturation
High- and low-context cultures
Interculturality
Material culture
Non-material culture
Participatory culture
Trans-cultural diffusion
Transculturation








Politics



Colonial mentality
Consumer capitalism
Cultural assimilation
Cultural attaché
Cultural backwardness
Cultural Bolshevism
Cultural conservatism
Cultural diplomacy
Cultural environmentalism
Cultural exception
Cultural feminism
Cultural genocide
Cultural globalization
Cultural hegemony
Cultural imperialism
Cultural intelligence
Cultural liberalism
Cultural nationalism
Cultural pessimism
Cultural policy
Cultural Revolution
Cultural rights
Cultural safety
Cultural Zionism
Culture change
Culture minister
Culture of fear
Culture war
Interculturalism
Monoculturalism
Multiculturalism








Related



Animal culture
Bennett scale
Bullying culture
Coffee culture
Conformity
Cross-cultural
Cultural bias
Cultural center
Cultural competence
Cultural critic
Cultural diversity
Cultural encoding
Cultural evolutionism
Cultural institution
Cultural lag
Cultural literacy
Cultural mosaic
Cultural movement
Cultural relativism
Cultural tourism
Cultural turn
Cultural sensibility
Culture gap
Culture hero
Culture industry
Culture shock
Children's culture
Death and culture
Emotions and culture
Intercultural competence
Media culture
Oppositional culture
Organizational culture
Permission culture
Print culture
Rape culture
Remix culture
Safety culture
Security culture
Tea culture
Transformation of culture
Urban culture











Portal
Category
changes
















v
t
e


Visualization of technical information






Fields



Biological data visualization
Chemical imaging
Crime mapping
Data visualization
Educational visualization
Flow visualization
Geovisualization
Information visualization
Mathematical visualization
Medical imaging
Molecular graphics
Product visualization
Scientific visualization
Software visualization
Technical drawing
User interface design
Visual culture
Volume visualization








Image types



Chart
Diagram
Engineering drawing
Graph of a function
Ideogram
Map
Photograph
Pictogram
Plot
Schematic
Statistical graphics
Table
Technical drawings
Technical illustration
User interface








People



Jacques Bertin
Stuart Card
Thomas A. DeFanti
Michael Friendly
George Furnas
Nigel Holmes
Alan MacEachren
Jock D. Mackinlay
Michael Maltz
Bruce H. McCormick
Charles Joseph Minard
Gaspard Monge
Otto Neurath
Florence Nightingale
Clifford A. Pickover
William Playfair
Adolphe Quetelet
George G. Robertson
Arthur H. Robinson
Lawrence J. Rosenblum
Ben Shneiderman
Edward Tufte
Fernanda Viégas
Howard Wainer








Related topics



Cartography
Chartjunk
Computer graphics

in computer science


Graph drawing
Graphic design
Graphic organizer
Imaging science
Information graphics
Information science
Mental visualisation
Misleading graph
Neuroimaging
Patent drawing
Scientific modelling
Spatial analysis
Tools for Ideas
Visual analytics
Visual perception















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Visual_culture&amp;oldid=691971008"					
				Categories: Cultural studiesHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from April 2011All articles needing additional referencesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from January 2012				
							
		
		
			