


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Main Page
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				





Welcome to Wikipedia,
the free encyclopedia that anyone can edit.
5,016,155 articles in English






Arts
Biography
Geography




History
Mathematics
Science




Society
Technology
All portals










From today's featured article







Sly and Robbie


Rhythm Killers is the second studio album by Jamaican musical duo Sly and Robbie (pictured), released in May 1987 on Island Records. First known as a reggae band, the duo experimented in the 1980s with electronic sounds and contemporary recording technology, while branching out into international, cross-genre music. A funk and dance album, Rhythm Killers has a dense sound that incorporates reggae, hip hop, hard rock, worldbeat, and downtown music. Along with their live instruments, Sly and Robbie used electronic recording equipment such as the Fairlight CMI synthesizer and electronic drums. The album has been cited by music writers for its electronic rhythms, its treatment of African-American music elements, and Laswell's densely layered production. It peaked at number 35 on the British Albums Chart, and also charted in the Netherlands, Sweden, and New Zealand. The critic Robert Christgau named it the seventh-best album of 1987. Two promotional singles were issued, including the UK hit "Boops (Here to Go)". Sly and Robbie continued their digital direction on subsequent albums. The album has since been out of print. (Full&#160;article...)

Recently featured:


Burger's Daughter
Ancestry of the Godwins
Trout Creek Mountains






Archive
By email
More featured articles...







Did you know...







Friar Bacon in his study



... that the Summa Grammatica by Roger Bacon (pictured) is sometimes considered to propose a universal grammar?
... that prior to the 2015–16 Big Ten Conference men's basketball season the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame named 14 players to its preseason watch lists?
... that the Maronite muleteer Tanyus Shahin established a "peasants' republic" in Keserwan after ousting that region's nobility?
... that The Bunbury Herald has been digitised as part of the Australian Newspapers Digitisation Program?
... that architect Susan Maxman's firm received 65 awards including 14 AIA design awards and 14 awards for their designs' environmental importance?
... that one of the founders of CD Projekt once sold cracked copies of video games in a market in Warsaw?
... that Singaporean ballet dancer and choreographer Goh Lay Kuan was branded "The Red Ballerina" after being detained in a mass-arrest of alleged communist-sympathizers?
... that the first two films in the Hotel Transylvania franchise have grossed over $762 million with a budget of just $165 million?



Recently improved articles
Start a new article
Nominate an article












In the news







Mauricio Macri



Cambiemos candidate Mauricio Macri (pictured) is elected President of Argentina.
Nineteen people are killed after more than 130 people were held hostage by gunmen at the Radisson Blu hotel in Bamako, Mali.
AquAdvantage salmon becomes the first genetically modified animal approved by the US FDA for human consumption.
The second-largest gem-quality diamond is found in Botswana.
Russia's Federal Security Service states that Metrojet Flight 9268 was destroyed by a bomb.


Ongoing events:


Paris attack aftermath
European migrant crisis



Recent deaths:


Kim Young-sam
Kitanoumi Toshimitsu
Mal Whitfield









On this day...





November 24: Feast day of Vietnamese Martyrs (Roman Catholicism)


Ruby about to shoot Oswald



1227 – High Duke of Poland Leszek the White was assassinated during a diet of the Piast dukes.
1642 – A Dutch expedition led by Abel Tasman reached present-day Tasmania, Australia.
1877 – Anna Sewell's influential animal welfare novel Black Beauty, one of the best-selling books of all time, was first published.
1922 – Irish Civil War: Author and Irish nationalist Robert Erskine Childers was executed by the Irish Free State for illegally carrying a semi-automatic pistol.
1963 – Businessman Jack Ruby shot (pictured) and fatally wounded Lee Harvey Oswald, the alleged assassin of U.S. President John F. Kennedy, during a live television broadcast, fueling conspiracy theories on the matter.
2012 – A fire at a clothing factory in the Ashulia district on the outskirts of Dhaka, Bangladesh, killed at least 117 people.


More anniversaries:


November 23
November 24
November 25






Archive
By email
List of historical anniversaries



Current date: November 24, 2015 (UTC)
Reload this page
















Today's featured picture









Maktoum bin Mohammed Al Maktoum (b.&#160;1983) is the deputy ruler of Dubai. He also serves as Chairman of Dubai Media Incorporated.
Photograph: Rowan Farrell

Recently featured:


European hedgehog
Grant Park
Fortress of Guaita






Archive
More featured pictures...













Other areas of Wikipedia

Community portal – Bulletin board, projects, resources and activities covering a wide range of Wikipedia areas.
Help desk – Ask questions about using Wikipedia.
Local embassy – For Wikipedia-related communication in languages other than English.
Reference desk – Serving as virtual librarians, Wikipedia volunteers tackle your questions on a wide range of subjects.
Site news – Announcements, updates, articles and press releases on Wikipedia and the Wikimedia Foundation.
Village pump – For discussions about Wikipedia itself, including areas for technical issues and policies.



Wikipedia's sister projects
Wikipedia is hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation, a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other projects:



Commons
Free media repository

MediaWiki
Wiki software development

Meta-Wiki
Wikimedia project coordination



Wikibooks
Free textbooks and manuals

Wikidata
Free knowledge base

Wikinews
Free-content news



Wikiquote
Collection of quotations

Wikisource
Free-content library

Wikispecies
Directory of species



Wikiversity
Free learning materials and activities

Wikivoyage
Free travel guide

Wiktionary
Dictionary and thesaurus




Wikipedia languages

This Wikipedia is written in English. Started in 2001&#160;(2001), it currently contains 5,016,155 articles.  Many other Wikipedias are available; some of the largest are listed below.

More than 1,000,000 articles:


Deutsch
Español
Français
Italiano
Nederlands
Polski
Русский
Svenska
Tiếng Việt



More than 250,000 articles:


العربية
Bahasa Indonesia
Bahasa Melayu
Català
Čeština
فارسی
한국어
Magyar
日本語
Norsk bokmål
Português
Română
Srpski / српски
Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски
Suomi
Türkçe
Українська
中文



More than 50,000 articles:


Bosanski
Български
Dansk
Eesti
Ελληνικά
English (simple)
Esperanto
Euskara
Galego
עברית
Hrvatski
Latviešu
Lietuvių
Norsk nynorsk
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
ไทย





Complete list of Wikipedias








					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Main_Page&amp;oldid=688747750"					
								
							
		
		
			