


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Wood carving
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				



Carved wooden cranes






Finely carved wooden door in the Great Mosque of Kairouan, Tunisia.


Wood carving is a form of working wood by means of a cutting tool (knife) in one hand or a chisel by two hands or with one hand on a chisel and one hand on a mallet, resulting in a wooden figure or figurine, or in the sculptural ornamentation of a wooden object. The phrase may also refer to the finished product, from individual sculptures to hand-worked mouldings composing part of a tracery.
The making of sculpture in wood has been extremely widely practiced but survives much less well than the other main materials such as stone and bronze, as it is vulnerable to decay, insect damage, and fire. It therefore forms an important hidden element in the art history of many cultures.[1] Outdoor wood sculptures do not last long in most parts of the world, so that we have little idea how the totem pole tradition developed. Many of the most important sculptures of China and Japan in particular are in wood, and the great majority of African sculpture and that of Oceania and other regions. Wood is light and can take very fine detail so it is highly suitable for masks and other sculpture intended to be worn or carried. It is also much easier to work than stone.
Some of the finest extant examples of early European wood carving are from the Middle Ages in Germany, Russia, Italy and France, where the typical themes of that era were Christian iconography. In England, many complete examples remain from the 16th and 17th century, where oak was the preferred medium.



Contents


1 Methods and styles
2 Techniques

2.1 Tools

2.1.1 Basic tool set


2.2 Wood

2.2.1 Selection
2.2.2 Sculpture




3 Traditions
4 See also
5 Gallery
6 References
7 External links



Methods and styles[edit]

Chip carving
Relief carving
Scandinavian flat-plane
Caricature carving
Lovespoon
Treen
Whittling

Techniques[edit]
Tools[edit]




A selection of woodcarving hand tools: 3 fishtail gouges, a v-parting tool, 4 straight gouges, 3 spoon gouges, and a carvers mallet






Desay Madu Jhya (window) in Kathmandu, Nepal is a specimen of traditional Nepalese wood carving.






Detail of the Last Supper from Tilman Riemenschneider's Altar of the Holy Blood, 1501-05, Rothenburg ob der Tauber, Bavaria









Carving knives









Carving knife, used to round a corner of a piece of wood









V-Tool, used to part lines and cut V-shaped channels




Basic tool set[edit]

the carving knife: a specialized knife used to pare, cut, and smooth wood.
the gouge: a tool with a curved cutting edge used in a variety of forms and sizes for carving hollows, rounds and sweeping curves.
the coping saw: a small saw that is used to cut off chunks of wood at once.
the chisel: large and small, whose straight cutting edge is used for lines and cleaning up flat surfaces.
the V-tool: used for parting, and in certain classes of flat work for emphasizing lines.
the veiner: a specialized deep gouge with a U-shaped cutting edge.
sharpening equipment, such as various stones and a strop: necessary for maintaining edges.

A special screw for fixing work to the workbench, and a mallet, complete the carvers kit, though other tools, both specialized and adapted, are often used, such as a router for bringing grounds to a uniform level, bent gouges and bent chisels for cutting hollows too deep for the ordinary tool.

Terminology

Term
Definition


Gouge
Carving tool with a curved cutting edge. The most used category of carving tools.


Sweep
The curvature of the cutting edge of a carving gouge. A lower number (like #3) indicates a shallow, flat sweep while a high number (like #9) is used for a deeply curved gouge.


Veiner
A small deep gouge with a U-shaped cutting edge. Usually #11 sweep.


Fluter
A larger #11 sweep gouge with a U-shaped cutting edge.


Sloyd knife
A whittling knife having a strong, blade slightly shorter than the handle (around 5&#160;inches), suitable for marking or carving.


Chisel
A carving tool with a straight cutting edge (usually termed #1 sweep) at right angles (or square to) the sides of the blade.


Skew chisel
A chisel with the edge at a "skew" or angle relative the sides of the blade. Often termed #2 sweep in the Sheffield list or #1s in continental lists.


V-tool
A carving tool with a V-shaped cutting edge.[2] Used for outlining and decorative cuts. Referred to as 'the carvers pencil' by old time professional carvers.


Parting tool


Long bent
A gouge, chisel or V tool where the blade is curved along its entire length. Handy for deep work.


Short bent
A gouge, chisel or V tool where the blade is straight with a curve at the end, like a spoon. Use for work in deep or inaccessible areas. Spoon gouges were often referred to as 'tracery tools' which indicates their use in the type of decorative carving found in churches


Spoon


Fishtail
A gouge or chisel with a straight, narrow shank that flares out at the end to form a "fishtail" shaped tool. The narrow shaft of the tool allows for clearance in tight areas.


Back bent
A spoon gouge with a reverse bent end. Used for undercuts and reeding work.


Palm tools
Short (5"), stubby tools used with one hand while the work is held in the other. Great for detail and small carving.


Full-size tools
10" to 11" tools used with two hands or a mallet.


Tang
The tapered part of the blade that is driven into the handle.


Bolster
A flared section of the blade near the tang that keeps the blade from being driven further into the handle.


Ferrule
A metal collar on the handle that keeps the wood from splitting when the tool is used with a mallet. Some tools have an external, visible ferrule while others have an internal ferrule.Some old, small detail tools have neither bolster nor ferrule as their light use makes them unnecessary.


Rockwell hardness
A scale that indicates the hardness of steel. A Rockwell range of 58 to 61 is considered optimum for fine woodworking edge tools.


Wood[edit]
Selection[edit]
The nature of the wood being carved limits the scope of the carver in that wood is not equally strong in all directions: it is an anisotropic material. The direction in which wood is strongest is called "grain" (grain may be straight, interlocked, wavy or fiddleback, etc.). It is smart to arrange the more delicate parts of a design along the grain instead of across it. Often however a "line of best fit" is instead employed, since a design may have multiple weak points in different directions, or orientation of these along the grain would necessitate carving detail on end grain, (which is considerably more difficult). Carving blanks are also sometimes assembled, as with carousel horses, out of many smaller boards, and in this way one can orient different areas of a carving in the most logical way, both for the carving process and for durability. Less commonly, this same principle is used in solid pieces of wood, where the fork of two branches is utilized for its divergent grain, or a branch off of a larger log is carved into a beak (this was the technique employed for traditional Welsh shepherd's crooks, and some Native American adze handles). The failure to appreciate these primary rules may constantly be seen in damaged work, when it will be noticed that, whereas tendrils, tips of birds beaks, etc., arranged across the grain have been broken away, similar details designed more in harmony with the growth of the wood and not too deeply undercut remain intact.
Probably the two most common woods used for carving are basswood (aka tilia or lime) and tupelo, both are hardwoods that are relatively easy to work with. Chestnut, butternut, oak, American walnut, mahogany and teak are also very good woods; while for fine work Italian walnut, sycamore maple, apple, pear, box or plum, are usually chosen. Decoration that is to be painted and of not too delicate a nature is often carved in pine.
Sculpture[edit]




Mambila figure, Nigeria


A wood carver begins a new carving by selecting a chunk of wood the approximate size and shape of the figure he or she wishes to create or, if the carving is to be large, several pieces of wood may be laminated together to create the required size. The type of wood is important. Hardwoods are more difficult to shape but have greater luster and longevity. Softer woods may be easier to carve but are more prone to damage. Any wood can be carved but they all have different qualities and characteristics. The choice will depend on the requirements of carving being done: for example a detailed figure would need a wood with a fine grain and very little figure as strong figure can interfere with 'reading' fine detail.
Once the sculptor has selected their wood, he or she begins a general shaping process using gouges of various sizes. The gouge is a curved blade that can remove large portions of wood smoothly. For harder woods, the sculptor may use gouges sharpened with stronger bevels, about 35 degrees, and a mallet similar to a stone carver's. The terms gouge and chisel are open to confusion. Correctly, a gouge is a tool with a curved cross section and a chisel is a tool with a flat cross section. However, professional carvers tend to refer to them all as 'chisels'. Smaller sculptures may require the wood carver to use a knife, and larger pieces might require the use of a saw. No matter what wood is selected or tool used, the wood sculptor must always carve either across or with the grain of the wood, never against the grain.
Once the general shape is made, the carver may use a variety of tools for creating details. For example, a “veiner” or “fluter” can be used to make deep gouges into the surface, or a “v-tool” for making fine lines or decorative cuts. Once the finer details have been added, the wood carver finishes the surface. The method chosen depends on the required quality of surface finish. The texture left by shallow gouges gives 'life' to the carving's surface and many carvers prefer this 'tooled' finish. If a completely smooth surface is required general smoothing can be done with tools such as “rasps,” which are flat-bladed tools with a surface of pointed teeth. “Rifflers” are similar to rasps, but smaller, usually double ended, and of various shapes for working in folds or crevasses. The finer polishing is done with abrasive paper. Large grained paper with a rougher surface is used first, with the sculptor then using finer grained paper that can make the surface of the sculpture slick to the touch.
After the carving and finishing is completed, the artist may seal &amp; color the wood with a variety of natural oils, such as walnut or linseed oil which protects the wood from dirt and moisture. Oil also imparts a sheen to the wood which, by reflecting light, helps the observer 'read' the form. Carvers seldom use gloss varnish as it creates too shiny a surface, which reflects so much light it can confuse the form; carvers refer to this as 'the toffee apple effect'. Objects made of wood are frequently finished with a layer of wax, which protects the wood and gives a soft lustrous sheen. A wax finish is comparatively fragile though and only suitable for indoor carvings.
Traditions[edit]
The making of decoys and fish carving are two of the artistic traditions that use wood carvings.
See also[edit]




Visual arts portal




List of woodcarvers
Chainsaw carving
History of wood carving
Wood as a medium
Woodcut
Woodturning
Woodworking
Wood carving in the Marquesas Islands
Woodcarved Catholic saints in the Parish Church of Ortisei, northern Italy
National Wood Carvers Association
Woodcarving events:

Woodfest Wales



Gallery[edit]







A wooden Bodhisattva from the Song Dynasty (960–1279)









Another Song-Dynasty Bodhisattva









From Africa









Tilman Riemenschneider's Saint Barbara from Germany









in Festac Town, Lagos, Nigeria









Yombe-sculpture, 19th century









in Festac Town, Lagos, Nigeria









Carved gallant genre scene with figurines from Val Gardena, 18th century









Sculpture by Medina Ayllón, Spain









Carving of a duck by a Florida artist









Carving of unicorn by G&amp;H Studios, Somerset, England









c. 1940s, hobo by Carl Johan Trygg









The eponymous carving on the Urnes stave church is an example of the Urnes style, Norway









A dragon's head from the Oseberg ship









Carvings for sale on a beach









Carvings for sale in Kenya




References[edit]


^ See for example Martin Robertson, A shorter history of Greek art, p. 9, Cambridge University Press, 1981, ISBN 0-521-28084-2, ISBN 978-0-521-28084-6 Google books
^ "12 top tips for using a V-tool". WoodworkersInstitute.com. 14 May 2010. Retrieved 30 January 2013.&#160;



&#160;This article&#160;incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:&#160;Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.&#160;
&#160;This article incorporates&#160;public domain material from websites or documents of the National Archives and Records Administration.


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Wood carving.



Chinese Wood Carving
Woodcarving Magazine
Sharpening, Honing and Polishing Gouges and Other Carving Tools by R.M Mottola
The British Woodcarvers Association
Maori Wood Carving
Sculptures and exotic wood lamps









v
t
e


Decorative arts and handicrafts






Textile



Banner-making
Canvas work
Cross-stitch
Crocheting
Embroidery
Felting
Friendship bracelet
Knitting
Lace-making
Lucet
Macrame
Millinery
Needlepoint
Needlework
Patchwork
Quilting
Ribbon embroidery
Rug hooking
Rug making
Sewing
Shoemaking
Spinning (textiles)
String art
Tapestry
Tatting
Tie-dye
Weaving








Paper



Altered book
Bookbinding
Calligraphy
Cardmaking
Cast paper
Collage

Decoupage
Photomontage


Embossing
Iris folding
Marbling
Origami

Kirigami
Moneygami


Papercutting
Paper toys
Papercraft
Papermaking
Papier-mâché
Pop-up book
Quilling
Scrapbooking
Stamping
Wallpaper








Wood



Bentwood
Cabinetry
Carpentry
Chip carving
Ébéniste
Fretwork
Intarsia
Marquetry
Wood burning
Wood carving
Woodturning








Ceramic



Azulejo
Bone china
Earthenware
Porcelain
Pottery
Stoneware
Terracotta








Glass



Cameo glass
Glassware
Stained glass








Metal



Engraving
Jewellery
Goldsmith
Silversmith








Other



Assemblage
Beadwork
Bone carving
Doll making
Dollhouse
Egg decorating
Engraved gems
Hardstone carving
Lathart
Lapidary
Leatherworking
Miniatures
Micromosaic
Mosaic
Pietra dura
Pressed flower craft
Scrimshaw
Straw marquetry
Wall decal
















v
t
e


Woodworking






Overviews



History
Glossary
Wood (lumber)
Wood art








Forms



Boat building
Bow and arrow
Bush carpentry
Cabinetry
Caning
Carpentry
Chainsaw carving
Chip carving
Clogs
Ébéniste
Fretwork
Intarsia
Japanese carpentry
Log building
Marquetry
Millwork
Parquetry
Pyrography
Relief carving
Root carving
Sawdust
Segmented turning
Shipbuilding
Spindle turning
Timber framing
Whittling
Wood carving
Woodturning
Wood flour








Woods




Soft



Cedar (Calocedrus, Cedrus)
Cypress
Douglas fir
Fir
Juniper
Larch
Pine
Spruce
Yew








Hard



Ash
Alder
Aspen
Balsa
Beech
Birch
Cherry
Chestnut
Ebony
Elm
Hazel
Lignum vitae
Linden (lime, basswood)
Mahogany
Maple
Oak
Padauk
Plum
Poplar
Teak
Totara
Walnut
Willow











Tools







Abrasives
Axe
Adze
Chisel
Clamp
Drawknife
Drill
Float
Mallet
Milling machine
Mitre box
Moulding plane
Plane
Rasp
Router
Sandpaper
Timber-framing
Vise
Winding sticks
Wood scribe
Workbench








Saws



Backsaw
Bandsaw
Bow
Bucksaw
Chainsaw
Circular
Compass
Coping
Crosscut
Frame
Fretsaw
Jigsaw
Keyhole
Miter
Rip
Scroll
Veneer
Whipsaw











Geometry




Joints



Birdsmouth
Bridle
Butt
Butterfly
Coping
Crown of thorns
Dados
Dovetail
Finger
Groove
Halved
Hammer-headed tenon
Knee
Lap
Mason's mitre
Miter
Mortise and tenon
Rabbet/Rebate
Scarf
Splice
Tongue and groove








Profiles



Bead
Bevel
Chamfer
Molding
Ogee
Ogive











Treatments



French polish
Heat bending
Paint
Paint stripper
Steam bending
Thermal
Varnish
Wood drying
Wood preservation
Wood stain








Organizations



American Association of Woodturners
Architectural Woodwork Institute
British Woodworking Federation
Building and Wood Workers' International
Caricature Carvers of America
International Federation of Building and Wood Workers
National Wood Carvers Association
Society of Wood Engravers
Timber Framers Guild








Conversion



Chainsaw mill
Hewing
Sawmill
Whipsaw
Wood splitting








Techniques



Frame and panel
Frameless construction











 Category
 WikiProject
 Commons















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wood_carving&amp;oldid=687187202"					
				Categories: WoodcarvingWoodworkingHidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with no article parameterWikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia BritannicaWikipedia articles incorporating text from the National Archives and Records Administration				
							
		
		
			