


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Work of art
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								  (Redirected from Art Object)
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				For the television program, see Work of Art: The Next Great Artist.
"Oeuvre" and "Body of work" redirect here. For the album, see Body of Work (album). For Oeuvre, see Oeuvre (disambiguation).




Tribuna of the Uffizi, Johann Zoffany (1772-78), showing many famous works of European art






The Great Mosque of Kairouan (also called the Mosque of Uqba) in Kairouan in Tunisia[1]






Sculpture garden of the National Gallery, Canberra with graveposts from Vanuatu


A work of art, artwork, art piece, piece of art or art object is an aesthetic physical item or artistic creation. Apart from "work of art", which may be used of any work regarded as art in its widest sense, including works from literature and music, these terms apply principally to tangible, portable forms of visual art:

An example of fine art, such as a painting or sculpture
An object that has been designed specifically for its aesthetic appeal, such as a piece of jewelry
An object that has been designed for aesthetic appeal as well as functional purpose, as in interior design and much folk art
An object created for principally or entirely functional, religious or other non-aesthetic reasons which has come to be appreciated as art (often later, and/or by cultural outsiders)
A non-ephemeral photograph, film or visual computer program, such as a video game or computer animation
A work of installation art or conceptual art.

Used more broadly, the term is less commonly applied to:

A fine work of architecture or landscape design
A production of live performance, such as theater, ballet, opera, performance art, musical concert and other performing arts, and other ephemeral, non-tangible creations.

This article is concerned with the terms and concept as used in and applied to the visual arts, although other fields such as aural-music and written word-literature have similar issues and philosophies. The term objet d'art is reserved to describe works of art that are not paintings, prints, drawings or large or medium-sized sculptures, or architecture (e.g. household goods, figurines, etc., some purely aesthetic, some also practical). The term oeuvre is used to describe the complete body of work completed by an artist throughout a career.[2]



Contents


1 Definition
2 Theories
3 Distinctions
4 See also
5 References
6 Further reading
7 External links



Definition[edit]




Chinese Jade ornament with grapes vine, (1115–1234 CE)






Leadlight window from the 1920s






Gold and enamel purse clasp, Saxon


A work of art in the visual arts is a physical two- or three- dimensional object that is professionally determined or other wise considered to fulfill a primarily independent aesthetic function. A singular art object is often seen in the context of a larger art movement or artistic era, such as: a genre, aesthetic convention, culture, or regional-national distinction.[3] It can also be seen as an item within an artist's "body of work" or oeuvre. The term is commonly used by: museum and cultural heritage curators, the interested public, the art patron-private art collector community, and art galleries.[4]
Physical objects that document immaterial or conceptual art works, but do not conform to artistic conventions can be redefined and reclassified as art objects. Some Dada and Neo-Dada conceptual and readymade works have received later inclusion. Also, some architectural renderings and models of unbuilt projects, such as by Vitruvius, Leonardo da Vinci, Frank Lloyd Wright, and Frank Gehry, are other examples.
The products of environmental design, depending on intention and execution, can be "works of art" and include: land art, site-specific art, architecture, gardens, landscape architecture, installation art, rock art, and megalithic monuments.
Legal definitions of "work of art" are used in copyright law; see Visual arts#United States of America copyright definition of visual art.
Theories[edit]
Marcel Duchamp critiqued the idea that the work of art should be a unique product of an artist's labour, representational of their technical skill and/or artistic caprice.[citation needed] Theorists have argued that objects and people do not have a constant meaning, but their meanings are fashioned by humans in the context of their culture, as they have the ability to make things mean or signify something.[5]
Artist Michael Craig-Martin, creator of An Oak Tree, said of his work - "It's not a symbol. I have changed the physical substance of the glass of water into that of an oak tree. I didn't change its appearance. The actual oak tree is physically present, but in the form of a glass of water." [6]
Distinctions[edit]
Some art theorists and writers have long made a distinction between the physical qualities of an art object and its identity-status as an artwork.[7] For example, a painting by Rembrandt has a physical existence as an "oil painting on canvas" that is separate from its identity as a masterpiece "work of art" or the artist's magnum opus.[8] Many works of art are initially denied "museum quality" or artistic merit, and later become accepted and valued in museum and private collections. Works by the Impressionists and non-representational abstract artists are examples. Some, such as the "Readymades" of Marcel Duchamp including his infamous 'urinal "Fountain'", are later reproduced as "museum quality replicas".
There is an indefinite distinction, for current or historical aesthetic items: between "fine art" objects made by "artists"; and folk art, craft-work, or "applied art" objects made by "first, second, or third-world" designers, artisans and craftspeople. Contemporary and archeological indigenous art, industrial design items in limited or mass production, and places created by environmental designers and cultural landscapes, are some examples. The term has been consistently available for debate, reconsideration, and redefinition.

See also[edit]




The original Fountain by Marcel Duchamp, 1917, photographed by Alfred Stieglitz at his 291 after the 1917 Society of Independent Artists exhibit.



Anti-art
Artistic media
Cultural artifact
Outline of aesthetics
The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction
Western canon

References[edit]


^ John Stothoff Badeau and John Richard Hayes, The Genius of Arab civilization: source of Renaissance. Taylor &amp; Francis. 1983. p. 104
^ Oeuvre Merriam Webster Dictionary , Accessed April 2011
^ Gell, Alfred (1998). Art and agency: an Anthropological Theory. Clarendon Press. p.&#160;7. ISBN&#160;0-19-828014-9. Retrieved 2011-03-11.&#160;
^ Macdonald, Sharon (2006). A Companion to Museum Studies. Blackwell companions in cultural studies. Wiley-Blackwell. p.&#160;52. ISBN&#160;1-4051-0839-8. Retrieved 2011-03-11.&#160;
^ Hall, S (ed.) 1997, Cultural Representations and Signifying Practice, Open University Press, London, 1997.
^ "There's No Need to be Afraid of the Present", The Independent, 25 Jun 2001
^ http://www.ftc.gov/opa/1995/08/gabos3.shtm
^ "Rembrandt Research Project - Home". rembrandtresearchproject.org.&#160;


Further reading[edit]

Richard Wollheim, Art and Its Objects, 2nd ed., 1980, Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-29706-0. The classic philosophical enquiry into what a work of art is.

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Art.





Look up art student, artwork, objet d'art, or work of art in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.










v
t
e


Aesthetics






Philosophers



Abhinavagupta
Theodor W. Adorno
Leon Battista Alberti
Thomas Aquinas
Hans Urs von Balthasar
Alexander Gottlieb Baumgarten
Clive Bell
Bernard Bosanquet
Edward Bullough
R. G. Collingwood
Ananda Coomaraswamy
Arthur Danto
John Dewey
Denis Diderot
Hubert Dreyfus
Curt John Ducasse
Thierry de Duve
Roger Fry
Nelson Goodman
Clement Greenberg
Georg Hegel
Martin Heidegger
David Hume
Immanuel Kant
Paul Klee
Susanne Langer
Theodor Lipps
György Lukács
Jean-François Lyotard
Joseph Margolis
Jacques Maritain
Thomas Munro
Friedrich Nietzsche
José Ortega y Gasset
Dewitt H. Parker
Stephen Pepper
David Prall
Ayn Rand
George Lansing Raymond
I. A. Richards
George Santayana
Friedrich Schiller
Arthur Schopenhauer
Roger Scruton
Irving Singer
Rabindranath Tagore
Giorgio Vasari
Morris Weitz
Richard Wollheim
more...








Theories



Classicism
Evolutionary aesthetics
Historicism
Modernism
New Classical
Postmodernism
Psychoanalytic theory
Romanticism
Symbolism
more...








Concepts



Aesthetic emotions
Aesthetic interpretation
Art manifesto
Avant-garde
Beauty
Boredom
Camp
Comedy
Creativity
Cuteness
Disgust
Ecstasy
Elegance
Entertainment
Eroticism
Gaze
Harmony
Judgement
Kama
Kitsch
Life imitating art
Magnificence
Mimesis
Perception
Quality
Rasa
Reverence
Style
Sublime
Taste
Work of art
more...








Related topics



Aesthetics of music
Applied aesthetics
Architecture
Art
Arts criticism
Gastronomy
History of painting
Humour
Japanese aesthetics
Literary merit
Mathematical beauty
Mathematics and art
Music theory
Neuroesthetics
Painting
Philosophy of design
Philosophy of film
Philosophy of music
Poetry
Sculpture
Theory of painting
Theory of art
Tragedy











Category
Discussion
Portal
Stubs
Task Force













Authority control



GND: 4123592-7















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Work_of_art&amp;oldid=691473636"					
				Categories: Architectural communicationArt mediaArtsConcepts in aestheticsCreativityDesignEnvironmental designLandscape architectureVisual artsWorks of artHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from March 2014Commons category with local link same as on WikidataWikipedia articles with GND identifiers				
							
		
		
			