


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Çatalhöyük
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				
Çatalhöyük


Çatalhöyük at the time of the first excavations












Shown within Turkey






Location
Küçükköy, Konya Province, Turkey


Region
Anatolia


Coordinates
37°42′3″N 32°49′42″E﻿ / ﻿37.70083°N 32.82833°E﻿ / 37.70083; 32.82833Coordinates: 37°42′3″N 32°49′42″E﻿ / ﻿37.70083°N 32.82833°E﻿ / 37.70083; 32.82833


Type
Settlement


History


Founded
Approximately 7500 BCE


Abandoned
Approximately 5700 BCE


Periods
Neolithic to Chalcolithic


Site notes


Archaeologists
Gold


Ownership
Nine






UNESCO World Heritage Site



Official name
Neolithic Site of Çatalhöyük


Type
Cultural


Criteria
iii, iv


Designated
2012 (36th session)


Reference&#160;no.
1405


State Party
Turkey


Region
Europe and North America


Çatalhöyük (Turkish pronunciation:&#160;[tʃaˈtaɫhøjyc]; also Çatal Höyük and Çatal Hüyük; çatal is Turkish for "fork", höyük for "mound") was a very large Neolithic and Chalcolithic proto-city settlement in southern Anatolia, which existed from approximately 7500 BC to 5700 BC, and flourished around 7000 BC.[1] It is the largest and best-preserved Neolithic site found to date. In July 2012, it was inscribed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site.[2]
Çatalhöyük is located overlooking the Konya Plain, southeast of the present-day city of Konya (ancient Iconium) in Turkey, approximately 140&#160;km (87&#160;mi) from the twin-coned volcano of Mount Hasan. The eastern settlement forms a mound which would have risen about 20&#160;m (66&#160;ft) above the plain at the time of the latest Neolithic occupation. There is also a smaller settlement mound to the west and a Byzantine settlement a few hundred meters to the east. The prehistoric mound settlements were abandoned before the Bronze Age. A channel of the Çarşamba river once flowed between the two mounds, and the settlement was built on alluvial clay which may have been favourable for early agriculture.



Contents


1 Archaeology
2 Culture
3 Religion
4 Archaeological project support
5 See also
6 Notes
7 References
8 Further reading
9 External links



Archaeology[edit]
The site was first excavated by James Mellaart in 1958. He later led a team which excavated there for four seasons between 1961 and 1965.[3][4][5][6] These excavations revealed this section of Anatolia as a centre of advanced culture in the Neolithic period.[7] Mellaart was banned from Turkey for his involvement in the Dorak affair in which he published drawings of supposedly important Bronze Age artifacts that later went missing.[8] Excavation revealed 18 successive layers of buildings signifying various stages of the settlement and eras of history. The bottom layer of buildings signifies as early as 7500 BC while the top layer is of 5,600 B.C.[9]
After this scandal, the site lay idle until 1993, when investigations began under the leadership of Ian Hodder, then at the University of Cambridge.[10][11][12][13] These investigations are among the most ambitious excavation projects currently in progress according to, among others, Colin Renfrew. In addition to extensive use of archaeological science, psychological and artistic interpretations of the symbolism of the wall paintings have been employed. Hodder, a former student of Mellaart, chose the site as the first "real world" test of his then-controversial theory of post-processual archaeology.
Culture[edit]




On-site restoration of a typical interior


Çatalhöyük was composed entirely of domestic buildings, with no obvious public buildings. While some of the larger ones have rather ornate murals, the purpose of some rooms remains unclear.[7]
The population of the eastern mound has been estimated to be, at maximum, 10,000 people, but the population likely varied over the community’s history. An average population of between 5,000 to 7,000 is a reasonable estimate. The sites were set up as large numbers of buildings clustered together. Households looked to their neighbors for help, trade, and possible marriage for their children.[14] The inhabitants lived in mudbrick houses that were crammed together in an aggregate structure. No footpaths or streets were used between the dwellings, which were clustered in a honeycomb-like maze. Most were accessed by holes in the ceiling, with doors reached by ladders and stairs. The rooftops were effectively streets. The ceiling openings also served as the only source of ventilation, allowing smoke from the houses' open hearths and ovens to escape.


The Neolithic
This box:

view
talk
edit





↑ Mesolithic




Fertile Crescent

Heavy Neolithic
Shepherd Neolithic
Trihedral Neolithic
Pre-Pottery (A, B)
Qaraoun culture
Tahunian culture
Yarmukian Culture
Halaf culture
Halaf-Ubaid Transitional period
Ubaid culture
Byblos
Jericho
Tell Aswad
Çatalhöyük
Jarmo


Europe

Boian culture
Butmir culture
Cernavodă culture
Coțofeni culture
Cucuteni-Trypillian culture
Dudeşti culture
Gorneşti culture
Gumelniţa–Karanovo culture
Hamangia culture
Linear Pottery culture
Malta Temples
Petreşti culture
Sesklo culture
Tisza culture
Tiszapolgár culture
Usatovo culture
Varna culture
Vinča culture
Vučedol culture
Neolithic Transylvania
Neolithic Southeastern Europe


China

Peiligang culture
Pengtoushan culture
Beixin culture
Cishan culture
Dadiwan culture
Houli culture
Xinglongwa culture
Xinle culture
Zhaobaogou culture
Hemudu culture
Daxi culture
Majiabang culture
Yangshao culture
Hongshan culture
Dawenkou culture
Songze culture
Liangzhu culture
Majiayao culture
Qujialing culture
Longshan culture
Baodun culture
Shijiahe culture
Yueshi culture
Tibet


South Asia

Mehrgarh







farming, animal husbandry
pottery, metallurgy, wheel
circular ditches, henges, megaliths
Neolithic religion



↓ Chalcolithic


Houses had plaster interiors characterized by squared-off timber ladders or steep stairs. These were usually on the south wall of the room, as were cooking hearths and ovens. The main rooms contained raised platforms that may have been used for a range of domestic activities. Typical houses contained two rooms for everyday activity, such as cooking and crafting.[14] All interior walls and platforms were plastered to a smooth finish.[7] Ancillary rooms were used as storage, and were accessed through low openings from main rooms.
All rooms were kept scrupulously clean. Archaeologists identified very little rubbish in the buildings, finding middens outside the ruins, with sewage and food waste, as well as significant amounts of wood ash. In good weather, many daily activities may also have taken place on the rooftops, which may have formed a plaza. In later periods, large communal ovens appear to have been built on these rooftops. Over time, houses were renewed by partial demolition and rebuilding on a foundation of rubble, which was how the mound was gradually built up. As many as eighteen levels of settlement have been uncovered.
As a part of ritual life, the people of Çatalhöyük buried their dead within the village.[14] Human remains have been found in pits beneath the floors and, especially, beneath hearths, the platforms within the main rooms, and under beds. Bodies were tightly flexed before burial and were often placed in baskets or wound and wrapped in reed mats. Disarticulated bones in some graves suggest that bodies may have been exposed in the open air for a time before the bones were gathered and buried. In some cases, graves were disturbed, and the individual’s head removed from the skeleton. These heads may have been used in rituals, as some were found in other areas of the community. In a woman's grave spinning whorls were recovered and in a man's grave, stone axes.[14] Some skulls were plastered and painted with ochre to recreate faces, a custom more characteristic of Neolithic sites in Syria and at Neolithic Jericho than at sites closer by.
Vivid murals and figurines are found throughout the settlement, on interior and exterior walls. Distinctive clay figurines of women, notably the Seated Woman of Çatalhöyük, have been found in the upper levels of the site. Although no identifiable temples have been found, the graves, murals, and figurines suggest that the people of Çatalhöyük had a religion rich in symbols. Rooms with concentrations of these items may have been shrines or public meeting areas. Predominant images include men with erect phalluses, hunting scenes, red images of the now extinct aurochs (wild cattle) and stags, and vultures swooping down on headless figures.[7] Relief figures are carved on walls, such as of lionesses facing one another.
Heads of animals, especially of cattle, were mounted on walls. A painting of the village, with the twin mountain peaks of Hasan Dağ in the background,[15] is frequently cited as the world's oldest map [16] and the first landscape painting.[7] However, some archaeologists question this interpretation. Stephanie Meece, for example, argues that it is more likely a painting of a leopard skin instead of a volcano, and a decorative geometric design instead of a map.[17]
Çatalhöyük had no apparent social classes, as no houses with distinctive features (belonging to royalty or religious hierarchy, for example) have been found so far. The most recent investigations also reveal little social distinction based on gender, with men and women receiving equivalent nutrition and seeming to have equal social status, as typically found in Paleolithic cultures.[18][19][20] Children observed domestic areas. They learned how to perform rituals and how to build or repair houses by watching the adults make statues, beads and other objects.[14] Çatalhöyük's spatial layout may be due to the close kin relations exhibited amongst the people. It can be seen, in the layout, that the people were "divided into two groups who lived on opposite sides of the town, separated by a gully." Furthermore, because no nearby towns were found from which marriage partners could be drawn, "this spatial separation must have marked two intermarrying kinship groups." This would help explain how a settlement so early on would become so large.[21]
In upper levels of the site, it becomes apparent that the people of Çatalhöyük were gaining skills in agriculture and the domestication of animals. Female figurines have been found within bins used for storage of cereals, such as wheat and barley, and the figurines are presumed to be of a deity protecting the grain. Peas were also grown, and almonds, pistachios, and fruit were harvested from trees in the surrounding hills. Sheep were domesticated and evidence suggests the beginning of cattle domestication as well. However, hunting continued to be a major source of food for the community. Pottery and obsidian tools appear to have been major industries; obsidian tools were probably both used and also traded for items such as Mediterranean sea shells and flint from Syria.

Artifacts






Excavations at the southern area of the site









Earliest known textile fragments









Images of deities









Mural of aurochs, a deer, and humans









Relief of two lionesses facing each other









Aurochs' heads









A photo of the earliest excavations in Çatalhöyük.




Religion[edit]
See also: History of religion




Seated goddess flanked by two felines


A striking feature of Çatalhöyük are its female figurines. Mellaart, the original excavator, argued that these well-formed, carefully made figurines, carved and molded from marble, blue and brown limestone, schist, calcite, basalt, alabaster, and clay, represented a female deity. Although a male deity existed as well, “…statues of a female deity far outnumber those of the male deity, who moreover, does not appear to be represented at all after Level&#160;VI”.[22] To date, eighteen levels have been identified. These artfully-hewn figurines were found primarily in areas Mellaart believed to be shrines. The stately goddess seated on a throne flanked by two female lions (illustration) was found in a grain bin, which Mellaart suggests might have been a means of ensuring the harvest or protecting the food supply.[23] In later cultures, similar depictions are seen of Cybele, the sun goddess, pulled in her chariot by lions as she transverses the sky in the house of Leo at the height of her power during the months of July and August.
Whereas Mellaart excavated nearly two hundred buildings in four seasons, the current excavator, Ian Hodder, spent an entire season excavating one building alone.[24] Hodder and his team, in 2004 and 2005, began to believe that the patterns suggested by Mellaart were false. They found one similar figurine, but the vast majority did not imitate the Mother Goddess style that Mellaart suggested. Instead of a Mother Goddess culture, Hodder points out that the site gives little indication of a matriarchy or patriarchy.

There are full breasts on which the hands rest, and the stomach is extended in the central part. There is a hole in the top for the head which is missing. As one turns the figurine around one notices that the arms are very thin, and then on the back of the figurine one sees a depiction of either a skeleton or the bones of a very thin and depleted human. The ribs and vertebrae are clear, as are the scapulae and the main pelvic bones. The figurine can be interpreted in a number of ways - as a woman turning into an ancestor, as a woman associated with death, or as death and life conjoined. It is possible that the lines around the body represent wrapping rather than ribs. Whatever the specific interpretation, this is a unique piece that may force us to change our views of the nature of Çatalhöyük society and imagery. Perhaps the importance of female imagery was related to some special role of the female in relation to death as much as to the roles of mother and nurturer[25]

In an article in the Turkish Daily News, Hodder is reported as denying that Çatalhöyük was a matriarchal society and quoted as saying "When we look at what they eat and drink and at their social statues, we see that men and women had the same social status. There was a balance of power. Another example is the skulls found. If one's social status was of high importance in Çatalhöyük, the body and head were separated after death. The number of female and male skulls found during the excavations is almost equal."[26] In another article on turkish "Hurriyet Daily News" Hodder is reported to say "We have learned that men and women were equally approached".[27]
In a report in September 2009 on the discovery of around 2000 figurines Hodder is quoted as saying:

“Çatalhöyük was excavated in the 1960s in a methodical way, but not using the full range of natural science techniques that are available to us today. Sir James Mellaart who excavated the site in the 1960s came up with all sorts of ideas about the way the site was organised and how it was lived in and so on,” he said. “We’ve now started working there since the mid 1990s and come up with very different ideas about the site. One of the most obvious examples of that is that Çatalhöyük is perhaps best known for the idea of the mother goddess. But our work more recently has tended to show that in fact there is very little evidence of a mother goddess and very little evidence of some sort of female-based matriarchy. That’s just one of the many myths that the modern scientific work is undermining.”[28]

Professor Lynn Meskell explained that while the original excavations had found only 200 figures, the new excavations had uncovered 2000 figurines of which most were animals, with less than 5% of the figurines women.[28]
Estonian folklorist Uku Masing has suggested as early as in 1976, that Çatalhöyük was probably a hunting and gathering religion and the Mother Goddess figurine didn't represent a female deity. He implied that perhaps a longer period of time was needed in order to develop symbols for agricultural rites.[29] His theory was developed in the paper "Some remarks on the mythology of the people of Catal Hüyük".[30]
Archaeological project support[edit]
The current archaeological investigations at Çatalhöyük are supported by the following institutions and organizations:[31][32]

Selçuk University
British Institute of Archaeology at Ankara
Institute of Archaeology, University College London
Cardiff University, Cardiff University
Stanford University
World Monuments Fund
Turkish Cultural Foundation
Istanbul University
University of California, Berkeley
Polish Heritage Council
Adam Mickiewicz University
SUNY Buffalo
Global Heritage Fund
Yapi Kredi
Boeing
Shell
Merko
Thames Water
National Geographic Society
American Embassy in Ankara
University of York
University of Reading

See also[edit]

Bull (mythology)
Cities of the ancient Near East
Cucuteni-Trypillian culture
Göbekli Tepe
Kamyana Mohyla
List of largest cities throughout history
List of Stone Age art
Matriarchy
Neolithic Revolution
Old European culture
Venus figurines
Favela modern equivalent

Notes[edit]


^ Langer, William L., ed. (1972). its not very fun there.An Encyclopedia of World History (5th ed.). Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin Company. p.&#160;9. ISBN&#160;0-395-13592-3.&#160;
^ http://globalheritagefund.org/onthewire/blog/catalhoyuk_world_heritage_list Çatalhöyük added to UNESCO World Heritage List Global Heritage Fund blog article
^ J. Mellaart, Excavations at Çatal Hüyük, first preliminary report: 1961. Anatolian Studies, vol. 12, pp. 41-65, 1962
^ J. Mellaart, Excavations at Çatal Hüyük, second preliminary report: 1962. Anatolian Studies, vol. 13, pp. 43-103, 1963
^ J. Mellaart, Excavations at Çatal Hüyük, third preliminary report: 1963. Anatolian Studies, vol. 14, pp. 39-119, 1964
^ J. Mellaart, Excavations at Çatal Hüyük, fourth preliminary report: at 1965. Anatolian Studies, vol. 16, pp. 15-191, 1966
^ a b c d e Kleiner, Fred S.; Mamiya, Christin J. (2006). Gardner's Art Through the Ages: The Western Perspective: Volume 1 (Twelfth ed.). Belmont, California: Wadsworth Publishing. pp.&#160;12–4. ISBN&#160;0-495-00479-0.&#160;
^ Kenneth Pearson and Patricia Connor, The Dorak affair, New York, Atheneum, 1968
^ Catalhuyuk - First known city
^ I. Hodder, Çatalhöyük, Anatolian Archaeology, vol. 4, pp. 8-10, 1998
^ I. Hodder, Getting to the Bottom of Thing: Çatalhöyük 1999, Anatolian Archaeology, vol. 5, pp. 4-7, 1999
^ I. Hodder, Çatalhöyük, Anatolian Archaeology, vol. 8, pp. 5-7, 2002
^ I. Hodder, A New Phase of Excavation at Çatalhöyük, Anatolian Archaeology, vol. 9, pp. 9-11, 2003
^ a b c d e Maynes, Mary Jo; Waltner, Ann (2012). The Family: A World History. New York, New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN&#160;978-0-19-530476-3.&#160;
^ Noah Wiener (November 1, 2013). "Çatalhöyük mural". Bible History Daily. Biblical Archaeology Society. Archived from the original on November 24, 2013. This Çatalhöyük mural is thought to represent a nearby volcanic eruption. New scientific evidence confirms a contemporaneous eruption at nearby Hasan Dağ.&#160;
^ Cartographic Images (accessed February 23, 2014)
^ A bird’s eye view - of a leopard’s spots. The Çatalhöyük ‘map’ and the development of cartographic representation in prehistory. Anatolian Studies 56, 2006, pp. 1-16. Published by The British Institute of Archaeology at Ankara
^ Leften Stavros Stavrianos (1991). A Global History from Prehistory to the Present. New Jersey, USA: Prentice Hall. ISBN&#160;0-13-357005-3.&#160; Pages 9-13
^ R Dale Gutrie (2005). The Nature of Paleolithic art. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ISBN&#160;0-226-31126-0.&#160; Page 420-422
^ Museum of Antiquites web site (accessed February 13, 2008).
^ Maynes, Mary Jo; Waltner, Ann (2012). The Family: A World History. New York, New York: Oxford University Press. p.&#160;8. ISBN&#160;978-0-19-530476-3.&#160;
^ Mellaart, James (1967). Catal Huyuk: A Neolithic Town in Anatolia. McGraw-Hill. p.&#160;181.&#160;
^ Mellaart (1967), 180.
^ Balter, Michael (2005). The Goddess and the Bull. New York: Free Press. p.&#160;127. ISBN&#160;0-7432-4360-9.&#160;
^ Hodder, Ian (2005). "New finds and new interpretations at Çatalhöyük". Çatalhöyük 2005 Archive Report. Catalhoyuk Research Project, Institute of Archaeology.&#160;
^ Hodder, Ian (2008-01-17). "A Journey to 9000 years ago". Retrieved 2008-08-07.&#160;
^ Hodder, Ian (2015-03-25). "Çatalhöyük excavations reveal gender equality in ancient settled life". Retrieved 2015-03-25.&#160;
^ a b O'Brien, Jeremy "New techniques undermine 'mother goddess' role in the community" Irish Times September 20, 2009 [1]
^ Masing, Uku (2011). Aarded Tellistes. Tartu, Estonia: Ilmamaa. pp.&#160;209–227. ISBN&#160;978-9985-77-351-2.&#160;
^ Oriental Studies 3. Acta et Commentationes Universitatis Tartuensis 392 / Tartu Riikliku Ülikooli Toimetised 392. Tartu 1976, 75-92.
^ Çatalhöyük: Excavations of a Neolithic Anatolian Höyük - Çatalhöyük Archive Report 2008
^ [2]


References[edit]


Ian Hodder. "This Old House: At Çatalhöyük, a Neolithic site in Turkey, families packed their mud-brick houses close together and traipsed over roofs to climb into their rooms from above". Natural History Magazine (June 2006). Archived from the original on 2011-01-22. Retrieved 2006-08-19.&#160;


Further reading[edit]

Bailey, Douglass. Prehistoric Figurines: Representation and Corporeality in the Neolithic. New York: Routledge, 2005 (hardcover, ISBN 0-415-33151-X; paperback, ISBN 0-415-33152-8).
Balter, Michael. The Goddess and the Bull: Çatalhöyük: An Archaeological Journey to the Dawn of Civilization. New York: Free Press, 2004 (hardcover, ISBN 0-7432-4360-9); Walnut Creek, CA: Left Coast Press, 2006 (paperback, ISBN 1-59874-069-5). A highly condensed version was published in The Smithsonian Magazine, May 2005.
Dural, Sadrettin. "Protecting Catalhoyuk: Memoir of an Archaeological Site Guard." Contributions by Ian Hodder. Translated by Duygu Camurcuoglu Cleere. Walnut Creek, CA: Left Coast Press, 2007. ISBN 978-1-59874-050-9.
Hodder, Ian. "Women and Men at Çatalhöyük," Scientific American Magazine, January 2004 (update V15:1, 2005).
Hodder, Ian. The Leopard's Tale: Revealing the Mysteries of Çatalhöyük. London; New York: Thames&#160;&amp; Hudson, 2006 (hardcover, ISBN 0-500-05141-0). (The UK title of this work is Çatalhöyük: The Leopard's Tale.)
Mallett, Marla, "The Goddess from Anatolia: An Updated View of the Catak Huyuk Controversy," in Oriental Rug Review, Vol. XIII, No. 2 (December 1992/January 1993).
Mellaart, James. Çatal Hüyük: A Neolithic Town in Anatolia. London: Thames&#160;&amp; Hudson, 1967; New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1967.
On the Surface: Çatalhöyük 1993–95, edited by Ian Hodder. Cambridge: McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research and British Institute of Archaeology at Ankara, 1996 (ISBN 0-9519420-3-4).
Todd, Ian A. Çatal Hüyük in Perspective. Menlo Park, CA: Cummings Pub. Co., 1976 (ISBN 0-8465-1958-5; ISBN 0-8465-1957-7).

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Çatalhöyük.



Çatalhöyük — Excavations of a Neolithic Anatolian Höyük, Çatalhöyük excavation official website
Explore Çatalhöyük on Global Heritage Network
Çatalhöyük map
Çatalhöyük photos
The First Cities: Why Settle Down? The Mystery of Communities, by Michael Balter, Çatalhöyük excavation official biographer
Remixing Çatalhöyük









v
t
e


Ancient settlements in Turkey






Aegean



Aegae
Aizanoi
Alabanda
Alinda
Allianoi
Amorium
Amyzon
Antioch on the Maeander
Apamea in Phrygia
Aphrodisias
Apollonia in Mysia
Atarneus
Bargylia
Beycesultan
Blaundus
Caloe
Caryanda
Celaenae
Ceramus
Colophon
Claros
Cyme
Didyma
Docimium
Ephesus
Erythrae
Eucarpia
Euromus
Gambrion
Gryneion
Halicarnassus
Hierapolis
Iasos
Karmylissos
Kaunos
Klazomenai
Knidos
Labraunda
Laodicea on the Lycus
Latmus
Lebedus
Leucae
Limantepe
Magnesia ad Sipylus
Magnesia on the Maeander
Metropolis
Miletus
Myndus
Myriandrus
Myrina
Myus
Notion
Nysa on the Maeander
Oenoanda
Pepuza
Pergamon
Perperene
Phocaea
Pinara
Pitane
Priene
Sardis
Smyrna
Stratonicea in Lydia
Stratonicea in Caria
Temnos
Teos
Tymion








Black Sea



Alaca Höyük
Comana in the Pontus
Euchaita
Hattusa
Heraclea Pontica
Hüseyindede Tepe
Ibora
Laodicea Pontica
Nerik
Nicopolis
Pompeiopolis
Salatiwara
Samuha
Sapinuwa
Tripolis
Yazılıkaya
Zaliche








Central Anatolia



Alishar Hüyük
Binbirkilise
Çatalhöyük
Cotenna
Derbe
Dorylaeum
Eudocia (Cappadocia)
Eudocia (Phrygia)
Gordium
Heraclea Cybistra
Irenopolis
Kaman-Kalehöyük
Kerkenes
Kültepe (Kanesh)
Laodicea Combusta
Meloë
Mokissos
Nyssa
Pessinus
Purushanda
Tavium
Tyana








Eastern Anatolia



Altıntepe
Ani
Cafer Höyük
Melid
Sugunia
Tushpa








Marmara



Achilleion
Aegospotami
Ainos
Alexandria Troas
Apamea Myrlea
Apollonia on the Rhyndax
Apros
Assos
Byzantium
Cardia
Cebrene
Chalcedon
Charax
Cius
Cyzicus
Drusipara
Faustinopolis
Germanicopolis
Lamponeia
Lampsacus
Lygos
Lysimachia
Marpessos
Neandreia
Nicomedia
Orestias
Perinthos
Sestos
Sigeion
Skepsis
Troy (Hisarlik)








Mediterranean



Acalissus
Acarassus
Alalakh
Amelas
Anazarbus
Andriaca
Antigonia
Antioch on the Orontes
Antioch of Pisidia
Antiochia Lamotis
Antioch on the Cragus
Antioch on the Pyramis
Antiphellus
Aperlae
Aphrodisias of Cilicia
Araxa
Ariassos
Arneae
Arsinoe
Arycanda
Aspendos
Bab al-Hawa Border Crossing
Balbura
Bubon
Calynda
Carallia
Carmylessus
Casae
Cestrus
Choma
Cibyra Mikra
Comama
Comana in Cappadocia
Comba
Coracesium
Corycus (Kızkalesi)
Corydala
Cremna
Cyaneae
Cyrrhus
Dalisandus in Isauria
Dalisandus in Pamphylia
Dias
Domuztepe
Elaiussa Sebaste
Epiphania
Erymna
Etenna
Eudocia (Lycia)
Eudocias (Pamphylia)
Gagae
Gözlükule
Hacilar
Idebessos
Irenopolis
Isba
Issus
Kandyba
Karakabaklı
Karatepe
Kibyra
Lebessus
Limyra
Lyrbe
Magydus
Mallus
Mamure Castle
Mastaura
Meloë
Mezgitkale
Mopsuestia
Myra
Nisa
Olba
Olympos
Öküzlü
Orokenda
Patara
Perga
Phaselis
Phellus
Podalia
Rhodiapolis
Rhosus
Sagalassos
Seleucia in Pamphylia
Seleucia Pieria
Seleucia Sidera
Selge
Side
Sidyma
Sillyon
Simena
Sinda
Soli
Sozopolis
Syedra
Tapureli
Tell Tayinat
Termessos
Tlos
Trebenna
Xanthos
Yanıkhan
Yumuktepe








Southeastern Anatolia



Antioch in the Taurus
Antioch in Mesopotamia
Apamea on the Euphrates
Carchemish
Urshu
Khashshum
Çayönü
Dara
Edessa
Göbekli Tepe
Harran
Kussara
Nevalı Çori
Sakçagözü
Sam'al
Samosata
Sareisa
Seleucia at the Zeugma
Sultantepe
Tille
Tushhan
Zeugma
















v
t
e


UNESCO World Heritage Sites in Turkey






Aegean



Ephesus
Hierapolis / Pamukkale
Pergamon
Xanthos / Letoon1








Black Sea



Hittite Capital of Hattusa
Safranbolu








Central Anatolia



Göreme and Rock Sites of Cappadocia
Neolithic Site of Çatalhöyük
Divriği Great Mosque and Hospital








Marmara



Archaeological Site of Troy
Bursa and Cumalıkızık
Historic Areas of Istanbul
Selimiye Mosque and its Social Complex








Mediterranean



Xanthos / Letoon1








Southeastern Anatolia



Mount Nemrut in Commagene
Diyarbakır Fortress and Hevsel Gardens









1 Shared with other regions














v
t
e


Prehistoric technology









Prehistory

timeline
outline
Stone Age
subdivisions
New Stone Age
synoptic table


Technology

history














&#160;
Tools










Farming



Neolithic Revolution

founder crops
New World crops


Ard&#160;/ plough
Celt
Digging stick
Domestication
Goad
Irrigation
Secondary products
Sickle
Terracing








Food processing



Fire
Basket
Cooking

Earth oven


Granaries
Grinding slab
Ground stone
Hearth

Aşıklı Höyük
Qesem Cave


Manos
Metate
Mortar and pestle
Pottery
Quern-stone
Storage pit








Hunting







Arrow
Boomerang

throwing stick


Bow and arrow

history


Nets
Spear

Spear-thrower
baton
harpoon
woomera
Schöningen Spears










Projectile points



Arrowhead
Bare Island
Cascade
Clovis
Cresswell
Cumberland
Eden
Folsom
Lamoka
Manis Site
Plano
Transverse arrowhead











Toolmaking



Earliest toolmaking

Oldowan
Acheulean
Mousterian


Clovis culture
Cupstone
Fire hardening
Gravettian culture
Hafting
Hand axe

Grooves


Langdale axe industry
Levallois technique
Lithic core
Lithic reduction

analysis
debitage
flake


Lithic technology
Magdalenian culture
Metallurgy
Microblade technology
Mining
Prepared-core technique
Solutrean industry
Striking platform
Tool stone
Uniface
Yubetsu technique








Other tools



Adze
Awl

bone


Axe
Bannerstone
Blade

prismatic


Bone tool
Bow drill
Burin
Canoe

Oar
Pesse canoe


Chopper

tool


Cleaver
Denticulate tool
Fire plough
Fire-saw
Hammerstone
Knife
Microlith
Quern-stone
Racloir
Rope
Scraper

side


Stone tool
Tally stick
Weapons
Wheel

illustration




















&#160;
Architecture










Ceremonial



Göbekli Tepe
Kiva
Standing stones

megalith
row
Stonehenge


Pyramid








Dwellings



Neolithic architecture
British megalith architecture
Nordic megalith architecture
Burdei
Cave
Cliff dwelling
Dugout
Hut

Quiggly hole


Jacal
Longhouse
Mud brick

Mehrgarh


Neolithic long house
Pit-house
Pueblitos
Pueblo
Rock shelter

Blombos Cave
Abri de la Madeleine
Sibudu Cave


Stone roof
Roundhouse
Stilt house

Alp pile dwellings


Wattle and daub








Water management



Check dam
Cistern
Flush toilet
Reservoir
Water well








Other architecture



Archaeological features
Broch
Burnt mound

fulacht fiadh


Causewayed enclosure

Tor enclosure


Circular enclosure

Goseck


Cursus
Henge

Thornborough


Oldest buildings
Megalithic architectural elements
Midden
Timber circle
Timber trackway

Sweet Track




















&#160;
Arts and culture










Material goods



Baskets
Beadwork
Beds
Chalcolithic
Clothing/textiles

timeline


Cosmetics
Glue
Hides

shoes
Ötzi


Jewelry

amber use


Mirrors
Pottery

Cardium
Grooved ware
Linear
Jōmon
Unstan ware


Sewing needle
Weaving
Wine

Winery
wine press










Prehistoric art



Art of the Upper Paleolithic
Art of the Middle Paleolithic

Blombos Cave


List of Stone Age art
Bird stone
Bradshaw rock paintings
Cairn
Carved Stone Balls
Cave paintings

painting
pigment


Cup and ring mark
Geoglyph
Golden hats
Guardian stones
Megalithic art
Petroform
Petroglyph
Petrosomatoglyph
Pictogram
Rock art

Stone carving


Sculpture
Statue menhir
Stone circle

list
British Isles and Brittany


Venus figurines








Burial



Burial mounds

Bowl barrow
Round barrow


Mound Builders culture

U.S. sites


Chamber tomb

Severn-Cotswold


Cist

Dartmoor kistvaens


Clava cairn
Court tomb
Cremation
Dolmen

Great dolmen


Funeral pyre
Gallery grave

transepted
wedge-shaped


Grave goods
Jar burial
Long barrow

unchambered
Grønsalen


Megalithic tomb
Mummy
Passage grave
Rectangular dolmen
Ring cairn
Simple dolmen
Stone box grave
Tor cairn
Tumulus
Unchambered long cairn








Other cultural



Astronomy

sites
lunar calendar


Behavioral modernity
Origin of language
Prehistoric medicine

trepanning


Evolutionary musicology

music archaeology


Prehistoric music

Alligator drum
flutes
Divje Babe flute
gudi


Prehistoric numerals
Origin of religion

Paleolithic religion
Prehistoric religion
Spiritual drug use


Prehistoric warfare
Symbols

symbolism
























v
t
e


Archaeological museums in Turkey






Aegean
Region



Afyonkarahisar Archaeological Museum
Aydın Archaeological Museum
Bodrum Castle
Bolvadin Museum
Bostanlı Open-air Archaeological Museum
Ephesus Archaeological Museum
Hierapolis
Izmir Archeology Museum
Archaeological Museum of Manisa
Uşak Museum of Archaeology








Black Sea
Region



Bolu Museum
Çorum Archaeological Museum
Kastamonu Archaeological Museum
Konuralp Museum
Trabzon Museum
Samsun Museum of Archaeology and Ethnography
Tokat Museum








Central Anatolia
Region



Çatalhöyük
Eskişehir Archaeological Museum
Konya Archaeological Museum
Gordion Museum
Museum of Anatolian Civilizations








Eastern Anatolia
Region



Kars Museum








Marmara
Region



Bursa Archaeological Museum
Great Palace Mosaic Museum
Istanbul Archaeology Museums
Kırklareli Museum
Sadberk Hanım Museum
Tekirdağ Museum of Archaeology and Ethnography








Mediterranean
Region



Adana Archaeology Museum
Alanya Archaeological Museum
Antalya Museum
Burdur Archaeological Museum
Hatay Archaeology Museum
Mersin Museum
Misis Mosaic Museum
Silifke Museum
Tarsus Museum








Southeastern Anatolia
Region



Adıyaman Archaeological Museum
Diyarbakır Archaeological Museum
Gaziantep Museum of Archaeology
Şanlıurfa Museum
Zeugma Mosaic Museum















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Çatalhöyük&amp;oldid=691241364"					
				Categories: World Heritage Sites in TurkeyArchaeological sites in Central AnatoliaAnatoliaChalcolithicNeolithicNeolithic settlementsFormer populated places in TurkeyMatriarchyBuildings and structures in Konya ProvinceArchaeological museums in TurkeyMuseums in Konya ProvinceArchaeological sites of prehistoric AnatoliaHistoric preservation in TurkeyHidden categories: Coordinates on WikidataArticles which use infobox templates with no data rows				
							
		
		
			