


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Advanced capitalism
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				Not to be confused with the neo-Marxist term 'late capitalism'.


Part of a series on the


Frankfurt School





Major works


Reason and Revolution
The Work of Art in the
Age of Mechanical Reproduction
Eclipse of Reason
Escape from Freedom
Dialectic of Enlightenment
Minima Moralia
Eros and Civilization
One-Dimensional Man
Negative Dialectics
The Structural Transformation
of the Public Sphere
The Theory of Communicative Action


Notable theorists


Herbert Marcuse&#160;· Theodor Adorno
Max Horkheimer&#160;· Walter Benjamin
Erich Fromm&#160;· Friedrich Pollock
Leo Löwenthal&#160;· Jürgen Habermas
Alfred Schmidt&#160;· Axel Honneth Siegfried Kracauer


Important concepts


Critical theory&#160;· Dialectic&#160;· Praxis
Psychoanalysis&#160;· Antipositivism
Popular culture&#160;· Culture industry
Advanced capitalism
Privatism&#160;· Non-identity
Communicative rationality
Legitimation crisis





v
t
e





In political philosophy, particularly Frankfurt School critical theory, advanced capitalism is the situation that pertains in a society in which the capitalist model has been integrated and developed deeply and extensively and for a prolonged period. The expression advanced capitalism distinguishes such societies from the historical previous forms of capitalism, mercantilism and industrial capitalism, and partially overlaps with the concepts of a developed country, of the post-industrial age, of finance capitalism, of post-Fordism, of the spectacular society, of media culture, and of "developed", "modern" and "complex" capitalism.
Various writers identify Antonio Gramsci as an influential early theorist of advanced capitalism, even if he did not use the term himself. In his writings Gramsci sought to explain how capitalism had adapted to avoid the revolutionary overthrow that had seemed inevitable in the 19th century. At the heart of his explanation was the decline of raw coercion as a tool of class power, replaced by use of civil society institutions to manipulate public ideology in the capitalists' favor.[1][2][3]
Jürgen Habermas has been a major contributor to the analysis of advanced-capitalistic societies. Habermas observed four general features that characterize advanced capitalism:

Concentration of industrial activity in a few large firms
Constant reliance on the state to stabilize the economic system
A formally democratic government that legitimizes the activities of the state and dissipates opposition to the system
The use of nominal wage increases to pacify the most restless segments of the work force[4]

Bibliography[edit]

Habermas, J. [1973] Legitimation Crisis (eng. translation by T. McCarthy). Boston: Beacon. from google books; excerpt
Sombart, Werner (1916) Der moderne Kapitalismus. Historisch-systematische Darstellung des gesamteuropäischen Wirtschaftslebens von seinen Anfängen bis zur Gegenwart. Final edn. 1916, repr. 1969, paperback edn. (3 vols. in 6): 1987 Munich: dtv. (Also in Spanish; no English translation yet.)
Ian Gough State Expenditure in Advanced Capitalism New Left Review
Fredric Jameson (1991) Postmodernism, or, the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism
Ernest Mandel Late Capitalism

See also[edit]

Capitalist mode of production
Late capitalism
Post-Fordism
State capitalism
State monopoly capitalism
White Collar: The American Middle Classes

References[edit]


^ Lears, T. J. Jackson (1985) "The Concept of Cultural Hegemony"
^ Holub, Renate (2005) Antonio Gramsci: Beyond Marxism and Postmodernism
^ Boggs, Carl (2012) Ecology and Revolution: Global Crisis and the Political Challenge
^ Habermas, 1988: 37, 75.










v
t
e


Media culture






Media



Mass media
Mainstream media
24-hour news cycle
Corporate media
News broadcasting
News media
Film
Internet
Radio
Television








Ideology



Mainstream
Advanced capitalism
American Dream
Bipartisanship
Consumerism
Pensée unique
Pop music








Deception





Forms




Advertising
Propaganda
Public relations
Spin
Tabloid journalism









Techniques




Cult of personality
Dumbing down
Framing
Media circus
Media event
Narcotizing dysfunction
Recuperation
Sensationalism









Others




Crowd manipulation
Managing the news
Media manipulation











Philosophers



Theodor W. Adorno
Edward Bernays
Noam Chomsky
Guy Debord
Walter Lippmann
Marshall McLuhan








Counterculture



Boycott
Civil disobedience
Culture jamming
Demonstration
Graffiti
Occupation
Political satire
Protest
Punk
Strike action








In academia



Media influence
Media studies
Semiotic democracy
The Lonely Crowd








Issues



Anonymity
Concentration of media ownership
Freedom of speech
Media bias
Privacy








Synonyms



Advanced capitalism
Culture industry
Mass society
Post-Fordism
Society of the Spectacle















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Advanced_capitalism&amp;oldid=657148858"					
				Categories: Capitalist systems				
							
		
		
			