


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Bibliothèque nationale de France
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				"BnF" and "Gallica" redirect here. For the compound abbreviated as "BnF", see Benzyl fluoride. For other uses, see Gallica (disambiguation).

Bibliothèque nationale de France
(National Library of France)




Established
1461; 554&#160;years ago&#160;(1461)[1]


Location
Paris, France


Collection


Items collected
books, journals, newspapers, magazines, sound and music recordings, patents, databases, maps, stamps, prints, drawings and manuscripts


Size
40M items
14M books and publications[2]


Access and use


Access requirements
Open to anyone with a need to use the collections and services


Other information


Budget
€254 million[2]


Director
Bruno Racine


Staff
2,700


Website
www.bnf.fr


The Bibliothèque nationale de France (BnF; French:&#160;[bi.bli.jɔ.tɛk na.sjɔ.nal də fʁɑ̃s]) is the National Library of France, located in Paris. It is intended to be the repository of all that is published in France. The current president of the library is Bruno Racine.



Contents


1 History
2 New buildings
3 Mission

3.1 Greek manuscripts
3.2 Gallica


4 See also
5 References
6 Further reading
7 External links



History[edit]
The National Library of France traces its origin to the royal library founded at the Louvre Palace by Charles V in 1368. Charles had received a collection of manuscripts from his predecessor, John II, and transferred them to the Louvre from the Palais de la Cité. The first librarian of record was Claude Mallet, the king's valet de chambre, who made a sort of catalogue, Inventoire des Livres du Roy nostre Seigneur estans au Chastel du Louvre. Jean Blanchet made another list in 1380 and Jean de Bégue one in 1411 and another in 1424. Charles V was a patron of learning and encouraged the making and collection of books. It is known that he employed Nicholas Oresme, Raoul de Presle and others to transcribe ancient texts. At the death of Charles VI, this first collection was unilaterally bought by the English regent of France, the Duke of Bedford, who transferred it to England in 1424. It was apparently dispersed at his death in 1435.[3][4]
Charles VII did little to repair the loss of these books, but the invention of printing resulted in the starting of another collection in the Louvre inherited by Louis XI in 1461. Charles VIII seized a part of the collection of the kings of Aragon.[5] Louis XII, who had inherited the library at Blois, incorporated the latter into the Bibliothèque du Roi and further enriched it with the Gruthuyse collection and with plunder from Milan. Francis I transferred the collection in 1534 to Fontainebleau and merged it with his private library. During his reign, fine bindings became the craze and many of the books added by him and Henry II are masterpieces of the binder's art.[4]
Under librarianship of Amyot, the collection was transferred to Paris during which process many treasures were lost. Henry IV again moved it to the Collège de Clermont and in 1604 it was housed in the Rue de la Harpe. The appointment of Jacques Auguste de Thou as librarian initiated a period of development that made it the largest and richest collection of books in the world. He was succeeded by his son who was replaced, when executed for treason, by Jérôme Bignon, the first of a line of librarians of the same name. Under de Thou, the library was enriched by the collections of Queen Catherine de Medici. The library grew rapidly during the reigns of Louis XIII and Louis XIV, due in great part to the interest of the Minister of Finance, Colbert, an indefatigable collectors of books.[4]
The quarters in the Rue de la Harpe becoming inadequate, the library was again moved, in 1666, to a more spacious house in Rue Vivienne. The minister Louvois took quite as much interest in the library as Colbert and during his administration a magnificent building to be erected in the Place Vendôme was planned. The death of Louvois, however, prevented the realization of this plan. Louvois employed Mabillon, Thévenot and others to procure books from every source. In 1688 a catalogue in eight volumes was compiled.[4]
The library opened to the public in 1692, under the administration of Abbé Louvois, Minister Louvois's son. Abbé Louvois was succeeded by the Abbé Bignon, or Bignon II as he was termed, who instituted a complete reform of the library's system. Catalogues were made which appeared from 1739–53 in 11 volumes. The collections increased steadily by purchase and gift to the outbreak of the French Revolution, at which time it was in grave danger of partial or total destruction, but owing to the activities of Antoine-Augustin Renouard and Joseph Van Praet it suffered no injury.[4]
The library's collections swelled to over 300,000 volumes during the radical phase of the French Revolution when the private libraries of aristocrats and clergy were seized. After the establishment of the French First Republic in September 1792, "the Assembly declared the Bibliotheque du Roi to be national property and the institution was renamed the Bibliothèque Nationale. After four centuries of control by the Crown, this great library now became the property of the French people."[3]




Reading Room, Richelieu site


An new administrative organization was established. Napoleon took great interest in the library and among other things issued an order that all books in provincial libraries not possessed by the Bibliothèque Nationale should be forwarded to it, subject to replacement by exchanges of equal value from the duplicate collections, making it possible, as Napoleon said, to find a copy of any book in France in the National Library. Napoleon furthermore increased the collections by spoil from his conquests. A considerable number of these books was restored after his downfall. During the period from 1800 to 1836, the library was virtually under the control of Joseph Van Praet. At his death it contained more than 650,000 printed books and some 80,000 manuscripts.[4]
Following a series of regime changes in France, it became the Imperial National Library and in 1868 was moved to newly constructed buildings on the Rue de Richelieu designed by Henri Labrouste. Upon Labrouste's death in 1875 the library was further expanded, including the grand staircase and the Oval Room, by academic architect Jean-Louis Pascal. In 1896, the library was still the largest repository of books in the world, although it has since been surpassed by other libraries for that title.[6] By 1920 the library's collection had grown to 4,050,000 volumes and 11,000 manuscripts.[4]

M. Henri Lemaître, a vice-president of the French Library Association and formerly librarian of the Bibliothèque Nationale&#160;... outlined the story of French libraries and librarians during the German occupation, a record of destruction and racial discrimination. During 1940–1945, more than two million books were lost through the ravages of war, many of them forming the irreplaceable local collections in which France abounded. Many thousands of books, including complete libraries, were seized by the Germans. Yet French librarians stood firm against all threats, and continued to serve their readers to the best of their abilities. In their private lives and in their professional occupations they were in the van of the struggle against the Nazis, and many suffered imprisonment and death for their devotion. Despite Nazi opposition they maintained a supply of books to French prisoners of war. They continued to supply books on various proscribed lists to trustworthy readers; and when liberation came, they were ready with their plans for rehabilitation with the creation of new book centres for the French people on lines of the English county library system.[7]

New buildings[edit]
On 14 July 1988, President François Mitterrand announced the construction and the expansion of one of the largest and most modern libraries in the world, intended to cover all fields of knowledge, and designed to be accessible to all, using the most modern data transfer technologies, which could be consulted from a distance, and which would collaborate with other European libraries. Surprisingly, the library does not maintain a wireless network. In July 1989, the services of the architectural firm of Dominique Perrault were retained. The design was recognized with the European Union Prize for Contemporary Architecture in 1996. The construction was carried out by Bouygues.[8] Construction of the library ran into huge cost overruns and technical difficulties related to its high-rise design, so much so that it was referred to as the "TGB" or "Très Grande Bibliothèque" (i.e. "Very Large Library," a sarcastic allusion to France's successful high-speed rail system, the TGV).[9] After the move of the major collections from the rue de Richelieu, the National Library of France was inaugurated on 15 December 1996.[10] It contains more than ten million volumes.[citation needed] The library retains the use of the rue de Richelieu complex for some of its collections.





Plan of the Bibliothèque François-Mitterrand







___



Located near the Métro station:&#160;Bibliothèque François Mitterrand.


Mission[edit]
The National Library of France is a public establishment under the supervision of the Ministry of Culture. Its mission is to constitute collections, especially the copies of works published in France that must, by law, be deposited there, conserve them, and make them available to the public. It produces a reference catalogue, cooperates with other national and international establishments, and participates in research programs.
Greek manuscripts[edit]
The library holds about 5,000 Greek manuscripts, which are divided into three fonds: Ancien fonds grec, fonds Coislin, and Fonds du Supplément grec.
Gallica[edit]
Gallica, the digital library for online users, was established in 1997. As of January 2012, Gallica had made available on the Web about:

1,600,000 documents
320,000 books
36,000 maps
19,462 manuscripts
410,000 images
830,000 newspapers and magazines
7,000 sheets of music

See also[edit]

Bibliothèque de l'Arsenal
Cabinet des Médailles
Dossiers Secrets d'Henri Lobineau
Pierre Marie François Ogé Bust Jomard

References[edit]


^ Jack A. Clarke. "French Libraries in Transition, 1789–95." The Library Quarterly, Vol. 37, No. 4 (Oct., 1967)
^ a b "La BnF en chiffres".&#160;
^ a b Priebe, Paul M. (1982). "From Bibliothèque du Roi to Bibliothèque Nationale: The Creation of a State Library, 1789–1793". The Journal of Library History (1974–1987) 17 (4): 389–408. JSTOR&#160;25541320.&#160;
^ a b c d e f g &#160;One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:&#160;Rines, George Edwin, ed. (1920). "National Library of France". Encyclopedia Americana.&#160;
^ Konstantinos Staikos (2012), History of the Library in Western Civilization: From Petrarch to Michelangelo, New Castle, DE: Oak Knoll Press, ISBN&#160;978-1-58456-182-8&#160;
^ Dunton, Larkin (1896). The World and Its People. Silver, Burdett. p.&#160;38.&#160;
^ "University and Research Libraries". Nature 156 (3962): 417. 6 October 1945. doi:10.1038/156417a0.&#160; |access-date= requires |url= (help)
^ Bouygues website: Bibliothèque nationale de France Archived November 27, 2006 at the Wayback Machine
^ Fitchett, Joseph (30 March 1995). "New Paris Library: Visionary or Outdated?". The New York Times. Retrieved 10 April 2013.&#160;
^ Ramsay, Raylene L. (2003). French women in politics: writing power, paternal legitimization, and maternal legacies. Berghahn Books. p.&#160;17. ISBN&#160;978-1-57181-082-3. Retrieved 21 May 2011.&#160;


Further reading[edit]

Bibliothèque nationale (France), Département de la Phonothèque nationale et de l'Audiovisuel. The National [Sound] Record[ings] and Audiovisual Department of the National Library [of France]. [Paris]: Bibliothèque nationale, [1986]. 9 p.
David H. Stam, ed. (2001). International Dictionary of Library Histories. Fitzroy Dearborn. ISBN&#160;1-57958-244-3.&#160;
Riding, Alan. "France Detects a Cultural Threat in Google," New York Times. April 11, 2005.

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Bibliothèque nationale de France.





Wikidata has a property, P268, for BnF identifier (see uses)



Official website
Official website (French)
Gallica, BnF's digital library
Gallica, BnF's digital library (French)

Coordinates: 48°50′01″N 2°22′33″E﻿ / ﻿48.83361°N 2.37583°E﻿ / 48.83361; 2.37583








v
t
e


National libraries of Europe






Sovereign states



Albania
Andorra
Armenia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland

Italy
Kazakhstan
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Malta
Moldova
Monaco
Montenegro
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
San Marino
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom
Vatican City








States with limited
recognition



Abkhazia
Kosovo
Nagorno-Karabakh
Northern Cyprus
South Ossetia
Transnistria








Dependencies and
other territories



Åland
Faroe Islands
Gibraltar
Guernsey
Jersey
Isle of Man
Svalbard








Other entities



European Union
















v
t
e


Établissement public à caractère administratif






Minister of Defence



Institut Supérieur de l'Aéronautique et de l'Espace
ENSTA ParisTech
École nationale supérieure de techniques avancées Bretagne
École Polytechnique
Naval Hydrographic and Oceanographic Service
Établissement de communication et de production audiovisuelle de la Défense
Établissement public d'insertion de la défense
Musée de l'Armée
Musée national de la Marine
Musée de l'Air
Académie de Marine
Etablissement public national des fonds de prévoyance militaire et de l'aéronautique








Minister of the Interior



Right of Asylum in France
Conseil national des activités privées de sécurité








Minister of Social Affairs



Agence Nationale pour l'Amélioration des Conditions de Travail
Agence nationale des services à la personne








Minister of the Economy,
Finances and Industry



Mines ParisTech
École Nationale Supérieure des Mines de Saint-Étienne
École des Mines de Douai
École des mines d'Alès
École des mines de Nantes
École des Mines d'Albi-Carmaux








Ministry of Higher Education
and Research



Groupe Concours Polytechniques
4 of the 5 Groupe des écoles nationales d’ingénieurs (Groupe ENI)

École nationale d'ingénieurs de Brest
École nationale d'ingénieurs de Metz
École nationale d'ingénieurs de Tarbes
École nationale d'ingénieurs du Val de Loire


7 of the 9 Institut d'études politiques
École Nationale Supérieure de l'Électronique et de ses Applications
École nationale supérieure d'informatique pour l'industrie et l'entreprise
Institut français de mécanique avancée
École nationale supérieure de la nature et du paysage
École nationale supérieure des arts et techniques du théâtre
Louis Lumière College
Côte d'Azur Observatory
Jean-François Champollion University Center for Teaching and Research
Institut national supérieur de formation et de recherche pour l'éducation des jeunes handicapés et les enseignements adaptés








Ministry of National Education



Centre international d'études pédagogiques
National Centre for Distance Education








Ministry of Agriculture



Établissement national des produits de l'agriculture et de la mer
Agence de services et de paiement
Institut français du cheval et de l'équitation
Inventaire Forestier National








Ministry of Ecology,
Sustainable Development
and Energy



Agence nationale de l'habitat
Agence de l'eau
École des Ponts ParisTech
École nationale de l'aviation civile
Institut Géographique National
Météo-France
Office national de la chasse et de la faune sauvage
Office national de l'eau et des milieux aquatiques
National parks of France
Agence des aires marines protégées et parcs naturels marins








Ministry of
Foreign and European Affairs



Agency for French Teaching Abroad








Minister of Culture



Bibliothèque nationale de France
Bibliothèque publique d'information
Centre des monuments nationaux
Centre Georges Pompidou
Centre national des arts plastiques
National Center of Cinematography and the moving image
Centre national du livre
Cité nationale de l'histoire de l'immigration
CNSAD
Conservatoire de Paris
Conservatoire national supérieur de musique et de danse de Lyon
École du Louvre
Écoles nationales supérieure d'architecture
École nationale supérieure d'arts de Cergy-Pontoise
École nationale supérieure de la photographie
École nationale supérieure des arts décoratifs
École nationale supérieure des Beaux-Arts
Opérateur du patrimoine et des projets immobiliers de la culture
Institut national du patrimoine
Institut national de recherches archéologiques préventives
Palace of Fontainebleau
Guimet Museum
Musée national Jean-Jacques Henner
Sèvres – Cité de la céramique
Musée du Louvre
Musée national Gustave Moreau
Musée d'Orsay
Musée Picasso
Musée Rodin
Établissement public du château, du musée et du domaine national de Versailles








Ministère chargé de la
Sécurité social



École nationale supérieure de sécurité sociale








Centre national de la
fonction publique territoriale



Institut national des études territoriales








Not classified



Sorbonne Graduate Business School
Institut des hautes études de défense nationale
French Academy of Technologies
Agence centrale des organismes de sécurité sociale
Agence nationale de sécurité sanitaire de l'alimentation, de l'environnement et du travail
Agence Nationale de la Recherche
AD Isère Drac Romanche
Centre d'études et de recherches sur les qualifications
National Computer Center for Higher Education
Institut national supérieur de formation et de recherche pour l'éducation des jeunes handicapés et les enseignements adaptés
Centre national des œuvres universitaires et scolaires
Centre régional des œuvres universitaires et scolaires
Caisse nationale de solidarité pour l'autonomie
Centre de ressources, d'expertise et de performance sportives
Chamber of commerce
Service départemental d'incendie et de secours
Syndicat des transports d'Île-de-France
Association syndicale allowed
















v
t
e


Grands Projets of François Mitterrand






Commissioned



Louvre Pyramid
Arab World Institute
Opéra Bastille
Ministère des Finances et de l'Économie
Bibliothèque nationale de France
Jean-Marie Tjibaou Cultural Centre
Centre International de Conferences











Influenced



Musée d'Orsay
Parc de la Villette
Grande Arche













Authority control



WorldCat
VIAF: 125984028
LCCN: no95028191
ISNI: 0000 0001 2353 1945
GND: 5156217-0
SELIBR: 211591
SUDOC: 03361122X
BNF: cb11862469g (data)
NLA: 35553176
NKC: ko2002102945
BNE: XX179415















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bibliothèque_nationale_de_France&amp;oldid=687432765"					
				Categories: University research collaboratives1368 establishments in France1792 establishments in FranceNational librariesLibraries in ParisModernist architecture in France13th arrondissement of Paris2nd arrondissement of ParisWorld Digital Library partnersBibliothèque nationale de France collectionsVisitor attractions in ParisDeposit librariesLibrary buildings completed in 1996Library cataloging and classificationGeographic region-oriented digital librariesHidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the Encyclopedia Americana with a Wikisource referenceWikipedia articles incorporating text from Encyclopedia AmericanaPages using citations with accessdate and no URLArticles containing French-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from October 2012Commons category with local link same as on WikidataOfficial website different in Wikidata and WikipediaArticles with French-language external linksCoordinates on WikidataWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiers				
							
		
		
			