


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Civil disobedience
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				"Disobedience" redirects here. For the 2003 film, see Disobedience (film). For the act of disobeying an authority figure, see insubordination.
For other uses, see Civil disobedience (disambiguation).




Mahatma Gandhi employed civil disobedience during the Indian independence movement.


Civil disobedience is the active, professed refusal to obey certain laws, demands, and commands of a government, or of an occupying international power. Civil disobedience is a symbolic or ritualistic violation of the law, rather than a rejection of the system as a whole. Civil disobedience is sometimes, though not always,[1][2] defined as being nonviolent resistance.



Contents


1 Overview
2 Etymology
3 Theories

3.1 Violent vs. nonviolent
3.2 Revolutionary vs. non-revolutionary
3.3 Collective vs. solitary


4 Techniques

4.1 Choice of specific act
4.2 Cooperation with authorities
4.3 Choice of plea
4.4 Choice of allocution


5 Legal implications of civil disobedience
6 See also
7 References
8 Further reading
9 External links



Overview[edit]
One of its earliest massive implementations was brought about by Egyptians against the British occupation in the 1919 Revolution.[3] Civil disobedience is one of the many ways people have rebelled against what they deem to be unfair laws. It has been used in many nonviolent resistance movements in India (Gandhi's campaigns for independence from the British Empire), in Czechoslovakia's Velvet Revolution and in East Germany to oust their communist governments,[4] In South Africa in the fight against apartheid, in the American Civil Rights Movement, in the Singing Revolution to bring independence to the Baltic countries from the Soviet Union, recently with the 2003 Rose Revolution in Georgia and the 2004 Orange Revolution[5] in Ukraine, among other various movements worldwide.
One of the oldest depictions of civil disobedience is in Sophocles' play Antigone, in which Antigone, one of the daughters of former King of Thebes, Oedipus, defies Creon, the current King of Thebes, who is trying to stop her from giving her brother Polynices a proper burial. She gives a stirring speech in which she tells him that she must obey her conscience rather than human law. She is not at all afraid of the death he threatens her with (and eventually carries out), but she is afraid of how her conscience will smite her if she does not do this.[6]
Following the Peterloo massacre of 1819, poet Percy Shelley wrote the political poem The Mask of Anarchy later that year, that begins with the images of what he thought to be the unjust forms of authority of his time—and then imagines the stirrings of a new form of social action. It is perhaps the first modern[vague] statement of the principle of nonviolent protest.[7] A version was taken up by the author Henry David Thoreau in his essay Civil Disobedience, and later by Gandhi in his doctrine of Satyagraha.[7] Gandhi's Satyagraha was partially influenced and inspired by Shelley's nonviolence in protest and political action.[8] In particular, it is known that Gandhi would often quote Shelley's Masque of Anarchy to vast audiences during the campaign for a free India.[7][9]
Thoreau's 1848 essay Civil Disobedience, originally titled "Resistance to Civil Government", has had a wide influence on many later practitioners of civil disobedience. The driving idea behind the essay is that citizens are morally responsible for their support of aggressors, even when such support is required by law. In the essay, Thoreau explained his reasons for having refused to pay taxes as an act of protest against slavery and against the Mexican-American War. He writes,

If I devote myself to other pursuits and contemplations, I must first see, at least, that I do not pursue them sitting upon another man's shoulders. I must get off him first, that he may pursue his contemplations too. See what gross inconsistency is tolerated. I have heard some of my townsmen say, "I should like to have them order me out to help put down an insurrection of the slaves, or to march to Mexico; — see if I would go;" and yet these very men have each, directly by their allegiance, and so indirectly, at least, by their money, furnished a substitute.

By the 1850s, a range of minority groups in the United States—blacks, Jews, Seventh Day Baptists, Catholics, anti-prohibitionists, racial egalitarians, and others—employed civil disobedience to combat a range of legal measures and public practices that to them promoted ethnic, religious, and racial discrimination. Public and typically peaceful resistance to public power would remain an integral tactic in modern American minority-rights politics.[10]
Etymology[edit]




Henry David Thoreau's classic essay Civil Disobedience inspired Martin Luther King and many other activists.


Thoreau's 1849 essay "Resistance to Civil Government" was eventually renamed "Essay on Civil Disobedience." After his landmark lectures were published in 1866, the term began to appear in numerous sermons and lectures relating to slavery and the war in Mexico.[11][12][13][14] Thus, by the time Thoreau's lectures were first published under the title "Civil Disobedience," in 1866, four years after his death, the term had achieved fairly widespread usage.
It has been argued that the term "civil disobedience" has always suffered from ambiguity and in modern times, become utterly debased. Marshall Cohen notes, "It has been used to describe everything from bringing a test-case in the federal courts to taking aim at a federal official. Indeed, for Vice President Agnew it has become a code-word describing the activities of muggers, arsonists, draft evaders, campaign hecklers, campus militants, anti-war demonstrators, juvenile delinquents and political assassins."[15]
LeGrande writes that "the formulation of a single all-encompassing definition of the term is extremely difficult, if not impossible. In reviewing the voluminous literature on the subject, the student of civil disobedience rapidly finds himself surrounded by a maze of semantical problems and grammatical niceties. Like Alice in Wonderland, he often finds that specific terminology has no more (or no less) meaning than the individual orator intends it to have." He encourages a distinction between lawful protest demonstration, nonviolent civil disobedience, and violent civil disobedience.[16]
In a letter to P.K.Rao, dated September 10, 1935, Gandhi disputes that his idea of civil disobedience was derived from the writings of Thoreau:[17]

The statement that I had derived my idea of Civil Disobedience from the writings of Thoreau is wrong. The resistance to authority in South Africa was well advanced before I got the essay ... When I saw the title of Thoreau's great essay, I began to use his phrase to explain our struggle to the English readers. But I found that even "Civil Disobedience" failed to convey the full meaning of the struggle. I therefore adopted the phrase "Civil Resistance."

Theories[edit]
In seeking an active form of civil disobedience, one may choose to deliberately break certain laws, such as by forming a peaceful blockade or occupying a facility illegally,[citation needed] though sometimes violence has been known to occur. Often there is an expectation to be attacked or even beaten by the authorities. Protesters often undergo training in advance on how to react to arrest or to attack.
Civil disobedience is usually defined as pertaining to a citizen's relation to the state and its laws, as distinguished from a constitutional impasse in which two public agencies, especially two equally sovereign branches of government, conflict. For instance, if the head of government of a country were to refuse to enforce a decision of that country's highest court, it would not be civil disobedience, since the head of government would be acting in her or his capacity as public official rather than private citizen.[18]
However, this definition is disupted by Thoreau's political philosophy pitching the conscience vs. the collective. The individual is the final judge of right and wrong. More than this, since only individuals act, only individuals can act unjustly. When the government knocks on the door, it is an individual in the form of a postman or tax collector whose hand hits the wood. Before Thoreau’s imprisonment, when a confused taxman had wondered aloud about how to handle his refusal to pay, Thoreau had advised, “Resign.” If a man chose to be an agent of injustice, then Thoreau insisted on confronting him with the fact that he was making a choice. But if government is “the voice of the people,” as it is often called, shouldn’t that voice be heeded? Thoreau admits that government may express the will of the majority but it may also express nothing more than the will of elite politicians. Even a good form of government is “liable to be abused and perverted before the people can act through it.” Moreover, even if a government did express the voice of the people, this fact would not compel the obedience of individuals who disagree with what is being said. The majority may be powerful but it is not necessarily right. What, then, is the proper relationship between the individual and the government?[19]
Ronald Dworkin held that there are three types of civil disobedience:

"Integrity-based" civil disobedience occurs when a citizen disobeys a law she or he feels is immoral, as in the case of northerners disobeying the fugitive slave laws by refusing to turn over escaped slaves to authorities.
"Justice-based" civil disobedience occurs when a citizen disobeys laws in order to lay claim to some right denied to her or him, as when blacks illegally protested during the Civil Rights Movement.
"Policy-based" civil disobedience occurs when a person breaks the law in order to change a policy (s)he believes is dangerously wrong.[20]

Some theories of civil disobedience hold that civil disobedience is only justified against governmental entities. Brownlee argues that disobedience in opposition to the decisions of non-governmental agencies such as trade unions, banks, and private universities can be justified if it reflects "a larger challenge to the legal system that permits those decisions to be taken". The same principle, she argues, applies to breaches of law in protest against international organizations and foreign governments.[21]
It is usually recognized that lawbreaking, if it is not done publicly, at least must be publicly announced in order to constitute civil disobedience. But Stephen Eilmann argues that if it is necessary to disobey rules that conflict with morality, we might ask why disobedience should take the form of public civil disobedience rather than simply covert lawbreaking. If a lawyer wishes to help a client overcome legal obstacles to securing her or his natural rights, he might, for instance, find that assisting in fabricating evidence or committing perjury is more effective than open disobedience. This assumes that common morality does not have a prohibition on deceit in such situations.[22] The Fully Informed Jury Association's publication "A Primer for Prospective Jurors" notes, "Think of the dilemma faced by German citizens when Hitler's secret police demanded to know if they were hiding a Jew in their house."[23] By this definition, civil disobedience could be traced back to the Book of Exodus, where Shiphrah and Puah refused a direct order of Pharaoh but misrepresented how they did it. (Exodus 1: 15-19)[24]
Violent vs. nonviolent[edit]
There have been debates as to whether civil disobedience must necessarily be non-violent. Black's Law Dictionary includes nonviolence in its definition of civil disobedience. Christian Bay's encyclopedia article states that civil disobedience requires "carefully chosen and legitimate means," but holds that they do not have to be nonviolent.[25] It has been argued that, while both civil disobedience and civil rebellion are justified by appeal to constitutional defects, rebellion is much more destructive; therefore, the defects justifying rebellion must be much more serious than those justifying disobedience, and if one cannot justify civil rebellion, then one cannot justify a civil disobedients' use of force and violence and refusal to submit to arrest. Civil disobedients' refraining from violence is also said to help preserve society's tolerance of civil disobedience.[26]
Philosopher H.J. McCloskey argues that "if violent, intimidatory, coercive disobedience is more effective, it is, other things being equal, more justified than less effective, nonviolent disobedience."[27] In his best-selling Disobedience and Democracy: Nine Fallacies on Law and Order,[28] Howard Zinn takes a similar position; Zinn states that while the goals of civil disobedience are generally nonviolent,



in the inevitable tension accompanying the transition from a violent world to a nonviolent one, the choice of means will almost never be pure, and will involve such complexities that the simple distinction between violence and nonviolence does not suffice as a guide...the very acts with which we seek to do good cannot escape the imperfections of the world we are trying to change.[29]



Zinn rejects any “easy and righteous dismissal of violence,” noting that Henry Thoreau, the popularizer of the term civil disobedience, approved of the armed insurrection of John Brown. He also notes that some major civil disobedience campaigns which have been classified as nonviolent, such as the Birmingham campaign, have actually included elements of violence.[30] [31]
Revolutionary vs. non-revolutionary[edit]
Non-revolutionary civil disobedience is a simple disobedience of laws on the grounds that they are judged "wrong" by an individual conscience, or as part of an effort to render certain laws ineffective, to cause their repeal, or to exert pressure to get one's political wishes on some other issue. Revolutionary civil disobedience is more of an active attempt to overthrow a government (or to change cultural traditions, social customs, religious beliefs, etc...revolution doesn't have to be political, i.e. "cultural revolution", it simply implies sweeping and widespread change to a section of the social fabric).[32] Gandhi's acts have been described as revolutionary civil disobedience.[18] It has been claimed that the Hungarians under Ferenc Deák directed revolutionary civil disobedience against the Austrian government.[33] Thoreau also wrote of civil disobedience accomplishing "peaceable revolution."[34] Howard Zinn, Harvey Wheeler, and others have identified the right espoused in The Declaration of Independence to "alter or abolish" an unjust government to be a principle of civil disobedience. [35][36]
Collective vs. solitary[edit]
The earliest recorded incidents of collective civil disobedience took place during the Roman Empire[citation needed]. Unarmed Jews gathered in the streets to prevent the installation of pagan images in the Temple in Jerusalem.[citation needed][original research?] In modern times, some activists who commit civil disobedience as a group collectively refuse to sign bail until certain demands are met, such as favorable bail conditions, or the release of all the activists. This is a form of jail solidarity.[37][page&#160;needed] There have also been many instances of solitary civil disobedience, such as that committed by Thoreau, but these sometimes go unnoticed. Thoreau, at the time of his arrest, was not yet a well-known author, and his arrest was not covered in any newspapers in the days, weeks and months after it happened. The tax collector who arrested him rose to higher political office, and Thoreau's essay was not published until after the end of the Mexican War.[38]
Techniques[edit]
Main article: Examples of civil disobedience
Choice of specific act[edit]
Civil disobedients have chosen a variety of different illegal acts. Bedau writes, "There is a whole class of acts, undertaken in the name of civil disobedience, which, even if they were widely practiced, would in themselves constitute hardly more than a nuisance (e.g. trespassing at a nuclear-missile installation)...Such acts are often just a harassment and, at least to the bystander, somewhat inane...The remoteness of the connection between the disobedient act and the objectionable law lays such acts open to the charge of ineffectiveness and absurdity." Bedau also notes, though, that the very harmlessness of such entirely symbolic illegal protests toward public policy goals may serve a propaganda purpose.[33] Some civil disobedients, such as the proprietors of illegal medical cannabis dispensaries and Voice in the Wilderness, which brought medicine to Iraq without the permission of the U.S. Government, directly achieve a desired social goal (such as the provision of medication to the sick) while openly breaking the law. Julia Butterfly Hill lived in Luna, a 180-foot (55&#160;m)-tall, 600-year-old California Redwood tree for 738 days, successfully preventing it from being cut down.
In cases where the criminalized behavior is pure speech, civil disobedience can consist simply of engaging in the forbidden speech. An example would be WBAI's broadcasting the track "Filthy Words" from a George Carlin comedy album, which eventually led to the 1978 Supreme Court case of FCC v. Pacifica Foundation. Threatening government officials is another classic way of expressing defiance toward the government and unwillingness to stand for its policies. For example, Joseph Haas was arrested for allegedly sending an email to the Lebanon, New Hampshire city councilors stating, "Wise up or die."[39]
More generally, protesters of particular victimless crimes often see fit to openly commit that crime. Laws against public nudity, for instance, have been protested by going naked in public, and laws against cannabis consumption have been protested by openly possessing it and using it at cannabis rallies.[40]
Some forms of civil disobedience, such as illegal boycotts, refusals to pay taxes, draft dodging, distributed denial-of-service attacks, and sit-ins, make it more difficult for a system to function. In this way, they might be considered coercive. Brownlee notes that "although civil disobedients are constrained in their use of coercion by their conscientious aim to engage in moral dialogue, nevertheless they may find it necessary to employ limited coercion in order to get their issue onto the table."[21] The Plowshares organization temporarily closed GCSB Waihopai by padlocking the gates and using sickles to deflate one of the large domes covering two satellite dishes.
Electronic civil disobedience can include web site defacements, redirects, denial-of-service attacks, information theft and data leaks, illegal web site parodies, virtual sit-ins, and virtual sabotage. It is distinct from other kinds of hacktivism in that the perpetrator openly reveals his identity. Virtual actions rarely succeed in completely shutting down their targets, but they often generate significant media attention.[41]
Dilemma actions are designed to create a "response dilemma" for public authorities "by forcing them to either concede some public space to protesters or make themselves look absurd or heavy-handed by acting against the protest."[42]
Cooperation with authorities[edit]




A police officer speaks with a demonstrator at a union picket, explaining that she will be arrested if she does not leave the street. The demonstrator was arrested moments later.


Some disciplines of civil disobedience hold that the protestor must submit to arrest and cooperate with the authorities. Others advocate falling limp or resisting arrest, especially when it will hinder the police from effectively responding to a mass protest.
Many of the same decisions and principles that apply in other criminal investigations and arrests arise also in civil disobedience cases. For example, the suspect may need to decide whether or not to grant a consent search of his property, and whether or not to talk to police officers. It is generally agreed within the legal community,[43] and is often believed within the activist community, that a suspect's talking to criminal investigators can serve no useful purpose, and may be harmful. However, some civil disobedients have nonetheless found it hard to resist responding to investigators' questions, sometimes due to a lack of understanding of the legal ramifications, or due to a fear of seeming rude.[44] Also, some civil disobedients seek to use the arrest as an opportunity to make an impression on the officers. Thoreau wrote, "My civil neighbor, the tax-gatherer, is the very man I have to deal with--for it is, after all, with men and not with parchment that I quarrel--and he has voluntarily chosen to be an agent of the government. How shall he ever know well that he is and does as an officer of the government, or as a man, until he is obliged to consider whether he will treat me, his neighbor, for whom he has respect, as a neighbor and well-disposed man, or as a maniac and disturber of the peace, and see if he can get over this obstruction to his neighborliness without a ruder and more impetuous thought or speech corresponding with his action."[34]
Some civil disobedients feel it is incumbent upon them to accept punishment because of their belief in the validity of the social contract, which is held to bind all to obey the laws that a government meeting certain standards of legitimacy has established, or else suffer the penalties set out in the law. Other civil disobedients who favor the existence of government still don't believe in the legitimacy of their particular government, or don't believe in the legitimacy of a particular law it has enacted. And still other civil disobedients, being anarchists, don't believe in the legitimacy of any government, and therefore see no need to accept punishment for a violation of criminal law that does not infringe the rights of others.
Choice of plea[edit]
An important decision for civil disobedients is whether or not to plead guilty. There is much debate on this point, as some believe that it is a civil disobedient's duty to submit to the punishment prescribed by law, while others believe that defending oneself in court will increase the possibility of changing the unjust law.[45] It has also been argued that either choice is compatible with the spirit of civil disobedience. ACT-UP's Civil Disobedience Training handbook states that a civil disobedient who pleads guilty is essentially stating, "Yes, I committed the act of which you accuse me. I don't deny it; in fact, I am proud of it. I feel I did the right thing by violating this particular law; I am guilty as charged," but that pleading not guilty sends a message of, "Guilt implies wrong-doing. I feel I have done no wrong. I may have violated some specific laws, but I am guilty of doing no wrong. I therefore plead not guilty." A plea of no contest is sometimes regarded as a compromise between the two.[46] One defendant accused of illegally protesting nuclear power, when asked to enter his plea, stated, "I plead for the beauty that surrounds us";[47] this is known as a "creative plea," and will usually be interpreted as a plea of not guilty.[48]
When the Committee for Non-Violent Action sponsored a protest in August 1957, at the Camp Mercury nuclear test site near Las Vegas, Nevada, 13 of the protesters attempted to enter the test site knowing that they faced arrest. At a pre-arranged announced time, one at a time they stepped across the "line" and were immediately arrested. They were put on a bus and taken to the Nye County seat of Tonopah, Nevada, and arraigned for trial before the local Justice of the Peace, that afternoon. A well known civil rights attorney, Francis Heisler, had volunteered to defend the arrested persons, advising them to plead "nolo contendere", as an alternative to pleading either guilty or not-guilty. The arrested persons were found "guilty," nevertheless, and given suspended sentences, conditional on their not reentering the test site grounds.[citation needed]
Howard Zinn writes, "There may be many times when protesters choose to go to jail, as a way of continuing their protest, as a way of reminding their countrymen of injustice. But that is different than the notion that they must go to jail as part of a rule connected with civil disobedience. The key point is that the spirit of protest should be maintained all the way, whether it is done by remaining in jail, or by evading it. To accept jail penitently as an accession to 'the rules' is to switch suddenly to a spirit of subservience, to demean the seriousness of the protest...In particular, the neo-conservative insistence on a guilty plea should be eliminated."[49]
Sometimes the prosecution proposes a plea bargain to civil disobedients, as in the case of the Camden 28, in which the defendants were offered an opportunity to plead guilty to one misdemeanor count and receive no jail time.[50] In some mass arrest situations, the activists decide to use solidarity tactics to secure the same plea bargain for everyone.[48] But some activists have opted to enter a blind plea, pleading guilty without any plea agreement in place. Mohandas Gandhi pleaded guilty and told the court, "I am here to . . . submit cheerfully to the highest penalty that can be inflicted upon me for what in law is a deliberate crime and what appears to me to be the highest duty of a citizen."[51]
Choice of allocution[edit]
Some civil disobedience defendants choose to make a defiant speech, or a speech explaining their actions, in allocution. In U.S. v. Burgos-Andujar, a defendant who was involved in a movement to stop military exercises by trespassing on U.S. Navy property argued to the court in allocution that "the ones who are violating the greater law are the members of the Navy". As a result, the judge increased her sentence from 40 to 60 days. This action was upheld because, according to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the First Circuit, her statement suggested a lack of remorse, an attempt to avoid responsibility for her actions, and even a likelihood of repeating her illegal actions.[52] Some of the other allocution speeches given by the protesters complained about mistreatment from government officials.[53]
Tim DeChristopher gave an allocution statement to the court describing the U.S. as "a place where the rule of law was created through acts of civil disobedience" and arguing, "Since those bedrock acts of civil disobedience by our founding fathers, the rule of law in this country has continued to grow closer to our shared higher moral code through the civil disobedience that drew attention to legalized injustice."[54]
Legal implications of civil disobedience[edit]
Steven Barkan writes that if defendants plead not guilty, "they must decide whether their primary goal will be to win an acquittal and avoid imprisonment or a fine, or to use the proceedings as a forum to inform the jury and the public of the political circumstances surrounding the case and their reasons for breaking the law via civil disobedience." A technical defense may enhance the chances for acquittal but make for more boring proceedings and reduced press coverage. During the Vietnam War era, the Chicago Eight used a political defense, while Benjamin Spock used a technical defense.[55] In countries such as the United States whose laws guarantee the right to a jury trial but do not excuse lawbreaking for political purposes, some civil disobedients seek jury nullification. Over the years, this has been made more difficult by court decisions such as Sparf v. United States, which held that the judge need not inform jurors of their nullification prerogative, and United States v. Dougherty, which held that the judge need not allow defendants to openly seek jury nullification.
Governments have generally not recognized the legitimacy of civil disobedience or viewed political objectives as an excuse for breaking the law. Specifically, the law usually distinguishes between criminal motive and criminal intent; the offender's motives or purposes may be admirable and praiseworthy, but his intent may still be criminal.[56] Hence the saying that "if there is any possible justification of civil disobedience it must come from outside the legal system."[57]
One theory is that, while disobedience may be helpful, any great amount of it would undermine the law by encouraging general disobedience which is neither conscientious nor of social benefit. Therefore, conscientious lawbreakers must be punished.[58] Michael Bayles argues that if a person violates a law in order to create a test case as to the constitutionality of a law, and then wins his case, then that act did not constitute civil disobedience.[59] It has also been argued that breaking the law for self-gratification, as in the case of a homosexual or cannabis user who does not direct his act at securing the repeal of amendment of the law, is not civil disobedience.[60] Likewise, a protestor who attempts to escape punishment by committing the crime covertly and avoiding attribution, or by denying having committed the crime, or by fleeing the jurisdiction, is generally viewed as not being a civil disobedient.
Courts have distinguished between two types of civil disobedience: "Indirect civil disobedience involves violating a law which is not, itself, the object of protest, whereas direct civil disobedience involves protesting the existence of a particular law by breaking that law."[61] During the Vietnam War, courts typically refused to excuse the perpetrators of illegal protests from punishment on the basis of their challenging the legality of the Vietnam War; the courts ruled it was a political question.[62] The necessity defense has sometimes been used as a shadow defense by civil disobedients to deny guilt without denouncing their politically motivated acts, and to present their political beliefs in the courtroom.[63] However, court cases such as U.S. v. Schoon have greatly curtailed the availability of the political necessity defense.[64] Likewise, when Carter Wentworth was charged for his role in the Clamshell Alliance's 1977 illegal occupation of the Seabrook Station Nuclear Power Plant, the judge instructed the jury to disregard his competing harms defense, and he was found guilty.[65] Fully Informed Jury Association activists have sometimes handed out educational leaflets inside courthouses despite admonitions not to; according to FIJA, many of them have escaped prosecution because "prosecutors have reasoned (correctly) that if they arrest fully informed jury leafleters, the leaflets will have to be given to the leafleter's own jury as evidence."[66]
Along with giving the offender his "just deserts", achieving crime control via incapacitation and deterrence is a major goal of criminal punishment.[67][68] Brownlee argues, "Bringing in deterrence at the level of justification detracts from the law’s engagement in a moral dialogue with the offender as a rational person because it focuses attention on the threat of punishment and not the moral reasons to follow this law."[21] Leonard Hubert Hoffmann writes, "In deciding whether or not to impose punishment, the most important consideration would be whether it would do more harm than good. This means that the objector has no right not to be punished. It is a matter for the state (including the judges) to decide on utilitarian grounds whether to do so or not."[69]
See also[edit]



Wikiquote has quotations related to: Civil disobedience





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Civil disobedience.



Ideas

Civil resistance
Satyagraha
Conscientious objection
Direct action
Diversity of tactics
Draft resistance
Examples of civil disobedience
Hunt sabotage
Insubordination
Nonconformism
Nonviolence
Nonviolent resistance
Sousveillance, passive campaign against surveillance
Tax resistance
Tree sitting

Groups

Abalone Alliance and Clamshell Alliance, anti-nuclear power groups
Committee of 100 (United Kingdom)
Defiance Campaign, anti-apartheid campaign in South Africa.
Gay Liberation Front
Gay Activists' Alliance
Greenpeace
Righteous Among the Nations

Le Chambon-sur-Lignon, French bread town


Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee, 1960s civil rights organization
Students for a Democratic Society (20th century)
Students for a Democratic Society (21st century)
Women's Social and Political Union, suffragette organization
The White Rose
Trident Ploughshares, anti-nuclear weapons group

People

Mohandas Gandhi

Satyagraha


Daniel Berrigan Jesuit priest and nonviolent activist
Étienne de La Boétie French writer and philosopher
Shiphrah and Puah, a pair of women from the Bible
Philip Berrigan former Josephite priest and nonviolent activist
James Bevel, strategist of the Birmingham campaign and other projects of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC)
Dorothy Day co-founder of Catholic Worker Movement
Stokely Carmichael, field organizer (1961-1968) and Chair (1966-1967) for the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC)
James Forman, Executive secretary (1961-1967) of SNCC
Václav Havel
Anna Hazare, 2011 Civil Disobedience in India for Jan Lokpal Bill (Citizen's ombudsman Bill)
Dr Martin Luther King, Jr

Letter from Birmingham Jail


Dalai Lama
Emmeline Pankhurst, women's suffrage leader
Rosa Parks, "mother of the civil rights movement"
Gloria Richardson, SNCC leader
Henry David Thoreau
Lech Wałęsa

By country

Mass incidents in China
Indian independence movement

Documents

Civil Disobedience, an essay written by Henry David Thoreau
May 68, Philosophy is in the Street!, a book written by Vincent Cespedes


References[edit]


^ Violent Civil Disobedience and Willingness to Accept Punishment 8 (2), Essays in Philosophy, June 2007&#160;
^ J Morreall (1976), "The justifiability of violent civil disobedience", Canadian Journal of Philosophy (Canadian Journal of Philosophy) 6 (1): 35–47, JSTOR&#160;40230600&#160;
^ Zunes, Stephen (1999:42), Nonviolent Social Movements: A Geographical Perspective, Blackwell Publishing&#160;
^ Michael Lerner, Tikkun reader&#160;
^ "The Orange Revolution". Time Magazine. 12 December 2004. Archived from the original on April 10, 2010. Retrieved 30 April 2010.&#160;
^ Sophocle's Antigone, Project Gutenberg, F. Storr translation, 1912, Harvard University Press
^ a b c [1] Archived January 5, 2011 at the Wayback Machine
^ Thomas Weber, "Gandhi as Disciple and Mentor," Cambridge University Press, 2004, pp. 28–29.
^ Thomas Weber, "Gandhi as Disciple and Mentor," Cambridge University Press, 2004, pp. 28.
^ Volk, Kyle G. (2014). Moral Minorities and the Making of American Democracy. New York: Oxford University Press.
^ The Gospel Applied to the Fugitive Slave Law [1850]: A Sermon, by mayur (1851)
^ "The Higher Law," in Its Application to the Fugitive Slave Bill:... by John Newell and John Chase Lord (1851)
^ The Limits of Civil Disobedience: A Sermon..., by Nathaniel Hall (1851)
^ The Duty and Limitations of Civil Disobedience: A Discourse, by Samuel Colcord Bartlett (1853)
^ Marshall Cohen (Spring 1969), Civil Disobedience in a Constitutional Democracy 10 (2), The Massachusetts Review, pp.&#160;211–226&#160;
^ J. L. LeGrande (Sep 1967), "Nonviolent Civil Disobedience and Police Enforcement Policy", The Journal of Criminal Law, Criminology, and Police Science (Northwestern University) 58 (3): 393–404, doi:10.2307/1141639, JSTOR&#160;1141639&#160;
^ Letter to P.K. Rao, Servants of India Society, September 10, 1935, Letter quoted in Louis Fischer's, The Life of Mahatma Gandhi, Part I, Chapter 11, pp. 87-88.
^ a b Rex Martin (Jan 1970), Civil Disobedience 80 (2), Ethics, pp.&#160;123–139&#160;
^ McElroy, Wendy. "Henry Thoreau and 'Civil Disobedience'". thoreau.eserver.org. Future of Freedom Foundation. Retrieved 5 September 2015.&#160;
^ Ken Kress and Scott W. Anderson (Spring 1989), Dworkin in Transition 37 (2), The American Journal of Comparative Law, pp.&#160;337–351&#160;
^ a b c Kimberley Brownlee (9 November 2006), "The communicative aspects of civil disobedience and lawful punishment", Criminal Law and Philosophy (Criminal Law and Philosophy) 1 (2): 179, doi:10.1007/s11572-006-9015-9&#160;
^ Stephen Ellmann; Luban, David (Jan 1990), "Lawyering for Justice in a Flawed Democracy", Columbia Law Review (Columbia Law Review) 90 (1): 116–190, doi:10.2307/1122838, JSTOR&#160;1122838&#160;
^ A Primer for Prospective Jurors (PDF), Fully Informed Jury Association&#160;
^ Magonet, Jonathan (1992) Bible Lives (London: SCM), 8
^ Bay, Christian, Civil Disobedience II, International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences, pp.&#160;473–486&#160;
^ Stuart M. Brown, Jr., Civil Disobedience 58 (22), The Journal of Philosophy&#160;
^ H. J. McCloskey (Jun 1980), "Conscientious Disobedience of the Law: Its Necessity, Justification, and Problems to Which it Gives Rise", Philosophy and Phenomenological Research (Philosophy and Phenomenological Research) 40 (4): 536–557, doi:10.2307/2106847, JSTOR&#160;2106847&#160;
^ Davis D. Joyce, Howard Zinn: A Radical American Vision (Prometheus, 2003), 102-103. Joyce notes that Disobedience and Democracy sold 75,000 copies in the late 1960s and was Zinn's best-selling book prior to A People's History of the United States
^ Howard Zinn, Disobedience and Democracy: Nine Fallacies on Law and Order (South End Press edition, 2002), 39-41
^ Zinn, Disobedience, 47
^ Howard Zinn, "Introduction" for The Higher Law: Thoreau on Civil Disobedience and Reform, Wendell Glick, ed., (Princeton University Press, 2004)
^ Harry Prosch (Apr 1967), Toward an Ethics of Civil Disobedience 77 (3), Ethics, pp.&#160;176–192&#160;
^ a b Hugo A. Bedau (October 12, 1961), "On Civil Disobedience", The Journal of Philosophy (The Journal of Philosophy) 58 (21): 653–665, doi:10.2307/2023542, JSTOR&#160;2023542&#160;
^ a b Thoreau, Henry David. Civil Disobedience.
^ Howard Zinn, "Introduction" for The Higher Law: Thoreau on Civil Disobedience and Reform, Wendell Glick, ed., (Princeton University Press, 2004)
^ Harvey Wheeler, "The Constitutionality of Civil Disobedience"
^ P Herngren (1993), Path of Resistance (PDF), The Practice of Civil Disobedience&#160;
^ Gross, Robert A. (October 2005), Quiet War With The State; Henry David Thoreau and Civil Disobedience., The Yale Review, pp.&#160;1–17&#160;
^ Brown case e-mails investigated, Union-Leader, June 21, 2007&#160;
^ Clark, Dick (April 22, 2008), Civil Disobedience and the Libertarian Division of Labor, LewRockwell.com&#160;
^ Jeffrey S. Juris (2005), "The New Digital Media and Activist Networking within Anti-Corporate Globalization Movements", Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science (Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science) 597 (Cultural Production in a Digital Age): 189–208, doi:10.1177/0002716204270338, JSTOR&#160;25046069&#160;
^ Laura Moth, Today's Zaman, 19 June 2013, A standing dilemma in Taksim
^ Watts v. Indiana, 338 U.S. 49 (1949)
^ John Griffiths and Richard E. Ayres (Dec 1967), "A Postscript to the Miranda Project: Interrogation of Draft Protestors", The Yale Law Journal 77 (2): 300–319, doi:10.2307/795080&#160;
^ Rules for Engaging in Civil Disobedience, Free State Project&#160;
^ Civil Disobedience Training (PDF), ACT-UP, 2003&#160;
^ Hurst, John (1978), A-plant protesters being freed, Los Angeles Times&#160;
^ a b National Lawyers Guild, LA Chapter, Questions and Answers about Civil Disobedience and the Legal Process (PDF)&#160;
^ Howard Zinn, Disobedience and Disorder: Nine Fallacies on Law and Order, cited in Paul F. Power (Mar 1970), On Civil Disobedience in Recent American Democratic Thought 64 (1), The American Political Science Review, p.&#160;40&#160;
^ Mirelle Cohen (Oct 2007), "The Camden 28 (review)", Teaching Sociology 35 (4): 391–392, doi:10.1177/0092055x0703500423&#160;
^ Nick Gier (January 15, 2006), Three Principles of Civil Disobedience: Thoreau, Gandhi, and King, Lewiston Morning Tribune&#160;
^ United States of America v. Norma Burgos-Andjar, 275 F.3d 23.
^ http://prosario-2000.0catch.com/Politics/allocution.htm
^ http://grist.org/climate-energy/2011-07-27-tim-dechristophers-statement-to-the-court/
^ Steven E. Barkan (Oct 1979), Strategic, Tactical and Organizational Dilemmas of the Protest Movement against Nuclear Power 27 (1), Social Problems, pp.&#160;19–37&#160;
^ Thomas Morawetz (Summer 1986), Reconstructing the Criminal Defenses: The Significance of Justification 77 (2), The Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology (1973-), pp.&#160;277–307&#160;
^ Arthur W. Munk (Sep 1971), Civil Disobedience: Conscience, Tactics, and the Law 397, Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, pp.&#160;211–212&#160;
^ Robert T. Hall (Jan 1971), Legal Toleration of Civil Disobedience 81 (2), Ethics, pp.&#160;128–142&#160;
^ Michael Bayles (Sep 1970), The Justifiability of Civil Disobedience 24 (1), The Review of Metaphysics, pp.&#160;3–20&#160;
^ Leslie J. Macfarlane (Oct 1968), Justifying Political Disobedience 79 (1), Ethics, pp.&#160;24–55&#160;
^ U.S. v. Schoon, 939 F2d 826 (July 29, 1991).
^ Hughes, Graham (1968), Civil Disobedience and the Political Question Doctrine 43, N.Y.U. L. Rev., p.&#160;1&#160;
^ Steven M. Bauer and Peter J. Eckerstrom (May 1987), The State Made Me Do It: The Applicability of the Necessity Defense to Civil Disobedience 39 (5), Stanford Law Review, pp.&#160;1173–1200&#160;
^ James L. Cavallaro, Jr. (Jan 1993), The Demise of the Political Necessity Defense: Indirect Civil Disobedience and United States v. Schoon 81 (1), California Law Review, pp.&#160;351–385&#160;
^ Robert Surbrug, Beyond Vietnam: The Politics of Protest in Massachusetts, 1974-1990&#160;
^ http://www.fija.org/docs/JG_If_You_are_Facing_Charges.pdf
^ 18 U.S.C.&#160;§&#160;3553
^ 3. The Basic Approach (Policy Statement), 2009 Federal Sentencing Guidelines Manual&#160;
^ Judgments - Sepet (FC) and Another (FC) (Appellants) v. Secretary of State for the Home Department (Respondent), 20 March 2003&#160;


Further reading[edit]

Lewis Perry, Civil Disobedience: An American Tradition. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2013.

External links[edit]


Civil Disobedience entry by Kimberley Brownlee in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
"Civil Disobedience" by Peter Suber, originally in Christopher B. Gray (ed.), Philosophy of Law: An Encyclopedia, Garland Pub. Co, 1999, II.110-113.










v
t
e


Conformity






Group pressures



Authoritarian personality
Bullying
Collectivism
Coercive persuasion
Consensus reality
Groupthink
Hazing
Herd mentality
Indoctrination
Milieu control
Mobbing
Nationalism
Normalization
Normative social influence
Ostracism
Panopticon
Patriotism
Peer pressure
Peer review
Propaganda
Right-wing authoritarianism
Scapegoating
Social influence
Socialization
Spiral of silence
Teasing
Tyranny of the majority








Conforming oneself



Compliance
Countersignaling
Herd behavior
Internalisation
Social proof
Obedience








Experiments



Asch conformity experiments
Milgram experiment
Stanford prison experiment








Counterconformity



Anti-authoritarianism
Antisocial tendencies
Civil disobedience
Cosmopolitanism
Culture jamming
Deviance
Eclecticism
Eccentricity
Idiosyncrasy
Individualism
Rebellion
Ritual clown
Satire
Shock value
















v
t
e


Mahatma Gandhi






Life events
and movements



Indian Ambulance Corps
Civil rights movement in South Africa
Bardoli Satyagraha
Champaran and Kheda Satyagraha
Indian independence movement

Gandhi cap


Non-cooperation Movement
Chauri Chaura incident
Purna Swaraj

flag


Salt March
Dharasana Satyagraha
Vaikom Satyagraha
Aundh Experiment
Gandhi–Irwin Pact

Second Round Table Conference


Padayatra
Poona Pact
Natal Indian Congress
Quit India

speech


Gujarat Vidyapith University
Harijan Sevak Sangh
Ashrams (Kochrab
Tolstoy Farm
Sabarmati
Sevagram)
List of fasts
Assassination








Philosophy



Gandhism
Economics

trusteeship


Education
Sarvodaya
Satyagraha
Swadeshi
Swaraj








Publications



Harijan
Hind Swaraj (Indian Home Rule)
Indian Opinion
The Story of My Experiments with Truth
Young India
Seven Social Sins
(Gandhi Heritage Portal)








Influences



A Letter to a Hindu
Ahimsa

nonviolence


Bhagavad Gita
Henry David Thoreau
Civil Disobedience (essay)
Civil disobedience
Fasting
Harishchandra
Hinduism
John Ruskin
Leo Tolstoy
The Kingdom of God Is Within You
The Masque of Anarchy
Muhammad
Pacifism
Sermon on the Mount
Shravan
Shrimad Rajchandra
Henry Stephens Salt
Unto This Last
"Vaishnava Jana To"
Vegetarianism








Associates



Swami Anand
C. F. Andrews
Jamnalal Bajaj
Shankarlal Banker
Sarla Behn
Vinoba Bhave
Brij Krishna Chandiwala
Sudhakar Chaturvedi
Jugatram Dave
Mahadev Desai
Dada Dharmadhikari
Kanu Gandhi
Shiv Prasad Gupta
Umar Hajee Ahmed Jhaveri
J. C. Kumarappa
Hermann Kallenbach
Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan
Acharya Kripalani
Mirabehn
Mohanlal Pandya
Vallabhbhai Patel
Narhari Parikh
Chakravarti Rajagopalachari
Bibi Amtus Salam
Sonja Schlesin
Anugrah Narayan Sinha
Sri Krishna Sinha
Rettamalai Srinivasan
V. A. Sundaram
Abbas Tyabji
Ravi Shankar Vyas








Legacy



Artistic depictions
Gandhigiri
Gandhi Peace Award
Gandhi Peace Prize
Mahatma Gandhi Kashi Vidyapith
Indian currency








Family



Kasturba (wife)
Harilal (son)
Manilal (son)
Ramdas (son)
Devdas (son)
Maganlal (cousin)
Samaldas (nephew)
Arun (grandson)
Ela (granddaughter)
Rajmohan (grandson)
Gopalkrishna (grandson)
Ramchandra (grandson)
Kanu (grandnephew)
Tushar (great-grandson)
Leela (great-granddaughter)








Influenced



James Bevel
Steve Biko
14th Dalai Lama
Gopaldas Ambaidas Desai
Morarji Desai
Eknath Easwaran
Maria Lacerda de Moura
James Lawson
Martin Luther King, Jr.
Nelson Mandela
Brajkishore Prasad
Rajendra Prasad
Ramjee Singh
Aung San Suu Kyi
Lanza del Vasto
Abhay Bang
Sane Guruji








Memorials





Physical




Aga Khan Palace
Gandhi Bhawan
Gandhi Mandapam
Gandhi Promenade
Gandhi Smriti
Gandhi Memorial
Gandhi Memorial Museum, Madurai
Kaba Gandhi No Delo
Kirti Mandir
Mahatma Gandhi College
Mohandas Gandhi High School
National Gandhi Museum
Pietermaritzburg
Raj Ghat
Sabarmati Ashram
Satyagraha House
Roads named for Gandhi









Observances




Gandhi Jayanti
International Day of Non-Violence
Martyrs' Day
Season for Nonviolence














 Category
 Commons
 Wikiquotes
 Wikisource texts
















v
t
e


Media culture






Media



Mass media
Mainstream media
24-hour news cycle
Corporate media
News broadcasting
News media
Film
Internet
Radio
Television








Ideology



Mainstream
Advanced capitalism
American Dream
Bipartisanship
Consumerism
Pensée unique
Pop music








Deception





Forms




Advertising
Propaganda
Public relations
Spin
Tabloid journalism









Techniques




Cult of personality
Dumbing down
Framing
Media circus
Media event
Narcotizing dysfunction
Recuperation
Sensationalism









Others




Crowd manipulation
Managing the news
Media manipulation











Philosophers



Theodor W. Adorno
Edward Bernays
Noam Chomsky
Guy Debord
Walter Lippmann
Marshall McLuhan








Counterculture



Boycott
Civil disobedience
Culture jamming
Demonstration
Graffiti
Occupation
Political satire
Protest
Punk
Strike action








In academia



Media influence
Media studies
Semiotic democracy
The Lonely Crowd








Issues



Anonymity
Concentration of media ownership
Freedom of speech
Media bias
Privacy








Synonyms



Advanced capitalism
Culture industry
Mass society
Post-Fordism
Society of the Spectacle
















v
t
e


Media manipulation






Context



Bias
Crowd psychology
Deception
Dumbing down
False balance
Half-truths
Machiavellianism
Media
Obfuscation
Persuasion
Psychological manipulation








Activism



Alternative media
Boycott
Civil disobedience
Culture jamming
Demonstrations
Guerrilla communication
Hacktivism
Internet
Media
Occupations
Petitions
Protests
Youth








Advertising



Billboards
False
Infomercials
Mobiles
Modeling
Radio
Regulation
Sex
Slogans
Testimonials
TV











Censorship
Regulation






Books
Broadcast law
Burying of scholars
Cover-ups
Corporate
Euphemism
Films
Historical revisionism
Internet
Political
Religious
Self








Hoaxing



April Fools'
Fakelore
Fictitious entries
Forgery
List
Literary
Racial
Urban legend
Virus








Marketing



Branding
Loyalty
Product
Product placement
Publicity
Research
Word of mouth








News media



Agenda-setting
Broadcasting
Circus
Cycle
False balance
Infotainment
Managing
Narcotizing dysfunction
Pseudo-event
Scrum
Sensationalism
Tabloid journalism








Political campaigning



Advertising
Astroturfing
Attack ad
Canvassing
Character assassination
Charm offensive
Election promises
Lawn signs
Manifestos
Name recognition
Negative
Push polling
Smear campaign
Wedge issue








Propaganda



Bandwagon
Crowd manipulation
Disinformation
Fear mongering
Framing
Indoctrination
Loaded language
National mythology
Techniques








Psychological warfare



Airborne leaflets
False flag
Fifth column
Information (IT)
Lawfare
Political
Public diplomacy
Sedition
Subversion








Public relations



Cult of personality
Doublespeak
Non-apology apology
Reputation management
Slogans
Sound bites
Spin
Transfer
Understatement
Weasel words








Sales



Pricing
Promotion
















v
t
e


Social and political philosophy






Philosophers



Alinsky
Aristotle
Augustine
Aurobindo
Aquinas
Averroes
Azurmendi
Badiou
Bakunin
Baudrillard
Benoist
Bentham
Berlin
Bonald
Bosanquet
Burke
Camus
Chanakya
Chomsky
Cicero
Comte
Confucius
Debord
Đilas
Durkheim
Engels
Foucault
Fourier
Gandhi
Gehlen
Gentile
Al-Ghazali
Gramsci
Grotius
Habermas
Han Fei
Hobbes
Hume
Kant
Kirk
Kropotkin
Le Bon
Le Play
Leibniz
Locke
Luxemburg
Machiavelli
Maistre
Malebranche
Marcuse
Maritain
Marsilius
Marx
Mencius
Michels
Mill
Montesquieu
Möser
Mozi
Muhammad
Negri
Nietzsche
Nozick
Oakeshott
Ortega
Pareto
Plamenatz
Plato
Popper
Rand
Rawls
Renan
Rousseau
Royce
Russell
Santayana
Sarkar
Sartre
Schmitt
Searle
Shang
Smith
Sombart
Spann
Spencer
Spirito
Stirner
Strauss
Taine
Taylor
Thoreau
Vivekananda
Walzer
Žižek








Social theories



Vaisheshika
Anarchism
Authoritarianism
Collectivism
Communism
Communitarianism
Conflict theories
Confucianism
Consensus theory
Conservatism
Contractualism
Culturalism
Gandhism
Individualism
Legalism
Liberalism
Libertarianism
Mohism
National liberalism
Social constructionism
Social constructivism
Social Darwinism
Social determinism
Socialism
Utilitarianism








Social concepts



Civil disobedience
Democracy
Four occupations
Justice
Law
Mandate of Heaven
Peace
Property
Revolution
Rights
Social contract
Society
War
more...








Related articles



Jurisprudence
Philosophy and economics
Philosophy of education
Philosophy of history
Philosophy of love
Philosophy of sex
Philosophy of social science
Social epistemology











Category
Portal
Task Force
















v
t
e


Tax resistance






Topics



Conscientious objection to military taxation
History of tax resistance
List of tax resisters








Methods



Barter
Gift economy
Local currency
Rebellion
Self-sufficiency
Simple living
Tax avoidance
Tax evasion
Unreported employment








Organizations



Addiopizzo
Aide-toi, le ciel t'aidera
All Britain Anti-Poll Tax Federation
Anti-Poll Tax Unions
Association of Real Estate Taxpayers
Catalunya Diu Prou
Committee for Non-Violent Action
Fasci Siciliani
Irish National Land League
National Campaign for a Peace Tax Fund
National War Tax Resistance Coordinating Committee
Northern California War Tax Resistance
Pagal Panthis
Peace churches
Peacemakers
Planka.nu
Women's Tax Resistance League








Media



An Act of Conscience
Civil Disobedience
Clericis laicos
The Cold War and the Income Tax: A Protest
Vyborg Manifesto








Campaigns




1300s



Peasants' Revolt








1400s



Cornish Rebellion of 1497








1500s



Croquant rebellions
Rappenkrieg
Revolt of the Pitauds








1600s



Angelets
Revolt of the papier timbré
Revolt of the va-nu-pieds
Salt Tax Revolt








1700s



Boston Tea Party
Fries's Rebellion
Gaspee Affair
No taxation without representation
Philadelphia Tea Party
War of the Regulation
Whiskey Rebellion
White Lotus Rebellion








1800s



Dog Tax War
Hut Tax War of 1898
Rebecca Riots
Saminism Movement
Tancament de Caixes
Tithe War








1900s



Agbekoya
Bambatha Rebellion
Bardoli Satyagraha
Beit Sahour
Bondelswarts affair
Champaran and Kheda Satyagraha
Johnson cult
Mau movement
Poll Tax Riots
Poplar Rates Rebellion
Turra Coo
Salt March
Women's War








21st century



Anti-austerity movement in Greece
Anti-Bin Tax Campaign
Bonnets Rouges
Campaign Against Home and Water Taxes
Movimento Passe Livre











Related topics



Civil disobedience
Conscientious objector
Direct action
Income tax threshold
Nonviolent resistance
Render unto Caesar
Tax noncompliance
Tax protester
Tax riot
Taxation as slavery
Taxation as theft















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Civil_disobedience&amp;oldid=691156024"					
				Categories: Civil disobedienceCommunity organizingNonviolenceActivism by typeSocial movementsHidden categories: All Wikipedia articles needing clarificationWikipedia articles needing clarification from November 2010All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from November 2013Articles with unsourced statements from June 2015All articles that may contain original researchArticles that may contain original research from January 2012Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from January 2012Articles with unsourced statements from November 2011Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata				
							
		
		
			