


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Comic book
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				This article is about periodicals containing comics.  For the comics art medium, see Comic.

Comic Books

Comics


  


Comics studies




Education
History

by country


Glossary




Methods




Cartooning
Fumetti




Media




Comic book
Comic strip
Editorial cartoon
Gag cartoon
Graphic novel
Webcomic




Community




Awards
Collecting
Publishers




 Comics portal





v
t
e









Comic books on display at a museum


A comic book or comicbook,[1] also called comic magazine or simply comic, is a publication that consists of comics art in the form of sequential juxtaposed panels that represent individual scenes. Panels are often accompanied by brief descriptive prose and written narrative, usually dialog contained in word balloons emblematic of the comics art form. Although comic books have some origins in 18th century Japan and 1830s Europe, comic books were first popularized in the United States during the 1930s. The first modern comic book, Famous Funnies, was released in the United States in 1933 and was a reprinting of earlier newspaper humor comic strips, which had established many of the story-telling devices used in comics.[2] The term comic book derives from American comic books once being a compilation of comic strips of a humorous tone; however, this practice was replaced by featuring stories of all genres, usually not humorous in tone.
It is important to distinguish the terminology used in the world of comics. A comic book is often confused with a graphic novel. However, unlike comic books, graphic novels are not periodical in nature and are a long form of usually fictional works. Similarly, a trade paperback is a reprinted collection of the stories previously published as comic books. Individual comic strips may not form part of a larger story arc and are generally regarded for their humor. Lastly, a comics anthology gathers together different short works for publication under one title.



Contents


1 Structure
2 American comic books

2.1 Underground comic books
2.2 Alternative comics
2.3 Graphic novels
2.4 Digital graphic novels
2.5 Comic book collecting


3 European comics

3.1 Franco-Belgian comics
3.2 British comics
3.3 Italian comics
3.4 Czech comics


4 Japanese comics (manga)

4.1 Doujinshi


5 Distribution

5.1 Digital distribution


6 Comic collections in libraries
7 See also
8 References
9 Further reading
10 External links



Structure[edit]
Comic books are reliant on their organization and appearance. Authors largely focus on the frame of the page, size, orientation, and panel positions. These characteristic aspects of comic books are necessary in conveying the content and messages of the author. The key elements of comic books include panels, balloons (speech bubbles), text (lines), and characters. Balloons are usually convex spatial containers of information that are related to a character using a tail element. The tail has an origin, path, tip, and pointed direction.
There are many technological formulas used to create comic books, including directions, axes, data, and metrics. Following these key formatting procedures is the writing, drawing, and colouring.[3]
American comic books[edit]
Main article: American comic book
Comics as a print medium have existed in America since the printing of The Adventures of Mr. Obadiah Oldbuck in 1842 in hardcover,[4] making it the first known American prototype comic book. Proto-comics periodicals began appearing early in the 20th century, with historians generally citing Dell Publishing's 36-page Famous Funnies: A Carnival of Comics as the first true American comic book; Goulart, for example, calls it "the cornerstone for one of the most lucrative branches of magazine publishing".[5] The introduction of Jerry Siegel and Joe Shuster's Superman in 1938 turned comic books into a major industry,[6] and ushered the Golden Age of Comics. The Golden Age originated the archetype of the superhero.
Historians generally divide the timeline of the American comic book into eras. The Golden Age of Comic Books began with the introduction of Superman in 1938, spurring a period of high sales.[7] The Silver Age of comic books is generally considered to date from the first successful revival of the then-dormant superhero form, with the debut of the Flash in Showcase #4 (Oct. 1956).[8][9] The Silver Age lasted through the late 1960s or early 1970s, during which time Marvel Comics revolutionized the medium with such naturalistic superheroes as Stan Lee and Jack Kirby's Fantastic Four and Lee and Steve Ditko's Spider-Man. The demarcation between the Silver Age and the following era, the Bronze Age of Comic Books, is less well-defined, with the Bronze Age running from the very early 1970s through the mid-1980s.[10] The Modern Age of Comic Books runs from the mid-1980s to the present day.[11]
A notable event in the history of the American comic book came with psychiatrist Fredric Wertham's criticisms of the medium in his book Seduction of the Innocent (1954), which prompted the American Senate Subcommittee on Juvenile Delinquency to investigate comic books. In response to attention from the government and from the media, the U.S. comic book industry set up the Comics Magazine Association of America.[12] The CMAA instilled the Comics Code Authority in 1954 and drafted the self-censorship Comics Code that year, which required all comic books to go through a process of approval. It was not until the 1970s that comic books could be published without passing through the inspection of the CMAA.[13]
Underground comic books[edit]
Main article: Underground comix
In the early 1970s, a surge of creativity emerged in what became known as underground comics. Published and distributed independently of the established comics industry, most of such comics reflected the youth counterculture and drug culture of the time. Many had an uninhibited, often irreverent style; their frank depictions of nudity, sex, profanity, and politics had no parallel outside their precursors, the pornographic and even more obscure "Tijuana bibles". Underground comics were almost never sold at newsstands, but rather in such youth-oriented outlets as head shops and record stores, as well as by mail order.
Frank Stack's The Adventures of Jesus, published under the name Foolbert Sturgeon,[14][15] has been credited as the first underground comic.[14][15]
Alternative comics[edit]
Main article: Alternative comics
The rise of comic book specialty stores in the late 1970s created/paralleled a dedicated market for "independent" or "alternative comics" in the U.S. The first such comics included the anthology series Star Reach, published by comic-book writer Mike Friedrich from 1974 to 1979, and Harvey Pekar's American Splendor, which continued sporadic publication into the 21st century and which Shari Springer Berman and Robert Pulcini adapted into a 2003 film. Some independent comics continued in the tradition of underground comics. While their content generally remained less explicit, others resembled the output of mainstream publishers in format and genre, but were published by smaller artist-owned companies or by single artists. A few (notably RAW) represented experimental attempts to bring comics closer to the status of fine art.
During the 1970s the "small press" culture grew and diversified. By the 1980s, several independent publishers - such as Pacific, Eclipse, First, Comico, and Fantagraphics - had started releasing a wide range of styles and formats—from color-superhero, detective, and science-fiction comic books to black-and-white magazine-format stories of Latin American magical realism.
A number of small publishers in the 1990s changed the format and distribution of their comics to more closely resemble non-comics publishing. The "minicomics" form, an extremely informal version of self-publishing, arose in the 1980s and became increasingly popular among artists in the 1990s,[citation needed] despite reaching an even more limited audience than the small press.
Small publishers regularly releasing titles include Avatar Comics, Hyperwerks, Raytoons, and Terminal Press, buoyed by such advances in printing technology as digital print-on-demand.
Graphic novels[edit]
Main article: Graphic novel
In 1964, Richard Kyle coined the term "graphic novel" to distinguish newly translated European works from genre-driven subject matter common in American comics. Precursors of the form existed by the 1920s, which saw a revival of the medieval woodcut tradition by Belgian Frans Masereel,[16] American Lynd Ward and others, including Stan Lee. In 1950, St. John Publications produced the digest-sized, adult-oriented "picture novel" It Rhymes with Lust, a 128-page digest by pseudonymous writer "Drake Waller" (Arnold Drake and Leslie Waller), penciler Matt Baker and inker Ray Osrin, touted as "an original full-length novel" on its cover. In 1971, writer-artist Gil Kane and collaborators devised the paperback "comics novel" Blackmark. Will Eisner popularized the term "graphic novel" when he used it on the cover of the paperback edition of his work A Contract with God, and Other Tenement Stories in 1978.
Digital graphic novels[edit]
See also: Digital comics
Comic book collecting[edit]
Main article: Comic book collecting



This section requires expansion. (April 2012)


In the 1970s, specialty comic stores began opening and they still have a place in today's society. Initially, the target audience of comic books was only children, however, with the introduction of devoted comic book stores, they are now embraced by many adults. Due to their greater income, comic book companies have been pushed to create comics aimed at adult readers.[17]
Comic book collectors are often lifelong enthusiasts of the comic book stories and they usually focus on particular heroes and attempt to assemble the entire run of a title. Comics are published with a sequential number. The very first issue of the Marvel magazine 'The Amazing Spider-Man' was number 1 and that was followed by number 2 until the end of the run which ran into the hundreds. Number 1 is commonly the rarest and most desirable to collectors.
However, the first appearance of a character might be in an existing title. For example, Spider-Man's first appearance was in Amazing Fantasy number 15. New characters were often introduced this way, and did not receive their own titles until there was a proven audience for the hero. As a result, comics that feature the first appearance of an important character will sometimes be even harder to find than the number 1 issue of a character's own title.
Some rare comic books include copies of the unreleased Motion Picture Funnies Weekly #1 from 1939. Eight copies, plus one without a cover, emerged in the estate of the deceased publisher in 1974. The "Pay Copy" of this book sold for $43,125 in a 2005 Heritage auction.[18]
The most valuable American comics have combined rarity and quality with the first appearances of popular and enduring characters. Four comic books have sold for over $1 million USD as of December 2010, including two examples of Action Comics #1, the first appearance of Superman,[19][20] both sold privately through online dealer ComicConnect.com in 2010, and Detective Comics #27, the first appearance of Batman, via public auction.
Updating the above price obtained for Action Comics #1, the first appearance of Superman, the highest sale on record for this book is $3.2 million, for a 9.0 copy.[21]
Misprints, promotional comic-dealer incentive printings, and issues with extremely low distribution also generally have scarcity value. The rarest modern comic books include the original press run of The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen #5, which DC executive Paul Levitz recalled and pulped due to the appearance of a vintage Victorian era advertisement for "Marvel Douche", which the publisher considered offensive;[22] only 100 copies exist, most of which have been CGC graded. (See Recalled comics for more pulped, recalled, and erroneous comics.)
In 2000, a company named CGC began to "slab" comics, encasing them in a thick plastic and giving them a numeric grade. As of 2014, there are two companies that provide third party grading of comic book condition. Because condition is so important to the value of rare comics, the idea of grading by a company that does not buy or sell comics seems like a good one. However, there is some controversy about whether this grading service is worth the high cost, and whether it is a positive development for collectors, or if it primarily services speculators who wish to make a quick profit trading in comics as one might trade in stocks or fine art. Comic grading has created valuation standards that online price guides such as GoCollect and GPAnalysis have used to report on real-time market values.
The original artwork pages from comic books are also collected, and these are perhaps the rarest of all comic book collector's items, as there is only one unique page of artwork for each page that was printed and published. These were created by a writer, who created the story; a pencil artist, who laid out the sequential panels on the page; an ink artist, who went over the pencil with pen and black ink; a letterer, who provided the dialogue and narration of the story by hand lettering each word; and finally a colorist, who added color as the last step before the finished pages went to the printer.
When the original pages of artwork are returned by the printer, they are typically given back to the artists, who sometimes sell them at comic book conventions, or in galleries and art shows related to comic book art. The original pages of the first appearances of such legendary characters as Superman, Batman, Wonder Woman and Spider-man are considered priceless.
European comics[edit]
Main article: European comics
Franco-Belgian comics[edit]
Main article: Franco-Belgian comics




René Goscinny (1926 – 1977), writer of the Astérix comic book series.


France and Belgium have a long tradition in comics and comic books, called BDs (an abbreviation of bande dessinées) in French and strips in Dutch. Belgian comic books originally written in Dutch show the influence of the Francophone "Franco-Belgian" comics, but have their own distinct style.
The name la bande dessinée derives from the original description of the art form as drawn strips (the phrase literally translates as "the drawn strip"), analogous to the sequence of images in a film strip. As in its English equivalent, the word "bande" can be applied to both film and comics. Significantly, the French-language term contains no indication of subject-matter, unlike the American terms "comics" and "funnies", which imply an art form not to be taken seriously. The distinction of comics as le neuvième art (literally, "the ninth art") is prevalent in French scholarship on the form, as is the concept of comics criticism and scholarship itself. Relative to the respective size of their populations, the innumerable authors in France and Belgium publish a high volume of comic books. In North America, the more serious Franco-Belgian comics are often seen as equivalent to graphic novels, but whether they are long or short, bound or in magazine format, in Europe there is no need for a more sophisticated term, as the art's name does not itself imply something frivolous.
In France, authors control the publication of most comics. The author works within a self-appointed time-frame, and it is common for readers to wait six months or as long as two years between installments. Most books first appear in print as a hardcover book, typically with 48, 56, or 64 pages.
British comics[edit]
Main article: British comics




Cover to 27 December 1884 edition of Ally Sloper's Half Holiday. Ally Sloper is regarded as the first recurring character in comics.[23]


Although Ally Sloper's Half Holiday (1884), the first comic published in Britain, aimed at an adult market, publishers quickly targeted a younger demographic, which has led to most publications being for children and has created an association in the public's mind of comics as somewhat juvenile.
The British comic adopted a magazine size, with The Beano and The Dandy, both created in the 1930s, the last to adopt this size (in the 1980s). Some comics, such as Judge Dredd and other 2000 AD titles, have been published in a tabloid form.
Popular titles within the UK have included The Beano, The Dandy, The Eagle, 2000 AD, and Viz. Underground comics and "small press" titles have also appeared in the UK, notably Oz and Escape Magazine.
The content of Action, another title aimed at children and launched in the mid-1970s, became the subject of discussion in the House of Commons. Although on a smaller scale than similar investigations in the U.S., such concerns led to a moderation of content published within British comics. Such moderation never became formalized to the extent of promulgating a code, nor did it last long.
The UK has also established a healthy market in the reprinting and repackaging of material, notably material originating in the U.S. The lack of reliable supplies of American comic books led to a variety of black-and-white reprints, including Marvel's monster comics of the 1950s, Fawcett's Captain Marvel, and other characters such as Sheena, Mandrake the Magician, and the Phantom. Several reprint companies became involved in repackaging American material for the British market, notably the importer and distributor Thorpe &amp; Porter.
Marvel Comics established a UK office in 1972. DC Comics and Dark Horse Comics also opened offices in the 1990s. The repackaging of European material has occurred less frequently, although The Adventures of Tintin and Asterix serials have been successfully translated and repackaged in softcover books.
In the 1980s, a resurgence of British writers and artists gained prominence in mainstream comic books, which was dubbed the "British Invasion" in comic book history.[24] These writers and artists brought with them their own mature themes and philosophy such as anarchy, controversy and politics common in British media. These elements would pave the way for mature and "darker and edgier" comic books and jump start the Modern Age of Comics.[25] Writers included Alan Moore, famous for his V for Vendetta, From Hell, Watchmen, Marvelman, and The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen;[26] Neil Gaiman with The Sandman mythos and Books of Magic; Warren Ellis, creator of Transmetropolitan and Planetary; and others such as Mark Millar, creator of Wanted and Kick-Ass. The comic book series Hellblazer, which is largely set in Britain and starring the magician John Constantine, paved the way for British writers such as Jamie Delano.[27]
At Christmas time, publishers repackage and commission material for comic annuals, printed and bound as hardcover A4-size books; "Rupert" supplies a famous example of the British comic annual. DC Thomson also repackages The Broons and Oor Wullie strips in softcover A4-size books for the holiday season.
On 19 March 2012, the British postal service, the Royal Mail, released a set of stamps depicting British comic-book characters and series.[28] The collection featured The Beano, The Dandy, Eagle, The Topper, Roy of the Rovers, Bunty, Buster, Valiant, Twinkle and 2000 AD.
Italian comics[edit]
Main article: Italian comics




Hugo Pratt (1927 – 1995), author of the Corto Maltese comic book series.


In Italy, comics (known in Italian as fumetti) made their debut as humor strips at the end of the 19th century, and later evolved into adventure stories. After World War II, however, artists like Hugo Pratt and Guido Crepax exposed Italian comics to an international audience. Popular comic books such as Diabolik or the Bonelli line—namely Tex Willer or Dylan Dog—remain best-sellers.
Mainstream comics are usually published on a monthly basis, in a black-and-white digest size format, with approximately 100 to 132 pages. Collections of classic material for the most famous characters, usually with more than 200 pages, are also common. Author comics are published in the French BD format, with an example being Pratt's Corto Maltese.
Italian cartoonists show the influence of comics from other countries, including France, Belgium, Spain, and Argentina. Italy is also famous for being one of the foremost producers of Walt Disney comic stories outside the U.S. Donald Duck's superhero alter ego, Paperinik, known in English as Superduck, was created in Italy.
Czech comics[edit]
Main article: Čtyřlístek
Čtyřlístek (in English translated as Lucky Four or Four-Leaf Clover) is one of the most well-known comics for children published in the Czech Republic.
Japanese comics (manga)[edit]





This section may not properly summarize its corresponding main article. Specific concerns can be found on the Talk page. Please help improve this article if you can.


Main article: Manga
The first comic books in Japan appeared during the 18th century in the form of woodblock-printed booklets containing short stories drawn from folk tales, legends, and historical accounts, told in a simple visual-verbal idiom. Known as "red books" (赤本, akahon?), "black books" (黒本, kurobon?), and "blue books" (青本, aohon?), these were written primarily for less literate readers. However, with the publication in 1775 of Koikawa Harumachi's comic book Master Flashgold's Splendiferous Dream (金々先生栄花の夢, Kinkin sensei eiga no yume?), an evolved form of comic book originated, which required greater literacy and cultural sophistication. This was known as the kibyōshi (黄表紙?, lit. yellow cover). Published in thousands of copies, the kibyōshi may have been the earliest fully realized comic book for adults in world literary history. Approximately 2,000 titles remain extant.
Modern comic books in Japan developed from a mixture of these earlier comic books and of woodblock prints ukiyo-e (浮世絵?) with Western styles of drawing. They took their current form shortly after World War II. They are usually published in black-and-white, except for the covers, which are usually printed in four colors, although occasionally, the first few pages may also be printed in full color. The term manga means "random (or whimsical) pictures", and first came into common usage in the late 18th century with the publication of such works as Santō Kyōden's picturebook Shiji no yukikai (四時交加?) (1798) and Aikawa Minwa's Comic Sketches of a Hundred Women (1798). During the Meiji period, the term Akahon was also common.
Western artists were brought over to teach their students such concepts as line, form, and color; things which had not been regarded as conceptually important in ukiyo-e, as the idea behind the picture was of paramount importance. Manga at this time was referred to as Ponchi-e (Punch-picture) and, like its British counterpart Punch magazine, mainly depicted humor and political satire in short one- or four-picture format.
Dr. Osamu Tezuka (1928–1989) further developed this form. Seeing an animated war propaganda film titled Momotaro's Divine Sea Warriors (桃太郎　海の神兵, Momotarō Umi no Shinpei?) inspired Tezuka to become a comic artist. He introduced episodic storytelling and character development in comic format, in which each story is part of larger story arc. The only text in Tezuka's comics was the characters' dialogue and this further lent his comics a cinematic quality. Inspired by the work of Walt Disney, Tezuka also adopted a style of drawing facial features in which a character's eyes, nose, and mouth are drawn in an extremely exaggerated manner. This style created immediately recognizable expressions using very few lines, and the simplicity of this style allowed Tezuka to be prolific. Tezuka's work generated new interest in the ukiyo-e tradition, in which the image is a representation of an idea, rather than a depiction of reality.
Though a close equivalent to the American comic book, manga has historically held a more important place in Japanese culture than comics have in American culture. Japanese society shows a wide respect for manga, both as an art form and as a form of popular literature. Many manga become television shows or short films. As with its American counterpart, some manga has been criticized for its sexuality and violence, although in the absence of official or even industry restrictions on content, artists have freely created manga for every age group and for every topic.
Manga magazines—also known as "anthologies"—often run several series concurrently, with approximately 20 to 40 pages allocated to each series per issue. These magazines range from 200 to more than 850 pages each. Manga magazines also contain one-shot comics and a variety of four-panel yonkoma (equivalent to comic strips). Manga series may continue for many years if they are successful, with stories often collected and reprinted in book-sized volumes called tankōbon (単行本?, lit. stand-alone book), the equivalent of the American trade paperbacks. These volumes use higher-quality paper and are useful to readers who want to be brought up to date with a series, or to readers who find the cost of the weekly or monthly publications to be prohibitive. Deluxe versions are printed as commemorative or collectible editions. Conversely, old manga titles are also reprinted using lower-quality paper and sold for 120 ¥ (approximately $1 USD) each.
Doujinshi[edit]
Main article: Doujinshi
Doujinshi (同人誌?, lit. fan magazine), fan-made Japanese comics operate in a far larger market in Japan than the American "underground comics" market; the largest doujinshi fair, Comiket, attracts 500,000 visitors twice a year.[29]
Distribution[edit]
Distribution has historically been a problem for the comic book industry with many mainstream retailers declining to carry extensive stocks of the most interesting and popular comics. The smartphone and the tablet have turned out to be an ideal medium for online distribution.[30]
Digital distribution[edit]
On November 13, 2007, Marvel Comics launched Marvel Digital Comics Unlimited, a subscription service allowing readers to read many comics from Marvel's history online. The service also includes periodic release new comics not available elsewhere. With the release of Avenging Spider-Man Marvel also became the first publisher to provide free digital copies as part of the print copy of the comic book.[31]
With the growing popularity of smartphones and tablets, many major publishers have begun releasing titles in digital form. The most popular platform is comiXology. Some platforms, such as Graphicly, have shut down,
Comic collections in libraries[edit]
Many libraries have extensive collections of comics in the form of graphic novels. This is a convenient way for many in the public to become familiar with the medium.[32]
See also[edit]




Comics portal




Cartoon
Comic book archive
Comic book therapy
Comics studies
Comics vocabulary
Comparison of image viewers
Digital comics
Webcomic

References[edit]


^ "Previous Winners". The Eagle Awards. Retrieved 3 October 2010.&#160;
^ A History of the Comic Book. Retrieved 16 July 2014.
^ Rigaud, Christophe (2015). "Knowledge-driven understanding of images in comic books". International Journal on Document Analysis and Recognition 18 (3). doi:10.1007/s10032-015-0243-1.&#160;
^ The Adventures of M. Obadiah Oldbuck at the Dartmouth College library
^ Goulart, Ron (2004). Comic Book Encyclopedia. New York: Harper Entertainment. ISBN&#160;978-0060538163.&#160;
^ Goulart, Ron (2000). Comic Book Culture: An Illustrated History. Collectors Press. p.&#160;43. ISBN&#160;978-1-888054-38-5.&#160;
^ "The Golden Age of Comics". History Detectives: Special Investigations. PBS. Retrieved February 18, 2015. The precise era of the Golden Age is disputed, though most agree that it was born with the launch of Superman in 1938.&#160;
^ CBR News Team (2 July 2007). "DC Flashback: The Flash". Comic Book Resources. Retrieved 27 June 2008.&#160;
^ Zicari, Anthony (3 August 2007). "Breaking the Border – Rants and Ramblings". Comics Bulletin. Archived from the original on 26 August 2007. Retrieved 5 January 2010.&#160;
^ Fagan, Bryan D.; Condit, Jody Condit (2011). Comic Book Collections for Libraries. Libraries Unlimited. p.&#160;38. ISBN&#160;978-1598845112.&#160;
^ "Glossary". Overstreet Comic Book Price Guide 38. 2008. p.&#160;1028.&#160;
^ Brown, Jeffrey (1997). "Comic Book Fandom and Cultural Capital". Journal of Popular Culture 30 (4).&#160;
^ Brown, Jeffrey (1997). "Comic book fandom and cultural capital". Journal of Popular Culture 30 (4). doi:10.1111/j.0022-3840.1997.3004_13.x. ISSN&#160;0022-3840.&#160;
^ a b Stack, Frank; Shelton, Gilbert (25 December 2006). "Introduction". The New Adventures of Jesus. Fantagraphics Books. p.&#160;9. ISBN&#160;978-1-56097-780-3.&#160;
^ a b Skinn, Dez (20 May 2004). "Heroes of the Revolution". Comix: The Underground Revolution. Thunder's Mouth Press. p.&#160;34. ISBN&#160;978-1-56025-572-7.&#160;
^ Sabin, Roger. Adult Comics: An Introduction(Routledge New Accents Library Collection, 2005), p. 291 ISBN 978-0-415-29139-2, ISBN 978-0-415-29139-2
^ Brown, Jeffrey (1997). "Comic Book Fandom and Cultural Capital". Journal of Popular Culture 30 (4).&#160;
^ "Motion Picture Funnies Weekly #1 Pay Copy (First Funnies, Inc., 1939) CGC VF/NM 9.0 Cream to off-white pages. This is one of... Golden Age (1938–1955)Superhero". Comics.ha.com. 14 October 2005. Retrieved 18 July 2011.&#160;
^ Batman comic book beats Superman at auction, sets record CNN Money 2-26-10
^ Superman comic sells for record $1.5 million (AFP) – 29 Mar 2010
^ Whitney, Lance. "Superman's Action Comics No. 1 sells for record $3.2 million on eBay". Retrieved 31 August 2014.&#160;
^ Johnston, Rich (23 May 2005). "Alan's Previous Problems With DC (sidebar)". Lying in the Gutters. Comic Book Resources.&#160;
^ Birch, Dinah (24 September 2009). The Oxford Companion to English Literature. Oxford: Oxford University Press. p.&#160;240.&#160;
^ "Comics Unmasked: The British invasion". Art Fund. Retrieved 2014-07-26.&#160;
^ Peter Sanderson. "The British Invasion, Part 3: Neil Gaiman &amp; Swamp Thing". Sequart Organization. Retrieved September 28, 2014.&#160; May 29, 2013
^ Please, Sir, I Want Some Moore / How Alan Moore transformed American comics, by Douglas Wolk in Slate, December, 2003
^ "The Writers of Hellblazer: Interviews with Jamie Delano and Garth Ennis". Tabula Rasa. Retrieved 2014-07-27.&#160;
^ "Beano's Dennis the Menace on Royal Mail comic stamps". BBC News. 19 March 2012. Retrieved 19 March 2012.&#160;
^ Mizoguchi Akiko (2003). "Male-Male Romance by and for Women in Japan: A History and the Subgenres of Yaoi Fictions". U.S.-Japan Women’s Journal, 25: 49–75.
^ Gregory Schmidt (July 21, 2013). "Embracing Tablets, Comic Book Publishers Cash In on a Digital Revolution". The New York Times. Retrieved July 24, 2013.&#160;
^ "Avenging Spider-Man #1 Makes Digital History". 12 October 2011. Retrieved 10 November 2011.&#160;
^ http://ccgclibraries.com/integrating-comics-into-your-exhibits-and-collections/


Further reading[edit]

Kern, Adam L. (18 December 2006). Manga from the Floating World: Comic book Culture and the Kibyôshi of Edo Japan. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Asia Center. ISBN&#160;978-0-674-02266-9.&#160;
Inge, M. Thomas (1979). "Comics as Culture". Journal of Popular Culture 12 (631).&#160;
Martin, Tim (2 April 2009). "How Comic Books Became Part of the Literary Establishment". Telegraph.&#160;

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Comic books.



Comic book Speculation Reference
Comic book Reference Bibliographic Datafile
Sequart Research &amp; Literacy Organization
Comic Art Collection at the University of Missouri









v
t
e


Comics






Formats



Ashcan copy
Comic book

minicomic
film comic


Comic strip

Comic strip formats
Daily comic strip
Yonkoma
Sunday comics
Sunday strip
Topper
Lianhuanhua


Digital comics
Graphic novel

Manga
Trade paperback


Mobile comic
Motion comic
Text comics
Webcomic

Webtoon
Hypercomics
Infinite canvas
Sprite comic


Widescreen comics











Creators



Artists
cartoonists
Female comics creators

list







By country




American
Australian
Canadian
Cuban
Japanese (Manga)











History



American (Ages: Golden Age
Silver Age
Bronze Age
Modern Age

Events)


Japanese (Manga)








Genres



Abstract
Adult
Alternative
Autobiographical
Crime
Fantasy
Horror
Romance
Science fiction
Superhero
Teen humor
Underground
War
Western








Tropes



Antihero
Funny animal
Superhero
Supervillain








By country




Africa



South Africa








Asia



China and Taiwan (list)

Hong Kong


India (list)
Japan (lists)
Korea (list)
Philippines
Thailand








Europe



Czech Republic
France and Belgium (list)

Belgium


Germany
Hungary
Italy (list)
Netherlands
Poland
Portugal
Serbia
Spain (list)
United Kingdom

Wales










North America



Canada

Quebec


Mexico
United States (list)








Oceania



Australia








South America



Argentina
Brazil














 Portal
 Category
 WikiProject
 Commons
 Wikiquote
 Wikisource















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Comic_book&amp;oldid=690466753"					
				Categories: Comics formatsEntertainmentComics publicationsHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from February 2013Articles to be expanded from April 2012All articles to be expandedWikipedia articles with content forksArticles containing Japanese-language textCommons category without a link on WikidataUse dmy dates from April 2012				
							
		
		
			