


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Download
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				For other uses, see Download (disambiguation).




An image/sign for downloading to a hard disk drive (HDD)


In computer networks, to download is to receive data from a remote system, typically a server[1] such as a web server, an FTP server, an email server, or other similar systems. This contrasts with uploading, where data is sent to a remote server..
A download is a file offered for downloading or that has been downloaded, or the process of receiving such a file.



Contents


1 Definition
2 Copyright
3 See also
4 References



Definition[edit]




Download data is sent downstream to an end-user, upstream from the provider


Downloading generally transfers the whole data object for local storage and later use, as contrasted with streaming, where the data is used nearly immediately, while the transmission is still in progress, and which may not be stored long-term.
Increasingly, websites that offer streaming media or media displayed in-browser, such as YouTube, and which place restrictions on the ability of users to save these materials to their computers after they have been received, forbid downloading in the sense of "receive and save" rather than simply "receive". Downloading is not the same as "transferring" (i.e., sending/receiving data between two storage devices would be a transferral of data, but receiving data from the Internet would be considered a download).
Copyright[edit]
Main article: Copyright aspects of downloading and streaming
Downloading copyrighted content without appropriate permissions may constitute copyright infringement.
See also[edit]



Look up download in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



Bandwidth
Digital distribution
FTP
Music download
Peer-to-peer
Sideload
Upload

References[edit]


^ http://searchnetworking.techtarget.com/definition/downloading Definition of Downloading











v
t
e


Download managers







Client software for downloading computer files






Microsoft Windows





Freeware




CryptLoad
FlashGet
Free Download Manager
Free Studio
Freemake Video Downloader
Internet Download Accelerator
Microsoft Download Manager
Orbit Downloader
Xunlei









Shareware




DownloadStudio
Download Accelerator Plus
GetRight
Go!Zilla
Internet Download Manager











Unix-like



GWget
KGet








Multi-platform



cURL
DownThemAll!
FlashGot
JDownloader
Wget








Related articles



Comparison of download managers
Download acceleration
Metalink
Segmented file transfer













Authority control



GND: 4202369-5
NDL: 00920558















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Download&amp;oldid=691862457"					
				Categories: Computer networkingData transmissionNetwork file transfer protocolsServers (computing)Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers				
							
		
		
			