


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Fictional film
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								  (Redirected from Fiction film)
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				




This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (May 2009)


Fictional film or narrative film is a film that tells a fictional or fictionalized story, event or narrative. In this style of film, believable narratives and characters help convince the audience that the unfolding fiction is real. Lighting and camera movement, among other cinematic elements, have become increasingly important in these films. Great detail goes into the screenplays of narratives, as these films rarely deviate from the predetermined behaviours and lines of the screenplays to maintain a sense of realism. Actors must deliver dialogue and action in a believable way, so as to persuade the audience that the film is real life.
Probably the first fictional film ever made was the Lumière's L'Arroseur arrosé, which was first screened at the Grand Café des Capucins on December 28, 1895.[1] A year later in 1896, Alice Guy-Blaché directed the fictional film "La fee aux choux." Yet perhaps the best known of early fictional films is Georges Méliès’s A Trip to the Moon from 1902.[2] Most films previous to this had been merely moving images of everyday occurrences, such as L'Arrivée d'un train en gare de La Ciotat by Auguste and Louis Lumière. Méliès was one of the first directors to progress cinematic technology, which paved the way for narratives as style of film.[3] Narrative films have come so far since their introduction that film genres such as comedy or Western films, were, and continue to be introduced as a way to further categorize these films.[4]
Narrative cinema is usually contrasted to films that present information, such as a nature documentary, as well as to some experimental films (works such as Wavelength by Michael Snow, Man with a Movie Camera by Dziga Vertov, or films by Chantal Akerman). In some instances pure documentary films, while nonfiction, may nonetheless recount a story. As genres evolve, from fiction film and documentary a hybrid one emerged, docufiction.
Many films are based on real occurrences, however these too fall under the category of a “narrative film” rather than a documentary. This is because films based on real occurrences are not simply footage of the occurrence, but rather hired actors portraying an adjusted, often more dramatic, retelling of the occurrence (such as 21 by Robert Luketic).[5]
Unlike literary fiction, which is typically based on characters, situations and events that are entirely imaginary/fictional/hypothetical, cinema always has a real referent, called the "pro-filmic," which encompasses everything existing and done in front of the camera.
Since the emergence of classical Hollywood style in the early 20th century, during which films were selected to be made based on the popularity of the genre, stars, producers, and directors involved, narrative, usually in the form of the feature film, has held dominance in commercial cinema and has become popularly synonymous with "the movies."[6] Classical, invisible filmmaking (what is often called realist fiction) is central to this popular definition. This key element of this invisible filmmaking lies in continuity editing.
See also[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Cinema.



Film genre
Film

References[edit]


^ Alison McMahan, "Alice Guy Blaché, Lost Visionary of the Cinema" (New York: Continuum, 2002) p. 13.
^ Rosalind Leveridge, “Fantastic voyages of the cinematic imagination: George Méliès’s Trip to the Moon” Early Popular Visual Culture (May 2012), 10 (2), pg. 197-199
^ Rosalind Leveridge, “Fantastic voyages of the cinematic imagination: George Méliès’s Trip to the Moon” Early Popular Visual Culture (May 2012), 10 (2), pg. 197-199
^ Barsam, Richard Meran., and Dave Monahan. Looking at Movies: An Introduction to Film. New York: W.W. Norton &amp;, 2010
^ Barsam, Richard Meran., and Dave Monahan. Looking at Movies: An Introduction to Film. New York: W.W. Norton &amp;, 2010
^ Kaplan, E. Ann. Women and Film: Both Sides of the Camera. New York: Methuen, 1988



David Bordwell, Mark Dherrick Cuevas, and Kristin Thompson. 1997. Film Art: An Introduction. Fifth ed. New York: The McGraw-Hill Companies. ISBN 0-07-114073-5.








					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fictional_film&amp;oldid=663687576"					
				Categories: Film genresFilm and video terminologyHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from May 2009All articles needing additional referencesCommons category with local link same as on Wikidata				
							
		
		
			