


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Film treatment
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				A film treatment (or simply treatment) is a piece of prose, typically the step between scene cards (index cards) and the first draft of a screenplay for a motion picture, television program, or radio play. It is generally longer and more detailed than an outline (or one-page synopsis), and it may include details of directorial style that an outline omits. Treatments read like a short story, but are told in the present tense and describe events as they happen.[1]



Contents


1 Original draft treatment
2 Presentation treatment
3 Usage
4 References



Original draft treatment[edit]
The original draft treatment is created during the writing process, and is generally long and detailed. It consists of full-scene outlines put together. Usually there are between thirty to eighty standard letter size or A4 pages (Courier New 12 point), with an average of about forty pages. For example, The Terminator is forty-eight pages.
More elaborate forms of the draft treatment are the step outline and the scriptment.
Presentation treatment[edit]
The presentation treatment is created as presentation material. Generally the scene card descriptions are written out in order, and only have the essential and important story events that make up the scenes. It is the full story in its simplest form, moving from the concept, to the theme, to the character, to the detailed synopsis of about four to eight pages of master scenes.
Presentation treatments are used to show how the production notes have been incorporated into the screenplay for the director and production executives to look over, or to leave behind as a presentation note after a sales pitch.[2]
The presentation treatment is the appropriate treatment to submit if a script submission requires one. They are usually three to thirty pages in length, with an average of seven to twelve pages.
Usage[edit]
Treatments are widely used within the motion picture industry as selling documents to outline story and character aspects of a planned screenplay, whereas outlines are generally produced as part of the development process. Screenwriters may use a treatment to initially pitch a screenplay, but may also use a treatment to sell a concept they are pitching without a completed screenplay.
References[edit]


^ "Film Treatments". Lights Film School. Retrieved August 10, 2012.&#160;
^ "Writing Treatments That Sell". FilmMakers.com. Retrieved August 10, 2012.&#160;










v
t
e


Filmmaking






Development



Film treatment

scriptment


Step outline
Screenplay

process
Spec Script
Film Adaptation
Hook
Option


Film budgeting
Film finance

pitch


Green-light








Pre-production



Script breakdown

process


Shooting script
Storyboard
Casting

Rehearsal


Production board

production strip


Day Out of Days
Production schedule
Shooting schedule

one-liner










Production



Film crew
Cinematic techniques
Principal photography

Cinematography
Videography


Daily call sheet
Dailies (rushes)
Daily Reports

Film inventory report
Production report
Daily production report
Daily progress report
Sound report
Cost report
Daily editor log










Post-production



Film editing
Re-recording
Sync sound
Soundtrack
Music
Special effects

sound
visual


Negative cost








Distribution



Film distributor

list


Film release

wide
limited
delayed


Roadshow








Related



Box office
Guerrilla filmmaking
Development hell
Film
Filmography
Film industry
Film rights
Turnaround











This filmmaking article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.


v
t
e












					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Film_treatment&amp;oldid=684408515"					
				Categories: Cinematic techniquesFilm productionScreenwritingFilmmaking stubsHidden categories: All stub articles				
							
		
		
			