


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Filmmaking
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								  (Redirected from Production cycle)
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				"Filmmaker" redirects here. For the magazine, see Filmmaker (magazine).





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2015)




Part of a series on


Filmmaking







Development


Step outline
Film treatment


Scriptment
Screenplay


Film finance
Film budgeting


Green-light








Pre-production


Breaking down the script


Script breakdown
Storyboard


Production board


Production strip


Day Out of Days


Production schedule


One liner schedule


Shooting schedule








Production


Cinematography


Principal photography


Videography
Shooting script


Film inventory report


Daily call sheet


Production report


Daily production report


Daily progress report


Daily editor log
Sound report


Cost report








Post-production


Film editing


Re-recording


Sync sound
Soundtrack
Music

Special effects


(sound
visual)




Negative cost








Distribution


Distribution

Film release


(wide
limited
delayed)




Roadshow








Related topics


Filmography


Guerrilla filmmaking








See also


Film
Film crew
Hook
Pitch


Screenwriting
Spec script








 Film portal







v
t
e





Filmmaking (or in an academic context, film production) is the process of making a film. Filmmaking involves a number of discrete stages including an initial story, idea, or commission, through scriptwriting, casting, shooting, sound recording and reproduction, editing, and screening the finished product before an audience that may result in a film release and exhibition. Filmmaking takes place in many places around the world in a range of economic, social, and political contexts, and using a variety of technologies and cinematic techniques. Typically, it involves a large number of people, and can take from a few months to several years to complete.



Contents


1 Stages of production

1.1 Development
1.2 Pre-production
1.3 Production
1.4 Post-production
1.5 Distribution


2 Independent filmmaking
3 See also
4 References
5 External links



Stages of production[edit]
Film production consists of five major stages:[1]

Development — The first stage in which the ideas for the film are created, rights to books/plays are bought etc., and the screenplay is written. Financing for the project has to be sought and greenlit.
Pre-production—Preparations are made for the shoot, in which cast and film crew are hired, locations are selected, and sets are built.
Production—The raw elements for the film are recorded during the film shoot.
Post-production—The images, sound, and visual effects of the recorded film are edited.
Distribution—The finished film is distributed and screened in cinemas and/or released to home video.

Development[edit]
In this stage, the project producer selects a story, which may come from a book, play, another film, true story, video game, comic book, graphic novel, or an original idea, etc. After identifying a theme or underlying message, the producer works with writers to prepare a synopsis. Next they produce a step outline, which breaks the story down into one-paragraph scenes that concentrate on dramatic structure. Then, they prepare a treatment, a 25-to-30-page description of the story, its mood, and characters. This usually has little dialogue and stage direction, but often contains drawings that help visualize key points. Another way is to produce a scriptment once a synopsis is produced.
Next, a screenwriter writes a screenplay over a period of several months. The screenwriter may rewrite it several times to improve dramatization, clarity, structure, characters, dialogue, and overall style. However, producers often skip the previous steps and develop submitted screenplays which investors, studios, and other interested parties assess through a process called script coverage. A film distributor may be contacted at an early stage to assess the likely market and potential financial success of the film. Hollywood distributors adopt a hard-headed business approach and consider factors such as the film genre, the target audience, the historical success of similar films, the actors who might appear in the film, and potential directors. All these factors imply a certain appeal of the film to a possible audience. Not all films make a profit from the theatrical release alone, so film companies take DVD sales and worldwide distribution rights into account.
The producer and screenwriter prepare a film pitch, or treatment, and present it to potential financiers. They will also pitch the film to actors and directors (especially so-called bankable stars) in order to "attach" them to the project (that is, obtain a binding promise to work on the film if financing is ever secured). Many projects fail to move beyond this stage and enter so-called development hell. If a pitch succeeds, a film receives a "green light", meaning someone offers financial backing: typically a major film studio, film council, or independent investor. The parties involved negotiate a deal and sign contracts.
Once all parties have met and the deal has been set, the film may proceed into the pre-production period. By this stage, the film should have a clearly defined marketing strategy and target audience.
Development of animated films differs slightly in that it is the director who develops and pitches a story to an executive producer on the basis of rough storyboards, and it is rare for a full-length screenplay to already exist at that point in time. If the film is green-lighted for further development and pre-production, then a screenwriter is later brought in to prepare the screenplay.
Pre-production[edit]
Main article: Pre-production
In pre-production, every step of actually creating the film is carefully designed and planned. The production company is created and a production office established. The film is pre-visualized by the director, and may be storyboarded with the help of illustrators and concept artists. A production budget is drawn up to plan expenditures for the film. For major productions, insurance is procured to protect against accidents.
The producer hires a crew. The nature of the film, and the budget, determine the size and type of crew used during filmmaking. Many Hollywood blockbusters employ a cast and crew of hundreds, while a low-budget, independent film may be made by a skeleton crew of eight or nine (or fewer). These are typical crew positions:

Storyboard artist: creates visual images to help the director and production designer communicate their ideas to the production team.
Director: is primarily responsible for the storytelling, creative decisions and acting of the film.

Assistant director (AD): manages the shooting schedule and logistics of the production, among other tasks. There are several types of AD, each with different responsibilities.


Unit production manager: manages the production budget and production schedule. They also report, on behalf of the production office, to the studio executives or financiers of the film.

Location manager: finds and manages film locations. Nearly all pictures feature segments that are shot in the controllable environment of a studio sound stage, while outdoor sequences call for filming on location.


Production designer: creates the visual conception of the film, working with the art director.[2]

Art director: manages the art department, which makes production sets
Costume designer: creates the clothing for the characters in the film working closely with the actors, as well as other departments.
Make up and hair designer: works closely with the costume designer in addition to create a certain look for a character.


Casting director: finds actors to fill the parts in the script. This normally requires that actors audition.

Choreographer creates and coordinates the movement and dance - typically for musicals. Some films also credit a fight choreographer.


Director of photography (DP): is the cinematographer who supervises the photography of the entire film.
Production sound mixer: is the head of the sound department during the production stage of filmmaking. They record and mix the audio on set - dialogue, presence and sound effects in mono and ambience in stereo.[3][4] They work with the boom operator, Director, DA, DP, and First AD.
Sound designer: creates the aural conception of the film,[2] working with the supervising sound editor. On Bollywood-style Indian productions the sound designer plays the role of a director of audiography.[5]
Composer: creates new music for the film. (usually not until post-production)

Production[edit]




Steven Spielberg with Chandran Rutnam in Sri Lanka


See also: Cinematography, Audiography and Principal photography
In production, the video production/film is created and shot. More crew will be recruited at this stage, such as the property master, script supervisor, assistant directors, stills photographer, picture editor, and sound editors. These are just the most common roles in filmmaking; the production office will be free to create any unique blend of roles to suit the various responsibilities possible during the production of a film.
A typical day's shooting begins with the crew arriving on the set/location by their call time. Actors usually have their own separate call times. Since set construction, dressing and lighting can take many hours or even days, they are often set up in advance.
The grip, electric and production design crews are typically a step ahead of the camera and sound departments: for efficiency's sake, while a scene is being filmed, they are already preparing the next one.
While the crew prepare their equipment, the actors are wardrobed in their costumes and attend the hair and make-up departments. The actors rehearse the script and blocking with the director, and the camera and sound crews rehearse with them and make final tweaks. Finally, the action is shot in as many takes as the director wishes. Most American productions follow a specific procedure:
The assistant director (AD) calls "picture is up!" to inform everyone that a take is about to be recorded, and then "quiet, everyone!" Once everyone is ready to shoot, the AD calls "roll sound" (if the take involves sound), and the production sound mixer will start their equipment, record a verbal slate of the take's information, and announce "sound speed", or just "speed", when they are ready. The AD follows with "roll camera", answered by "speed!" by the camera operator once the camera is recording. The clapper, who is already in front of the camera with the clapperboard, calls "marker!" and slaps it shut. If the take involves extras or background action, the AD will cue them ("action background!"), and last is the director, telling the actors "action!". The AD may echo "action" louder on large sets.
A take is over when the director calls "cut!", and camera and sound stop recording. The script supervisor will note any continuity issues and the sound and camera teams log technical notes for the take on their respective report sheets. If the director decides additional takes are required, the whole process repeats. Once satisfied, the crew moves on to the next camera angle or "setup," until the whole scene is "covered." When shooting is finished for the scene, the assistant director declares a "wrap" or "moving on," and the crew will "strike," or dismantle, the set for that scene.
At the end of the day, the director approves the next day's shooting schedule and a daily progress report is sent to the production office. This includes the report sheets from continuity, sound, and camera teams. Call sheets are distributed to the cast and crew to tell them when and where to turn up the next shooting day. Later on, the director, producer, other department heads, and, sometimes, the cast, may gather to watch that day or yesterday's footage, called dailies, and review their work.
With workdays often lasting 14 or 18 hours in remote locations, film production tends to create a team spirit. When the entire film is in the can, or in the completion of the production phase, it is customary for the production office to arrange a wrap party, to thank all the cast and crew for their efforts.
For the production phase on live-action films, synchronizing work schedules of key cast and crew members is very important, since for many scenes, several cast members and most of the crew must be physically present at the same place at the same time (and bankable stars may need to rush from one project to another). Animated films have different workflow at the production phase, in that voice talent can record their takes in the recording studio at different times and may not see one another until the film's premiere, while most physical live-action tasks are either unnecessary or are simulated by various types of animators.
Post-production[edit]
Main article: Post-production
Here the video/film is assembled by the video/film editor. The shot film material is edited. The production sound (dialogue) is also edited; music tracks and songs are composed and recorded if a film is sought to have a score; sound effects are designed and recorded. Any computer-graphic visual effects are digitally added. Finally, all sound elements are mixed into "stems", which are then married to picture, and the film is fully completed ("locked").
Distribution[edit]
Main articles: Film distribution and Film promotion
This is the final stage, where the film is released to cinemas or, occasionally, directly to consumer media (DVD, VCD, VHS, Blu-ray) or direct download from a digital media provider. The film is duplicated as required (either onto film or hard disk drives) and distributed to cinemas for exhibition (screening). Press kits, posters, and other advertising materials are published, and the film is advertised and promoted. A B-roll clip may be released to the press based on raw footage shot for a "making of" documentary, which may include making-of clips as well as on-set interviews.
Film distributors usually release a film with a launch party, a red-carpet premiere, press releases, interviews with the press, press preview screenings, and film festival screenings. Most films are also promoted with their own special website separate from those of the production company or distributor. For major films, key personnel are often contractually required to participate in promotional tours in which they appear at premieres and festivals, and sit for interviews with many TV, print, and online journalists. The largest productions may require more than one promotional tour, in order to rejuvenate audience demand at each release window.
Since the advent of home video in the early 1980s, most major films have followed a pattern of having several distinct release windows. A film may first be released to a few select cinemas, or if it tests well enough, may go directly into wide release. Next, it is released, normally at different times several weeks (or months) apart, into different market segments like rental, retail, pay-per-view, in-flight entertainment, cable, satellite, and/or free-to-air broadcast television. The distribution rights for the film are also usually sold for worldwide distribution. The distributor and the production company share profits.
Independent filmmaking[edit]
Main article: Independent film




Sound recordist Curtis Choy (left) on location for "Dim Sum: a Little Bit of Heart," an indie film by Wayne Wang on Clement Street, San Francisco, California 1983


Filmmaking also takes place outside of the mainstream and is commonly called independent filmmaking. Since the introduction of DV technology, the means of production have become more democratized. Filmmakers can conceivably shoot and edit a film, create and edit the sound and music, and mix the final cut on a home computer. However, while the means of production may be democratized, financing, traditional distribution, and marketing remain difficult to accomplish outside the traditional system. In the past, most independent filmmakers have relied on film festivals (such as Sundance, Venice, Cannes and Toronto film festivals) to get their films noticed and sold for distribution and production. However, the Internet has allowed for relatively inexpensive distribution of independent films on websites such as YouTube. As a result, several companies have emerged to assist filmmakers in getting independent movies seen and sold via mainstream internet marketplaces, often adjacent to popular Hollywood titles. With internet movie distribution, independent filmmakers who fail to garner a traditional distribution deal now have the ability to reach global audiences.
See also[edit]




Film portal





35 mm film
Audiography
Cinematic techniques
Cinematography
Director of audiography (Bollywood-style filmmaking in India)
Film crew
Film director
Film editing
Film title design
Film industry
Film producer
Film school
Film studies
First look deal
List of film-related topics
Movie production incentives in the United States
Outline of film
Post-production
Pre-production
Screenplay
Screenwriter
Television


References[edit]


^ Steiff, Josef (2005). The Complete Idiot's Guide to Independent Filmmaking. Alpha Books. pp.&#160;26–28.&#160;
^ a b Sound-On-Film by Vincent LoBrutto (1994)
^ Sound for Digital Video by Tomlinson Holman (Focal Press) 2005 (p. 162)
^ Dialogue Editing for Motion Pictures by John Purcell (Focal Press) 2007 (p. 148)
^ Film Sound: Theory and Practice, Edited by Elisabeth Weis and John Belton, Columbia University Press (1985) - Page 361


External links[edit]


Library resources about
Filmmaking





Resources in your library







Wikimedia Commons has media related to Filmmaking.



Filmmaking at DMOZ
Internet Filmmaker's FAQ - frequently asked questions on filmmaking.


Wikibooks




Wikibooks has more on the topic of: Filmmaking



Movie Making Manual


Wikiversity




Wikiversity has learning materials about Filmmaking



Wikiversity Courses in Filmmaking









v
t
e


Filmmaking






Development



Film treatment

scriptment


Step outline
Screenplay

process
Spec Script
Film Adaptation
Hook
Option


Film budgeting
Film finance

pitch


Green-light








Pre-production



Script breakdown

process


Shooting script
Storyboard
Casting

Rehearsal


Production board

production strip


Day Out of Days
Production schedule
Shooting schedule

one-liner










Production



Film crew
Cinematic techniques
Principal photography

Cinematography
Videography


Daily call sheet
Dailies (rushes)
Daily Reports

Film inventory report
Production report
Daily production report
Daily progress report
Sound report
Cost report
Daily editor log










Post-production



Film editing
Re-recording
Sync sound
Soundtrack
Music
Special effects

sound
visual


Negative cost








Distribution



Film distributor

list


Film release

wide
limited
delayed


Roadshow








Related



Box office
Guerrilla filmmaking
Development hell
Film
Filmography
Film industry
Film rights
Turnaround
















v
t
e


Cinematic techniques






Lighting



Background
Cameo
Fill
Flood
High-key
Key
Lens flare
Low-key
Mood
Rembrandt
Stage
Soft








Sound



Diegetic
Non-diegetic

Narration
Film score
Sound effects










Shooting




Field size



Long (Extreme long * Full)
American
Medium
Close-up
Italian
Two shot








Camera placement







Perspective
Over-the-shoulder
Point-of-view (POV)
Reverse
Trunk
Single&#160;/ multiple-camera setup








Camera angle



Tilt
Aerial
High-angle
Bird's-eye
Crane shot
Jib&#160;/ boom shot
Low-angle
Worm's-eye view
Dutch angle











Camera movement



Tilting
Panning

Whip pan


Hand-held
Shaky
Tracking
Dolly
Steadicam
Walk and talk
Follow
Dolly zoom








Lens effects



Focus

Racking
Depth of field
Shallow
Deep


Zooming








Other techniques



Establishing shot
Master shot
B-roll
Freeze-frame shot
Long take
Insert


















v
t
e


Special effects






Practical



Physical effects
Prosthetic makeup
Animatronics
Puppetry
Suitmation
Miniature effect&#160;(hanging)
Pyrotechnics
Aerial rigging&#160;(Wire-flying)
Squib
Matte painting
Sugar glass
Theatrical blood








In-camera



Tilted plane focus
Forced perspective
Schüfftan process
Dolly zoom
Lens flares
Lighting effects
Filtration
Shutter effects
Time-lapse

Slow motion
Fast motion
Speed ramping


Bipacks
Slit-scan
Reverse motion
Front projection
Rear projection
Multiple exposure
Infrared photography
Bullet time








Visual



Computer-generated imagery
Split screen
Stop motion
Go motion
Chroma key
Compositing&#160;(digital)
Optical printing
Introvision
Smallgantics
Match moving



















v
t
e


Film crew










&#160;
Above the line









Leading actor
Movie star
Superstar
Cameo actors
Screenwriter
Film producer
Executive producer
Line producer
Film director
Unit production manager
Cinematographer&#160;/ Director of photography















&#160;
Below the line










Pre-production



Production coordinator
Production accountant
Assistant director
Script supervisor
Script coordinator
Casting director
Production assistant
Location manager








Production design



Production designer
Art director
Scenic design
Illustrator
Set decorator
Costume designer
Hairdresser
Make-up artist
Property master / mistress ("props")
Matte painter








Photography



Camera operator
Focus puller
Clapper loader
Gaffer
Best boy (electrical)
Lighting technician
Grip
Key grip
Best boy (grip)
Dolly grip








Sound



Sound designer&#160;/ Sound editor&#160;/ Director of audiography
Production sound mixer
Boom operator
Utility sound technician
Dialogue editor
Re-recording mixer
Foley artist
Composer
Music supervisor
Music editor








Post-production



Film editor
Colorist
Visual effects editor
Compositor
Animator
Technical director








Special effects



Special effects supervisor
Visual effects supervisor
Stunt double
Stunt performer








Talent



Movement director
Choreographer
Extra
Talent agent
Actor&#160;(voice)
Cast member
Stand-in
Acting instructor






















v
t
e


World cinema






Africa





North Africa




Algeria
Egypt
Morocco
Tunisia









East Africa




Djibouti
Kenya
Somalia
Uganda









West Africa




Burkina Faso
Cape Verde
Niger
Nigeria
Senegal









Central Africa




D.R. Congo









Southern Africa




Madagascar
South Africa











Asia





Eastern




China

Hong Kong


Japan
Mongolia
Korea

North Korea
South Korea


Taiwan









Southern




Afghanistan
Bangladesh
Bhutan
India
Nepal
Pakistan
Sri Lanka (Jaffna)









Southeastern




Burma
Cambodia
Indonesia
Malaysia
Philippines
Singapore
Thailand
Vietnam









Western




Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Georgia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Jordan
Kuwait
Lebanon
Oman
Palestine
Saudi Arabia
Syria
Turkey
U.A.E.
Yemen









Central




Kazakhstan
Kyrgyzstan
Tajikistan
Turkmenistan
Uzbekistan











Europe





Eastern




Belarus
Czech Republic
Hungary
Moldova
Poland
Romania
Russia

Russian Empire
Soviet Union


Slovakia
Slovenia
Ukraine









Northern




Denmark
Estonia
Faroe Islands
Finland
Iceland
Ireland
Latvia
Lithuania
Norway
Sweden
United Kingdom

Northern Ireland
Scotland
Wales











Southern




Albania
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Greece
Italy
Kosovo
Macedonia
Malta
Montenegro
Portugal
Serbia

Yugoslavia


Spain

Galicia











Western




Austria
Belgium
France
Germany
Luxembourg
Netherlands
Switzerland











North America



Canada (Quebec)
Cuba
Haiti
Jamaica
Mexico
United States

Puerto Rico










Oceania



Australia
Fiji
New Zealand
Samoa








South America



Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Ecuador
Paraguay
Peru (Iquitos)
Uruguay
Venezuela











Intercontinental: Arab World
Latin America
















v
t
e


Visual arts









Architecture
Ceramics
Craft
Drawing
Painting
Photography
Public art
Sculpture











Computer art
Filmmaking
Printmaking











List of artistic media













Authority control



GND: 4124971-9















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Filmmaking&amp;oldid=690781015"					
				Categories: FilmmakingFilmFilm productionCinematic techniquesHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from June 2015All articles needing additional referencesArticles with DMOZ linksWikipedia articles with GND identifiers				
							
		
		
			