


		
		
		
			

							
						


			Help:Contents
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				



This page provides assistance with the most common questions about Wikipedia.






To start, click on what you need assistance with below, or search all the help pages using the search box to the right. Or browse the Help&#160;menu or the Help directory.









Help
Wikipedia












Read or find an article
The Readers' FAQ and our about page contain the most commonly sought information about Wikipedia.
There is a search box in the upper-right corner of every page with the word "Search" in it. Just type what you are looking for in there and then press ↵ Enter. See Help:Searching for more details.
There are other ways to browse and explore Wikipedia articles; many can be found at Portal:Contents. Also see our disclaimer for cautions about Wikipedia's limitations.





Edit an article
Contributing is easy: see how to edit a page or contributing to Wikipedia. For a quick summary on participating, see the plain and simple guide. You can practice editing and experiment in a sandbox. Or play the Wikipedia Adventure to learn to edit in an hour. The Cheatsheet can remind you of basic wiki markup.
Be&#160;bold in improving articles! When adding facts, please provide references so others may verify them. If you are affiliated with the article subject, please see our conflict of interest guideline.
If you're looking for places you can help out, the community portal is the place to go.







Report a problem with an article
If there is a problem with an article about yourself, a family member, a friend or a colleague, please read Wikipedia:Biographies of living persons/Help and, if necessary, add a discussion to the biographies of living persons noticeboard.
If you spot a problem with an article, you can fix it directly, by clicking on the "Edit" link at the beginning of that page. See the "I want to edit an article" section of this page for more information.
If you don't feel ready to fix the article yourself, please post a message on the article's talk page. This will bring the matter to the attention of others who work on that article. There is a "Talk" link at the beginning of every article page.
Alternatively you can contact us. If it's an article about you or your organization, see Contact us - Subjects.





Create a new article or upload media
Check Your first article to see if your topic is appropriate, then the Article wizard will walk you through creating the article.
Once you have created an article, see Writing better articles for guidance on how to improve it and what to include (like reference citations).
For contributing images, audio or video files, see the Introduction to uploading images. Then the Upload wizard will guide you through that process.







Factual questions
If searching Wikipedia has not answered your question (for example, questions like "Which country has the world's largest fishing fleet?"), try the Reference Desk. Volunteers there will attempt to answer your questions on any topic, or point you towards the information you need.





Stuck?

For your convenience, answers have been recorded for the most frequently asked questions.
You can find also where to ask questions or make comments.
You can ask questions about using Wikipedia at the Help desk or at the Teahouse. Volunteers will respond as soon as possible.
Or ask for help on your talk page and a volunteer will visit you there!
You can get live help with editing in the help chatroom.
For help with technical issues, ask at Village&#160;pump&#160;(technical)







Looking for help with something specific
Besides the Help Menu to the right, Wikipedia has many reference aids to help you find the wiki topic you are looking for:

Use the Search Help box at the top right of this page.
Help directory: for a descriptive listing of informative, instructional and consultation pages.
Quick directory: for a table of the key locations of interest around Wikipedia.
Department directory: for the pages to go to for specific needs or activities.

Request directory: for a list of the services and assistance that can be requested on Wikipedia.


Manual of Style (contents): for all the standards for the writing and design of Wikipedia articles.
Glossary: for a list of Wikipedia jargon, with definitions.

Abbreviations: for various pages, processes, policies, and proposals.


Shortcut directory: for abbreviated redirects and the pages they lead to.
Editor's index: for everything an editor needs to know to work on Wikipedia.






Help Menu

Help Menu: Search help topics
Navigating Wikipedia: for searching and browsing the encyclopedia.
Joining Wikipedia: how to get involved.
Editing Wikipedia: has general help for editors.
Links and references: has help for creating links, or dealing with references
Images and media: how to use images, videos and sound files
Keeping track of changes: how to track the evolution of a page, or follow a user.
Policies and guidelines: for community standards.
Asking questions: volunteers will attempt to answer.
The Wikipedia community: how to submit or debate a proposal.
Resources and lists: has resources for editors.
Account settings: has tips and tools for registered users.
Technical information: has tools for advanced users, and troubleshooting.
Site map: is the above twelve pages on a single page.








Tip of the day
Making the editbox more visually pleasing
Do you know the GFDL License inside-out, and have thousands of edits to your credit? Are all those copyright disclaimer warnings starting to bug you? Add this to your vector.css (or whatever skin you are using):



/* Remove to-me-useless notes in all edit boxes. leaves only the command buttons and special chars. */
#editpage-copywarn { display: none; }
#editpage-copywarn1 { display: none; }
#editpage-copywarn2 { display: none; }
#editpage-copywarn3 { display: none; }





Read more: m:Help:User style&#160;&#160;


Prior tip - Next tip
To add this auto-updating daily tip to your user page, use {{totd}}
Become a Wikipedia tipster - Tips library, by subject






Additional searches



Search Frequently Asked Questions





 








Search the help desk archives





 











The blue bar that follows is a navigation box linking many help pages. Click "show" on the right to expand it.








v
t
e


Wikipedia help pages










Noticeboards&#160;(?)
FAQs&#160;(?)
Reference desks&#160;(?)
The Missing Manual&#160;(?)
Help hub&#160;(?)









About Wikipedia



Principles&#160;(Wikipedia in brief)
Policies and guidelines
What Wikipedia is not
Disclaimer&#160;(parental advice)
Making requests

where to ask questions
contact Wikipedia directly


Who writes Wikipedia?
Why create an account?








Help for readers



FAQ
Books
Copyright
Glossary
Mobile access
Navigation
Other languages
Searching
Students
Viewing media








Contributing
to Wikipedia



A plain and simple overview
A primer for newcomers
Asking for help
Advice for young editors
Avoiding common mistakes
Etiquette&#160;(community expectations)
Learning the ropes
Instructional material
Simplified Manual of Style
Simplified rule-set

"Ignore all rules"
"The rules are principles"


Style-tips
Tip of the day
Job Center
Your first article&#160;(article wizard)
Vandalism








Introductions
and tutorials



Wikipedia intro
Wikipedia tutorial
The Wikipedia Adventure
Newcomers' training
Manual of Style intro
Graphics tutorials
Picture tutorial (Uploading intro)
IRC (live chat) tutorial
Navigating intro
Policies intro
Referencing intro
Tables intro
Talk pages intro
VisualEditor user guide








How-to pages and
information pages



Appealing blocks
Article deletion
Categories
Citations&#160;/ references

Referencing for beginners
Citation Style 1
Cite errors
References and page numbers


Diff
Editing

toolbar
edit conflict


Email confirmation
Find sources
Files
Footnotes
Image deletion
Infoboxes
Linking&#160;(link color)
Logging in
Merging
Namespaces
Page name
Redirect
Renaming pages
Passwords
Reverting
Talk pages&#160;(archiving)
URL
User contributions
User page design center








Coding wiki markup



Wiki markup&#160;(cheatsheet)
Barcharts
Calculations
Characters
Citation templates
Columns
HTML
Lists
Magic words&#160;(introduction)
Music symbols
Sections
Sounds
Tables&#160;(introduction)
Templates

documentation
messages


Transclusion
Visual files
Wiki tools








Directories



Abbreviations
Departments
Editor's index
Essays
FAQs
Glossary
Guidelines
Help menu
Manual of Style
Policies
Shortcuts
Tips









Visit the Teahouse if you are a new editor looking for interactive help, or the Help desk for an interactive Q &amp; A forum
&#160;Ask for help on your talk page






The navigation box below provides many useful policy and guideline links.








v
t
e


Wikipedia key policies and guidelines






Overview



Five pillars
Policies and guidelines
List of policies and guidelines

List of policies
List of guidelines










Project-wide principles



Consensus
Dispute resolution
Editing policy
Ignore all rules
What Wikipedia is not
Wikipedia is not a dictionary








Core content policies



Neutral point of view
No original research
Verifiability








Other content policies



Article titles
Autobiography
Biographies of living persons
Image use








Content guidelines



Citing sources
Do not create hoaxes
Do not include copies of primary sources
External links
Fringe theories
Identifying reliable sources
Notability
Patent nonsense








Behavioural policies



Child protection
Civility
Courtesy vanishing
Edit warring
Harassment
No legal threats
No personal attacks
Ownership of content
Sock puppetry








Behavioural guidelines



Assume good faith
Conflict of interest
Disruptive editing
Do not disrupt Wikipedia to illustrate a point
Etiquette
Gaming the system
Please do not bite the newcomers








Editing guidelines



Article size
Be bold
Disambiguation
Hatnotes
Set index articles
Signatures
Subpages
Talk page guidelines
User pages
Vandalism
WikiProjects








Style conventions



Manual of Style

Contents


Accessibility

Understandability


Dates and numbers
Images
Layout
Lead section
Linking
Lists








Classification guidelines



Categories, lists, and navigation templates
Categorization
Template namespace








Deletion policies



Attack page
Criteria for speedy deletion
Deletion policy
Oversight
Proposed deletion
Proposed deletion (BLP)
Proposed deletion (books)
Revision deletion








Wikimedia Foundation



List of policies
Licensing and copyright
Privacy policy
Values











 Book
 Category: Policies / Guidelines








Shortcuts to this page: WP:HELP • WP:H • H:H







					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Help:Contents&amp;oldid=691838263"					
				Categories: HelpWikipedia help contentsHidden categories: Semi-protected project pagesWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages				
							
		
		
			