


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Hook (filmmaking)
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				For other uses of "Hook", see Hook (disambiguation).





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2014)


The hook is the nucleus of both a film and its screenplay.[citation needed] It is what grabs the viewer's attention, preferably in the first 5–10 minutes, as a reader might expect to find a literary hook in the first chapter of a novel.
During the pitch process, a screenwriter will use a hook to prove the "bankable" quality of their screenplay.[1]
Knowing the importance of a good hook, many screenwriters write their hooks first. Conceivably, the life of a screenplay might evolve from hook to 1-page synopsis, to 4-page treatment, to full treatment, to scriptment, to screenplay.
One can briefly state a good hook in one or two sentences, introducing the protagonist, the conflict that drives the story, and what the protagonist will achieve with either triumph or defeat. The "hook" is the viewer's own question of whether the conflict can be resolved, so a screenwriter might want to test the hook by turning it into a question. For example, "Johnny must catch the murderer so that he can get the girl" might become "Will Johnny catch the murderer? Or will he lose the girl?"[2] In this way, the screenwriter can use the hook as a tool when writing the screenplay.
Notes[edit]


^ "The Hook". Crafty Screenwriting. Retrieved 2014-05-21.&#160;
^ "How to Write Your Screenplay's Hook". Scriptfly.com. Retrieved 2014-05-21.&#160;










v
t
e


Filmmaking






Development



Film treatment

scriptment


Step outline
Screenplay

process
Spec Script
Film Adaptation
Hook
Option


Film budgeting
Film finance

pitch


Green-light








Pre-production



Script breakdown

process


Shooting script
Storyboard
Casting

Rehearsal


Production board

production strip


Day Out of Days
Production schedule
Shooting schedule

one-liner










Production



Film crew
Cinematic techniques
Principal photography

Cinematography
Videography


Daily call sheet
Dailies (rushes)
Daily Reports

Film inventory report
Production report
Daily production report
Daily progress report
Sound report
Cost report
Daily editor log










Post-production



Film editing
Re-recording
Sync sound
Soundtrack
Music
Special effects

sound
visual


Negative cost








Distribution



Film distributor

list


Film release

wide
limited
delayed


Roadshow








Related



Box office
Guerrilla filmmaking
Development hell
Film
Filmography
Film industry
Film rights
Turnaround












This article related to film or motion picture terminology is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.


v
t
e












					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hook_(filmmaking)&amp;oldid=684408577"					
				Categories: Cinematic techniquesFilm productionNarratologyFilm terminology stubsHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from March 2014All articles needing additional referencesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from March 2014All stub articles				
							
		
		
			