


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Latin American cinema
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				Latin American cinema refers collectively to the film output and film industries of Latin America. Latin American film is both rich and diverse, but the main centers of production have been Argentina, Brazil and Mexico. Latin American cinema flourished after the introduction of sound, which added a linguistic barrier to the export of Hollywood film south of the border.



Contents


1 History
2 See also
3 References

3.1 Bibliography
3.2 Further reading


4 External links



History[edit]
An early success for the Latin American cinema, La Nobleza Gaucha, was an Argentinean film directed by Eduardo Martinez de la Pera in 1915.
Mexican movies from the Golden Era in the 1940s and 1950s are significant examples of Latin American cinema. Mexican movies were exported and exhibited in all Latin America and Europe. The film Maria Candelaria (1944) by Emilio Fernández, won the Palme D'Or in Cannes Film Festival. Famous actors and actresses from this period include María Félix, Pedro Infante, Dolores del Río, Jorge Negrete and comedian Cantinflas. Argentine cinema was a big industry in the first half of the twentieth century.
The 1950s and 1960s saw a movement towards Third Cinema, led by the Argentine filmmakers Fernando Solanas and Octavio Getino.
In Brazil, the Cinema Novo movement created a particular way of making movies with critical and intellectual screenplays, a clearer photography related to the light of the outdoors in a tropical landscape, and a political message. The film The Given Word / Keeper of Promises (1962) by Anselmo Duarte, won the Palme d'Or at the 1962 Cannes Film Festival,[1] becoming the first (and to date the only) Brazilian film to achieve that feat. A year later, it also became the first Brazilian and South American film nominated for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film. Director Glauber Rocha was the key figure of the Brazilian Cinema Novo movement, famous for his trilogy of political films: Deus e o Diabo na Terra do Sol, Terra em Transe (1967) and O Dragão da Maldade Contra o Santo Guerreiro (1969), for which he won the Best Director award at the Cannes Film Festival.
In Colombia, Carlos Mayolo, Luís Ospina and Andrés Caicedo led an alternative movement that was to have lasting influence, founding the Grupo de Cali, which they called Caliwood and producing many films as leading exponents of the "New Latin American Cinema" of the 1960s and 70s, including Oiga, Vea, Cali de película, Agarrando pueblo, Pura sangre and Carne de tu carne.[2]
Cuban cinema has enjoyed much official support since the Cuban revolution, and important film-makers include Tomás Gutiérrez Alea.
In Argentina, after a series of military governments that shackled culture in general, the industry re-emerged after the 1976–1983 military dictatorship to produce The Official Story in 1985, becoming the first of only two Latin American movies to win the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film. Other nominees for Argentina were The Truce (1974), Camila (1984), Tango (1998), Son of the Bride (2001) and The Secret In Their Eyes (2009, which also won the award).
More recently, a new style of directing and stories filmed has been tagged as "New Latin American Cinema," although this label was also used in the 1960s and 70s.
In Mexico movies such as Como agua para chocolate (1992), Cronos (1993), Amores perros (2000), Y tu mamá también (2001), Pan's Labyrinth (2006) and Babel (2006) have been successful in creating universal stories about contemporary subjects, and were internationally recognised, as in the prestigious Cannes Film Festival. Mexican directors Alejandro González Iñárritu, Alfonso Cuarón (Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban), Guillermo del Toro and screenwriter Guillermo Arriaga have gone on to Hollywood success.
The Argentine economic crisis affected the production of films in the late 1990s and early 2000s, but many Argentine movies produced during those years were internationally acclaimed, including El abrazo partido (2004), Roma (2004) and Nueve reinas (2000), which was the basis for the 2004 American remake Criminal.
The modern Brazilian film industry has become more profitable inside the country, and some of its productions have received prizes and recognition in Europe and the United States. The comedy film O Auto da Compadecida (2000) is considered a classic of Brazilian cinema and was a box-office hit in the country. Movies like Central Station (1998), City of God (2002) and Elite Squad (2007) have fans around the world, and its directors Walter Salles, Fernando Meirelles and José Padilha, have taken part in American and European film projects. Central Station was nominated for 2 Academy Awards in 1999: Best Foreign Language Film and Best Actress for Fernanda Montenegro, who became the first (and to date the only) Brazilian, the first (and to date the only) Portuguese-speaking and the first Latin-American to be nominated for Best Actress. In 2003, City of God was nominated for 4 Academy Awards: Best Director, Best Adapted Screenplay, Best Cinematography and Best Film Editing, it was also nominated for a Golden Globe Award for Best Foreign Language Film. Elite Squad won the Golden Bear at the 2008 Berlin Film Festival.
There is a movement in the US geared towards promoting and exposing audiences to Latin American filmmakers. The New England Festival of Ibero American Cinema - which takes place in Providence, Rhode Island, is a good example.
See also[edit]

Cinema of Argentina
Cinema of Bolivia
Cinema of Brazil
Cinema of Chile
Cinema of Colombia
Cinema of Cuba
Cinema of Haiti
Cinema of Mexico
Cinema of Paraguay
Cinema of Peru
Cinema of Puerto Rico
Cinema of Uruguay
List of Latin American films
List of Bolivian films
List of Dominican films
List of Uruguayan films
Latin American culture
World cinema

References[edit]


^ "Festival de Cannes: O Pagador de Promessas". festival-cannes.com. Retrieved 2009-02-23.&#160;
^ http://dintev.univalle.edu.co/cvisaacs/index.php?option=com_content&amp;task=view&amp;id=638&amp;Itemid=5&amp;limit=1&amp;limitstart=1 Carlos Mayolo y el innolvidable Caliwood (in Spanish)


Bibliography[edit]

Julianne Burton (ed.): Cinema and Social Change in Latin America. Conversations with Filmmakers, Austin: University of Texas Press, 1986
Julianne Burton (ed.): The Social Documentary in Latin America, Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1990
Alberto Elena, Marina Diaz Lopez (ed.): The Cinema of Latin America (24 Frames), Columbia Univ Press, 2003, ISBN 1-903364-83-3
John King: Magical Reels: A History of Cinema in Latin America, New edition, Verso, 2000, ISBN 1-85984-233-X
Deborah Shaw (ed.): Contemporary Latin American Cinema: Breaking Into the Global Market, Rowman &amp; Littlefield, 2007, ISBN 0-7425-3915-6
Donald F. Stevens (ed.): Based on a True Story: Latin American History at the Movies, Scholarly Resources, 1997, ISBN 0-8420-2781-5

Further reading[edit]

Isabel Maurer Queipo (ed.): "Directory of World Cinema: Latin America", intellectbooks, Bristol 2013, ISBN 9781841506180

External links[edit]

New England Festival of Ibero American Cinema
Top 100 Ibero-American movies of all time
Latin American Cinema, Centro Virtual Cervantes
Latineos - Latin America, Caribbean, arts and culture
[1]
Brazilian Director Walter Salles talks about his career
Guide to Spanish Language Movies










v
t
e


Latin American cinema






Middle America



Belize
Costa Rica
El Salvador
Guatemala
Honduras
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama











Caribbean



Antigua and Barbuda
Aruba1
Bahamas
Barbados
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Grenada
Haiti
Jamaica
Puerto Rico1
St. Kitts and Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
Trinidad and Tobago








South America



Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Ecuador
Guyana
Paraguay
Peru
Suriname
Uruguay
Venezuela









Dependencies not included.&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;1&#160;Defined as a semi-autonomous territory.














v
t
e


World cinema






Africa





North Africa




Algeria
Egypt
Morocco
Tunisia









East Africa




Djibouti
Kenya
Somalia
Uganda









West Africa




Burkina Faso
Cape Verde
Niger
Nigeria
Senegal









Central Africa




D.R. Congo









Southern Africa




Madagascar
South Africa











Asia





Eastern




China

Hong Kong


Japan
Mongolia
Korea

North Korea
South Korea


Taiwan









Southern




Afghanistan
Bangladesh
Bhutan
India
Nepal
Pakistan
Sri Lanka (Jaffna)









Southeastern




Burma
Cambodia
Indonesia
Malaysia
Philippines
Singapore
Thailand
Vietnam









Western




Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Georgia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Jordan
Kuwait
Lebanon
Oman
Palestine
Saudi Arabia
Syria
Turkey
U.A.E.
Yemen









Central




Kazakhstan
Kyrgyzstan
Tajikistan
Turkmenistan
Uzbekistan











Europe





Eastern




Belarus
Czech Republic
Hungary
Moldova
Poland
Romania
Russia

Russian Empire
Soviet Union


Slovakia
Slovenia
Ukraine









Northern




Denmark
Estonia
Faroe Islands
Finland
Iceland
Ireland
Latvia
Lithuania
Norway
Sweden
United Kingdom

Northern Ireland
Scotland
Wales











Southern




Albania
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Greece
Italy
Kosovo
Macedonia
Malta
Montenegro
Portugal
Serbia

Yugoslavia


Spain

Galicia











Western




Austria
Belgium
France
Germany
Luxembourg
Netherlands
Switzerland











North America



Canada (Quebec)
Cuba
Haiti
Jamaica
Mexico
United States

Puerto Rico










Oceania



Australia
Fiji
New Zealand
Samoa








South America



Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Ecuador
Paraguay
Peru (Iquitos)
Uruguay
Venezuela











Intercontinental: Arab World
Latin America















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Latin_American_cinema&amp;oldid=688121232"					
				Categories: Latin American cinemaCinema by regionNorth American cinemaSouth American cinemaLatin America				
							
		
		
			