


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Post-credits scene
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				







This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page.








This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2007)







This article possibly contains original research. Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations. Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. (May 2008)








A post-credits scene (also called a tag, stinger, credit cookie,[1] or coda[2]) is a short clip that appears after all or some of the closing credits of a movie or video game have run. It is usually included for humor or to set up a possible sequel.



Contents


1 History
2 Modern film examples
3 Post-credit scenes in video games

3.1 List of post-credits scenes in video games

3.1.1 1980s
3.1.2 1990s
3.1.3 2000s
3.1.4 2010s




4 Post-credits scene films
5 References
6 External links



History[edit]
One of the earliest appearances of a post-credits scene in a mainstream film was in The Muppet Movie in 1979, and use of such scenes gained popularity throughout the 1980s at the end of comedy films. In 1980, Airplane! ended with a callback to an abandoned taxicab passenger who was not a primary character, and who had not been shown since the film's first scene. The Muppet Movie also began a trend of using such scenes to break the fourth wall, even when much of the rest of the film had kept it intact. The scenes were often used as a form of metafiction, with characters showing an awareness that they were at the end of a film, and sometimes telling the audience directly to leave the theatre. Films using this technique include Ferris Bueller's Day Off (in which the title character frequently broke the fourth wall during the movie) and the musical remake of The Producers. The post-credits scene in latter movie also includes the film's only cameo appearance of producer Mel Brooks.
Post-credits scenes also appeared on the long-running TV show Mystery Science Theater 3000, introduced in episode 205 ("Rocket Attack USA"), continuing until the end of the series. With few exceptions, they highlighted moments from the films that were either particularly nonsensical or had simply caught the Brains' attention.
The Great Train Robbery, a 1903 silent film, ends with the leader of the outlaw band taking aim and firing point blank at the audience (after having been killed in the previous scene).
Modern film examples[edit]
Stingers lacking the metafictional aspects also gained prominence in the 1980s, although they were still primarily used for comedy films. Post-credits scenes became useful places for humorous scenes that would not fit in the main body of the film. Most were short clips that served to tie together loose ends&#160;— minor characters whose fates were not elaborated on earlier in the movie, or plotlines that were not fully wrapped up. For example, all four Pirates of the Caribbean films include such scenes. At the end of the Disney animated made-for-video film Aladdin: The Return of Jafar, we see Abis Mal asking for his third wish while in its sequel, towards the end of the song "Welcome to the Forty Thieves", which plays over the credits, Genie can be seen squished between the black background and the credits with a bit of dialogue at the very end. During its wide release, Napoleon Dynamite features a stinger that reveals that Kip and LaFawnduh get married. In the film The Cannonball Run, bloopers from the film are shown.
Even when post-credit scenes started to be used by films with little comedy development, the same format of giving closure to incomplete storylines or inconsequential characters remained in use. Using humor in such scenes is also still common for more serious films, as in the film Daredevil, in which Bullseye is shown after his defeat by Daredevil in a full body cast. Other films eschew the comedy in favor of a twist or revelation that would be out of place elsewhere in the movie, as in X-Men: The Last Stand's post-credits scene, where Professor X is shown to be alive. Another example is the stinger at the end of Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets which features a post-memory loss Lockhart. A third example occurs in Young Sherlock Holmes: during the entire credits, Rathe is shown traveling to an Alpine inn, where he signs the register as "Moriarty".
With the rise of pre-planned movie franchises, post-credit scenes have been adopted in order to prepare the audience for upcoming sequels, sometimes going so far as to include a cliffhanger ending where the main film is largely stand-alone. The cinematic release of The Matrix Reloaded demonstrated the sequel set-up use of stingers by featuring the trailer for The Matrix Revolutions.
Star Wars Episode I: The Phantom Menace includes a stinger-like effect to tie this prequel to the later events of the original Star Wars film and its first sequel. Phantom Menace's end-credit music stylistically morphs into "The Imperial March" (the motif of Darth Vader), and the film concludes with Vader's trademark muffled breathing, both audio elements being quite familiar to fans of the earlier films.
Some films, including Richard Linklater's School of Rock, take the idea of the post-credits scene to its limit by running the credits during the main action of the film. In this example, the characters perform a song in the last minutes of the film, and the credits run inconspicuously until one character sings the line "the movie is over / but we're still on screen".
During the credits of The Chronicles of Narnia: The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe, there is a scene between Professor Kirke and Lucy Pevensie, in which Kirke tells Lucy that she will return to Narnia, only not through the wardrobe.
The Marvel Cinematic Universe has made extensive use of mid- or post-credit scenes (sometimes both) which mainly, but not always, serve purpose as a teaser for one of Marvel Studios' future movies. For instance, in the post-credits scene of 2010's Iron Man 2, a large hammer at the bottom of a crater in a desert in New Mexico is shown being located by S.H.I.E.L.D. Agent Coulson, thus setting up their next release, 2011's Thor.
Post-credit scenes in video games[edit]
Video games, particularly the ones that make use of complex stories, have begun using post-credits scenes. An early example is EarthBound, in which Ness awakens to knocks on the front door just like the beginning of the game, and finds Pokey's brother Picky with a message from Pokey, indicating that he escapes and wants Ness to come and get him. Also notable is the Metal Gear series of video games, in which Metal Gear Solid, MGS2, MGS3, MGS4, MPO and MGSPW feature a voice-over only scene after the credits of one or more characters speaking as the game's logo is displayed, all of which reveal new information that gives a new perspective to the previous events as well as setting up part of the next game in the series. Another example is the Kingdom Hearts video game series, in which Kingdom Hearts and Kingdom Hearts II include a post-credits epilogue, along with an unlockable, highly enigmatic scene depicting possible events in a future installment of the series (The Final Mix versions of both games also include another unlockable scene that takes off where the previous ones left). Also, Halo 2's post-credits scene doubles as a cliffhanger.
In "Version one" (Xbox 360/PlayStation 3/Windows) of Splinter Cell: Double Agent, if the game is completed still on the side of Third Echelon, a post-credit level begins allowing the player to finish the game. Another example of this would be in The Warriors in which the player fights the Rogues as the Riff leader during the game's end credits.
The Legend of Zelda: Twilight Princess and Halo 3 are rare example in video games where a crucial twist is unveiled: for Twilight Princess, the title character Midna shatters the Mirror of Twilight before jumping into the vortex herself, leaving Link and Zelda standing alone in the desert and breaking the only known link between the normal and Twilight realms. Halo 3's post-credits scene reveals that Master Chief actually survived the events of the ending scene and sees him entering suspended animation to await his rescue. In "Batman: Arkham Asylum", an end-credits scene is shown in which a crate of the poisonous Titan makes its way to Gotham bay and, depending on game choice, Bane, Scarecrow, or Killer Croc grabs hold of it.
List of post-credits scenes in video games[edit]
1980s[edit]

Bionic Commando (Famicom/NES port)
Contra (Japanese version only)

1990s[edit]

EarthBound
Mega Man X
Metal Gear Solid
Final Fantasy VII
Final Fantasy VIII
Wing Commander III: Heart of the Tiger

2000s[edit]

Final Fantasy X
Metal Gear Solid 2: Sons of Liberty
Halo: Combat Evolved
Kingdom Hearts
Dead to Rights
Metroid Prime
Halo 2
Half-Life 2 (usage)
Metal Gear Solid 3: Snake Eater
Kingdom Hearts II
Cars
The Legend of Spyro: A New Beginning
MPO
The Legend of Spyro: The Eternal Night
The Legend of Spyro: Dawn of the Dragon
Halo 3
Beyond Good &amp; Evil
New Super Mario Bros.
Batman: Arkham Asylum
Super Mario Galaxy
New Super Mario Bros. Wii
Halo 3: ODST
Metal Gear Solid 4: Guns of the Patriots
Assassin's Creed II
Tales of the Abyss

2010s[edit]

Assassins Creed III
God of War III
Castlevania: Lords of Shadow
Super Mario Galaxy 2
Halo: Reach
Sonic Colors
Epic Mickey
Dead Space 2
Portal 2
L.A. Noire
Deus Ex: Human Revolution
Sonic Generations
Kid Icarus: Uprising
The Amazing Spider-Man
Halo 4
BioShock Infinite
Sonic Lost World
Lego Marvel Super Heroes
Batman: Arkham Origins
Call of Duty: Ghosts
Final Fantasy XIII-2
Lightning Returns: Final Fantasy XIII
The Amazing Spider-Man 2
Watch Dogs
Mass Effect 3
The Walking Dead (video game)
Dragon Age: Inquisition
Metal Gear Solid: Peace Walker
Mortal Kombat X
Metal Gear Solid V: Ground Zeroes
Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain
Lego Batman 3: Beyond Gotham
Lego Jurassic World
Until Dawn
SOMA

Post-credits scene films[edit]
Further information: List of films with post-credits scenes
?
References[edit]


^ http://wordspy.com/words/creditcookie.asp
^ Justin Chang Chief Film Critic @JustinCChang (2013-10-22). "Film Review: ‘Thor: The Dark World’". Variety. Retrieved 2013-11-30.&#160;


External links[edit]

MediaStinger - Authoritative coverage of stingers in movies, television, and video games
What's After the Credits? - Comprehensive listing of stingers in movies, television, and video games








					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Post-credits_scene&amp;oldid=691527639"					
				Categories: Film scenesFilm and video terminologyHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from October 2007All articles needing additional referencesArticles that may contain original research from May 2008All articles that may contain original research				
							
		
		
			