


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Principal photography
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				Main article: Filmmaking





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2008)






Film production on location in Newark, New Jersey.


Principal photography is the phase of film production in which the movie is filmed, with actors on set and cameras rolling, as distinct from pre-production and post-production.[1]
Principal photography is nearly always the most expensive phase of film production, due to actor, director, and set crew salaries, as well as the costs of certain shots, props, and on-set special effects. Its start generally marks a point of no return for the financiers, because until it is complete there is unlikely to be enough material filmed to release a final product needed to recoup costs.[2] While it is common for a film to lose its greenlight status during pre-production&#160;– for example, because an important cast member drops out&#160;– it is extremely uncommon for finance to be withdrawn once principal photography has begun.
Feature films usually have insurance in place by the time principal photography begins. The death of a bankable star before completing all planned takes, or the loss of sets or footage can render a film impossible to complete as planned. For example, sets are notoriously flammable, and most older studios feature water towers for that reason.
Once a film concludes principal photography, it is said to have wrapped, and a wrap party may be organized to celebrate. During post-production, it may become clear that certain shots or sequences are missing or incomplete and are required to complete the film, or that a certain scene is not playing as expected, or even that a particular actor's performance hasn't turned out as desired. In these circumstances, additional material may have to be shot. If the material has already been shot once, or is substantial, the process is referred to as a re-shoot, but if the material is new and relatively minor, it is often referred to as a pick-up.
References[edit]


^ Lee, John J. Jr.; Gillen, Anne Marie (2010-11-01). The Producer's Business Handbook: The Roadmap for the Balanced Film Producer. Focal Press. pp.&#160;218–. ISBN&#160;9780240814636. Retrieved 29 April 2012.&#160;
^ Kelly Crabb (2005). The Movie Business: The Definitive Guide to the Legal and Financial Secrets of Getting Your Movie Made. Simon and Schuster. p.&#160;276. ISBN&#160;0743264924. Retrieved 31 December 2014.&#160;


External links[edit]



Wikiversity has learning materials about Filmmaking



 Media related to Filmmaking at Wikimedia Commons




This filmmaking article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.


v
t
e













v
t
e


Filmmaking






Development



Film treatment

scriptment


Step outline
Screenplay

process
Spec Script
Film Adaptation
Hook
Option


Film budgeting
Film finance

pitch


Green-light








Pre-production



Script breakdown

process


Shooting script
Storyboard
Casting

Rehearsal


Production board

production strip


Day Out of Days
Production schedule
Shooting schedule

one-liner










Production



Film crew
Cinematic techniques
Principal photography

Cinematography
Videography


Daily call sheet
Dailies (rushes)
Daily Reports

Film inventory report
Production report
Daily production report
Daily progress report
Sound report
Cost report
Daily editor log










Post-production



Film editing
Re-recording
Sync sound
Soundtrack
Music
Special effects

sound
visual


Negative cost








Distribution



Film distributor

list


Film release

wide
limited
delayed


Roadshow








Related



Box office
Guerrilla filmmaking
Development hell
Film
Filmography
Film industry
Film rights
Turnaround













Authority control



GND: 4232013-6















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Principal_photography&amp;oldid=689827910"					
				Categories: Filmmaking stubsFilmmakingFilm productionHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from February 2008All articles needing additional referencesAll stub articlesWikipedia articles with GND identifiers				
							
		
		
			