


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Separation masters
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				




This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2012)







This article may be too technical for most readers to understand. Please help improve this article to make it understandable to non-experts, without removing the technical details. The talk page may contain suggestions. (August 2012)


Separation masters are a method of long-term preservation for most modern color motion picture film. Since monopack color film - used in such processes as ECN, ECP and their successive revisions - contains photographically active color couplers which remain in the film after development, the emulsion will continue to produce chemical reactions in the image which cumulatively create a color fading, usually heavily biased towards the pink spectrum. In order to protect against this occurrence, the technique of separation masters was created.
Separation mastering is essentially an inversion of the Technicolor three-strip system, which used filtration to create three black and white masters each sensitized for one of the RGB spectrums and then printed the negatives with a CMYK colorspace. In separation mastering, the original camera negative is used to create three black and white copies, each one filtered for one of the RGB spectrums.[1] The black and white process is considered inert after development and thus should be more stable for long-term archival, preservation, and restoration (although the film base may eventually decay regardless).
References[edit]


^ Giovanna Fossati (2010). From Grain to Pixel: The Archival Life of Film in Transition. Framing Film. Volume 1. Amsterdam, Netherlands: Amsterdam University Press. p.&#160;286. ISBN&#160;9789089641397. Retrieved 25 August 2012.&#160;





This filmmaking article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.


v
t
e












					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Separation_masters&amp;oldid=538725052"					
				Categories: Film and video technologyFilmmaking stubsHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from August 2012All articles needing additional referencesWikipedia articles that are too technical from August 2012All articles that are too technicalArticles needing expert attention from August 2012All articles needing expert attentionAll stub articles				
							
		
		
			