


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Short film
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								  (Redirected from Short subject)
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				




This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2010)




Play media


Hemp for Victory, a short documentary produced by the United States Department of Agriculture during World War II


A short film is any film not long enough to be considered a feature film. No consensus exists as to where that boundary is drawn: the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences defines a short film as "an original motion picture that has a running time of 40 minutes or less, including all credits".[1] The term featurette originally applied to a film longer than a short subject, but shorter than a standard feature film.
The increasingly rare term short subject means approximately the same thing. An industry term, it carries more of an assumption that the film is shown as part of a presentation along with a feature film. Short is an abbreviation for either term. Short films are often screened at local, national, or international film festivals and made by independent filmmakers for non profit, either with a low budget or no budget at all. They are usually funded by film grants, non profit organizations, sponsor, or personal funds. Short films are generally used by filmmakers to gain experience and/or prove their talent in order to gain funding for future films from private investors, entertainment companies, or film studios.



Contents


1 History
2 Modern era
3 Short shorts
4 In popular culture
5 See also
6 References
7 External links



History[edit]




William Garwood starred in numerous short films, many of which were only 20 minutes in length


Longer and shorter films coexisted with similar popularity throughout the early days of film. However, comedy short films were produced in large numbers compared to lengthy features such as D.W. Griffith's The Birth of a Nation. By the 1920s, a ticket purchased a varied program including a feature and several supporting works from categories such as second feature, short comedy, 5–10 minute cartoon, and newsreel.
Short comedies were especially popular, and typically came in a serial or series (such as the Our Gang movies, or the many outings of Charlie Chaplin's Little Tramp character). Even though there was often no set release schedule, these series could be considered somewhat like a modern TV sitcom – lower in status than feature films but nevertheless very popular (comedians such as Laurel and Hardy, Charlie Chaplin and Buster Keaton all 'graduated' from shorts to features).
Animated cartoons came principally as short subjects. Virtually all major film production companies had units assigned to develop and produce shorts, and many companies, especially in the silent and very early sound era, produced mostly or only short subjects.
In the 1930s, the distribution system changed in many countries owing to the Great Depression. Instead of the cinema owner assembling a program of their own choice, the studios sold a package centered on a main and supporting feature, a cartoon and little else. With the rise of the double feature, 2-reel shorts went into decline as a commercial category. Hal Roach, for example, moved Laurel and Hardy full-time into feature films after 1935, and halved his popular Our Gang films to one reel. By the 1940s, he'd moved out of short films altogether (though MGM continued the Our Gang shorts until 1944)
Later shorts include George O'Hanlon's Joe McDoakes movies, and the animated work of studios such as Walt Disney Productions, Leon Schlesinger Productions/Warner Bros. Cartoons. By the mid-1950s, with the rise of television, the commercial live-action short was virtually dead, The Three Stooges being the last major series of 2-reelers, ending in 1959. Short films had become a medium for student, independent and specialty work.
Cartoon shorts had a longer life, due in part to the implementation of lower-cost limited animation techniques, but also declined in this period. Warner Bros., one of the most prolific of the golden era, shut down its studio permanently in 1969. The Pink Panther was the last regular theatrical cartoon short series, having begun in 1964 (and thus having spent its entire existence in the limited animation era) and ended in 1980. By the 1960s, the market for animated shorts had largely shifted to television, with existing theatrical shorts being syndicated to television.
Modern era[edit]
A few animated shorts continue within mainstream commercial distribution. For instance, Pixar has screened a short along with each of its feature films during its initial theatrical run since 1995 (producing shorts permanently since 2001).[2] Since Disney acquired Pixar in 2005, Disney has also produced animated shorts since 2007 with the Goofy short How to Hook Up Your Home Theater and produced a series of live action ones featuring The Muppets for viewing on YouTube as viral videos to promote the 2011 movie of the same name.
DreamWorks Animation often produces a short sequel to include in the special edition video releases of major features, and are typically of a sufficient length to be broadcast as a TV special, a few films from the studio have added theatrical shorts as well. Warner Brothers often includes old animated shorts from its considerable library, connected only thematically, on the DVD releases of classic WB movies. In 2010 and 2012 Warners also released new Looney Tunes cartoons before family films.
Shorts International and Magnolia Pictures organize an annual release of Academy Award nominated short films in theatres across the US, UK, Canada and Mexico throughout February and March.[3]
Shorts are occasionally broadcast as filler when a feature film or other work doesn't fit the standard broadcast schedule. ShortsTV was the first television channel dedicated to short films.
However, short films generally rely on festival exhibition to reach an audience. Such movies can also be distributed via the Internet. Certain websites which encourage the submission of user-created short films, such as YouTube, Snoovies[4] and Vimeo[5] have attracted large communities of artists and viewers. Sites like FILMSshort and Vimeo and apps such as Snoovies[6] focus on showcasing curated shorts.
Short films are a typical first stage for new filmmakers, but professional actors and crews still choose to create short films as an alternative form of expression. Short filmmaking is growing in popularity as equipment becomes cheaper. "Prosumer" or semi-professional cameras now cost under US$3,000, and free or low-cost software is widely available that is capable of video editing, post-production work and DVD authoring.
The lower production costs of short films often mean that short films can cover alternative subject matter as compared to higher budget feature films. Similarly unconventional filmmaking techniques such as Pixilation or narratives that are told without dialogue, are more often seen in short films than features.
Tropfest claims to be the world's largest short film festival. Tropfests now take place in Australia (its birthplace), Arabia, the US and elsewhere. Originating in 1993, Tropfest is often credited as being at least partially responsible for the recent popularity of short films internationally.
Short shorts[edit]
Short short films are sometimes considered to be a category of their own. The International Festival of Very Shorts is a festival based in Paris, which shows only movies less than three minutes long. Filminute, the international one-minute film festival, has presented and promoted a collection of one-minute films across multiple media since September 2006. FILMSsshort.com also categorizes films under five minutes. They are known for their conciseness and entertainment value.
In popular culture[edit]
Canada has a "television magazine program that features short films from across the country", entitled the "Short Film Face Off".
See also[edit]

Reel#Motion picture terminology for an explanation of the historic term "two-reeler"
List of animated short series
List of independent short films
List of short live-action films
List of short subjects by Hollywood studio
Movieola: The Short Film Channel
The Journal of Short Film
Tropfest

References[edit]


^ "Rule Nineteen: Short Films Awards". AMPAS. Retrieved 2011-03-31.&#160;
^ Pixar Short Films Web Site
^ Holden, Stephen (2013). "Far From Epic Length, but on the Shortlist for Oscar Glory". The New York Times.&#160;
^ Snoovies Film Submission page
^ Vimeo The Story Beyond the Still Video Contest
^ Snoovies app page


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Short films.



Short Films at DMOZ
British Film Institute: "Writing Short Films" by Phil Parker screenonline, website of the British Film Institute
Short of the Week | Curating the greatest short films for millions since 2007









v
t
e


Film genres






By style



Action

heroic bloodshed
Hong Kong action


Adventure

survival


Art
Biographical
Comedy

black
dramedy
horror
parody
mo lei tau
thriller
remarriage
romantic
sex
screwball
silent
slapstick


Documentary

animated
docudrama
mockumentary
mondo
pseudo


Drama

dramedy
historical
legal
melodrama


Erotic

pink
thriller


Educational

social guidance


Epic
Experimental
Exploitation
Fantasy

comic
contemporary
dark
fairy tale
high
historical
magic realism


Film noir

bad girl
neo-noir
tech noir


Horror

body
comedy
eco
found footage
natural
psychological
slasher
splatter
satanic


Musical
Mystery
Pornographic
Propaganda
Reality
Romantic

comedy
thriller


Science fiction

comic
cyberpunk
parallel universe
space opera
steampunk


Thriller

comedy
conspiracy
erotic
financial
giallo
legal
political
psychological
romantic
techno


Trick








By theme



Animals
Beach party
Blaxploitation
Body swap
Buddy

buddy cop
female


Cannibal
Coming-of-age
Concert
Crime

Gentleman thief
heist
hood
mob
yakuza


Dance

hip hop


Disaster

apocalyptic


Drug

stoner


Dystopian
Ethnographic
Extraterrestrial
Food and drink
Funny animal
Ghost
Hentai
Homeland
LGBT
Martial arts

chopsocky
girls with guns
gun fu
kung fu
wuxia


Mecha
Monster

giant monster
jiangshi
vampire
werewolf
zombie


Mountain
Nature

environmental issues


Outlaw biker
Pirate
Prison

women


Race
Rape and revenge
Road
Rubble
Samurai
Sexploitation

Sex report


Slavery
Slice of life
Snuff

Crush


Sports
Spy

eurospy


Submarine
Superhero
Swashbuckler
Sword-and-sandal
Sword and sorcery
Travel
Trial
Vigilante
War

anti-war
submarine


Western

acid
epic
meat pie
northern
ostern
revisionist
space
spaghetti
weird
zapata










By audience



Chick flick
Children's
Guy-cry
Teen
Woman's








By format
or production



3D
Animation

anime
computer
stop motion
traditional


B movie
Black-and-white
Blockbuster
Color
Compilation
Cult
Feature
Featurette
Independent
Live action

animation


Low-budget
Major studio
Mockbuster
No budget
Serial
Short
Silent
Sound
Underground













Authority control



GND: 4166233-7















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Short_film&amp;oldid=691958330"					
				Categories: Short film festivalsShort filmsHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from December 2010All articles needing additional referencesCommons category with local link same as on WikidataArticles with DMOZ linksWikipedia articles with GND identifiers				
							
		
		
			