


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Sound report
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				




This article does not cite any references (sources). Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2007)


A sound report is a filmmaking term for a sheet of paper created by the Sound Mixer to record details of each file recorded during filming. A sound report is arranged in a table format, where the rows represent each file recorded, which at the least would contain columns for noting down the scene, slate or shot and take number, and a wider column for remarks about the particular take's sound. A report would typically note the title of the production, the date, the audio roll or tape that the file is recorded on, tape speed or sample rate, bit depth, and timecode information. More detailed reports may include the location, production company, director, the model of the mixer, recorder and microphones used on the day, the names of the sound crew, and columns indicating which tracks were used for any given take.
The sound mixer will fill out the report during or after each take, noting down if there were any wild lines, any extraneous or unwanted sounds, and any other information useful in determining the take's sound quality. The sound mixer may in some way mark takes that were good, or of high quality, to provide a simple visual indicator as to the best takes. The report will be given to the post production department, where it would be used to determine which takes are of the best quality without having to listen through to every one, so the film editor and/or dialogue editor can more easily determine where alternate good takes may be found to replace those of lower sound quality, and can quickly determine how the sound needs to be edited.








v
t
e


Filmmaking






Development



Film treatment

scriptment


Step outline
Screenplay

process
Spec Script
Film Adaptation
Hook
Option


Film budgeting
Film finance

pitch


Green-light








Pre-production



Script breakdown

process


Shooting script
Storyboard
Casting

Rehearsal


Production board

production strip


Day Out of Days
Production schedule
Shooting schedule

one-liner










Production



Film crew
Cinematic techniques
Principal photography

Cinematography
Videography


Daily call sheet
Dailies (rushes)
Daily Reports

Film inventory report
Production report
Daily production report
Daily progress report
Sound report
Cost report
Daily editor log










Post-production



Film editing
Re-recording
Sync sound
Soundtrack
Music
Special effects

sound
visual


Negative cost








Distribution



Film distributor

list


Film release

wide
limited
delayed


Roadshow








Related



Box office
Guerrilla filmmaking
Development hell
Film
Filmography
Film industry
Film rights
Turnaround












This article related to film or motion picture terminology is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.


v
t
e












					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sound_report&amp;oldid=582856598"					
				Categories: Film productionFilm terminology stubsHidden categories: Articles lacking sources from August 2007All articles lacking sourcesAll stub articles				
							
		
		
			