


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Strike action
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				"Go on strike" redirects here. For the song by Lower Than Atlantis, see Changing Tune.




Female tailors on strike, New York City, February 1910.




Part of a series on


Organized labour







Labour movement


Timeline



New Unionism
Proletariat



Social Movement Unionism



Socialism
Syndicalism



Anarcho-syndicalism








Labour rights





Child labour
Eight-hour day



Collective bargaining
Occupational safety and health








Trade unions


Trade unions by country
Trade union federations
International comparisons



ITUC
IWA
WFTU











Strike action


Chronological list of strikes



General strike
Secondary action






Sitdown strike
Work-to-rule











Labour parties



Australian
British
Irish
Israeli
New Zealand
Norwegian



more parties








Academic disciplines


Industrial relations
Labour economics
Labour history
Labour law









v
t
e





Strike action, also called labor strike, labour strike, on strike, greve (of French: grève), or simply strike, is a work stoppage caused by the mass refusal of employees to work. A strike usually takes place in response to employee grievances. Strikes became common during the Industrial Revolution, when mass labour became important in factories and mines. In most countries, strike actions were quickly made illegal, as factory owners had far more power than workers. Most western countries partially legalized striking in the late 19th or early 20th centuries.
Strikes are sometimes used to pressure governments to change policies. Occasionally, strikes destabilize the rule of a particular political party or ruler; in such cases, strikes are often part of a broader social movement taking the form of a campaign of civil resistance. Notable examples are the 1980 Gdańsk Shipyard or 1981 Warning Strike, led by Lech Wałęsa. These strikes were significant in the long campaign of civil resistance for political change in Poland, and were an important mobilizing effort that contributed to the fall of the Iron Curtain and the end of communist party rule in eastern Europe.[1]



Contents


1 History

1.1 Etymology
1.2 Pre-industrial strikes
1.3 During and after the Industrial Revolution


2 Variations
3 Legal prohibitions

3.1 Canada
3.2 People's Republic of China and the former Soviet Union
3.3 France
3.4 United Kingdom
3.5 United States


4 Strikebreakers

4.1 Union strikebreaking


5 Antistrike action

5.1 Strike preparation
5.2 Strike breaking
5.3 Union busting
5.4 Lockout
5.5 Violence


6 Films

6.1 Non-fiction
6.2 Fiction


7 Other uses
8 See also
9 References
10 Further reading
11 External links



History[edit]




Strike action (1879), painting by Theodor Kittelsen


See also: List of strikes
Etymology[edit]
The use of the English word "strike" first appeared in 1768, when sailors, in support of demonstrations in London, "struck" or removed the topgallant sails of merchant ships at port, thus crippling the ships.[2][3][4] Official publications have typically used the more neutral words "work stoppage" or "industrial dispute".
Pre-industrial strikes[edit]
The first historically certain account of strike action was towards the end of the 20th dynasty, under Pharaoh Ramses III in ancient Egypt on 14 November 1152 BC. The artisans of the Royal Necropolis at Deir el-Medina walked off their jobs because they had not been paid.[5][6] The Egyptian authorities raised the wages.
An early predecessor of the general strike may have been the secessio plebis in ancient Rome. In the Outline Of History, H.G. Wells characterized this event as "the general strike of the plebeians; the plebeians seem to have invented the strike, which now makes its first appearance in history."[7] Their first strike occurred because they "saw with indignation their friends, who had often served the state bravely in the legions, thrown into chains and reduced to slavery at the demand of patrician creditors."[7]
During and after the Industrial Revolution[edit]




Agitated workers face the factory owner in The Strike, painted by Robert Koehler in 1886


The strike action only became a feature of the political landscape with the onset of the Industrial Revolution. For the first time in history, large numbers of people were members of the industrial working class; they lived in cities and exchanged their labour for payment. By the 1830s, when the Chartist movement was at its peak, a true and widespread 'workers consciousness' was awakening. In 1842 the demands for fairer wages and conditions across many different industries finally exploded into the first modern general strike. After the second Chartist Petition was presented to Parliament in April 1842 and rejected, the strike began in the coal mines of Staffordshire, England, and soon spread through Britain affecting factories, mills in Lancashire and coal mines from Dundee to South Wales and Cornwall.[8] Instead of being a spontaneous uprising of the mutinous masses, the strike was politically motivated and was driven by an agenda to win concessions. Probably as much as half of the then industrial work force were on strike at its peak - over 500,000 men.[citation needed] The local leadership marshalled a growing working class tradition to politically organize their followers to mount an articulate challenge to the capitalist, political establishment. Friedrich Engels, an observer in London at the time, wrote:

by its numbers, this class had become the most powerful in England. . . . The English proletarian is only just becoming aware of his power, and the fruits of this awareness were the disturbances of last summer.[9]

As the 19th century progressed, strikes became a fixture of industrial relations across the industrialized world, as workers organized themselves to collectively bargain for better wages and standards with their employees. Karl Marx has condemned the theory of Proudhon criminalizing strike action in his work The Poverty of Philosophy.[10]
In 1937 there were 4,740 strikes in the United States.[11] This was the greatest strike wave in American labor history. The number of major strikes and lockouts in the U.S. fell by 97% from 381 in 1970 to 187 in 1980 to only 11 in 2010. Companies countered the threat of a strike by threatening to close or move a plant.[12][13]
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights adopted in 1967 ensure the right to strike in Article 8 and European Social Charter adopted in 1961 also ensure the right to strike in Article 6.
Variations[edit]




A rally of the trade union UNISON in Oxford during a strike on 2006-03-28.






2005 New York City transit strike


Most strikes are undertaken by labor unions during collective bargaining as a last resort. The object of collective bargaining is for the employer and the union to come to an agreement over wages, benefits, and working conditions. A collective bargaining agreement may include a clause which prohibits the union from striking during the term of the agreement, known as a "no-strike clause."
No-strike clauses became prevalent in the United States immediately following World War II.[14] Nowadays, virtually all modern collective bargaining agreements contain prohibitions on work stoppages. Some in the labor movement consider no-strike clauses to be an unnecessary detriment to unions in the collective bargaining process.[15]
Generally, strikes are rare: according to the News Media Guild, 98% of union contracts in the United States are settled each year without a strike.[citation needed] Occasionally, workers decide to strike without the sanction of a labor union, either because the union refuses to endorse such a tactic, or because the workers concerned are not unionized. Such strikes are often described as unofficial. Strikes without formal union authorization are also known as wildcat strikes.
In many countries, wildcat strikes do not enjoy the same legal protections as recognized union strikes, and may result in penalties for the union members who participate or their union. The same often applies in the case of strikes conducted without an official ballot of the union membership, as is required in some countries such as the United Kingdom.
A strike may consist of workers refusing to attend work or picketing outside the workplace to prevent or dissuade people from working in their place or conducting business with their employer. Less frequently workers may occupy the workplace, but refuse either to do their jobs or to leave. This is known as a sit-down strike. A similar tactic is the work-in, where employees occupy the workplace but still continue work, often without pay, which attempts to show they are still useful, or that worker self-management can be successful. This occurred for instance with factory occupations in the Bienno Rossi strikes-the "two red years" of Italy from 1919-1920.
Another unconventional tactic is work-to-rule (also known as an Italian strike, in Italian: Sciopero bianco), in which workers perform their tasks exactly as they are required to but no better. For example, workers might follow all safety regulations in such a way that it impedes their productivity or they might refuse to work overtime. Such strikes may in some cases be a form of "partial strike" or "slowdown".
During the development boom of the 1970s in Australia, the Green ban was developed by certain unions described by some as more socially conscious. This is a form of strike action taken by a trade union or other organized labor group for environmentalist or conservationist purposes. This developed from the black ban, strike action taken against a particular job or employer in order to protect the economic interests of the strikers.
United States labor law also draws a distinction, in the case of private sector employers covered by the National Labor Relations Act, between "economic" and "unfair labor practice" strikes. An employer may not fire, but may permanently replace, workers who engage in a strike over economic issues. On the other hand, employers who commit unfair labor practices (ULPs) may not replace employees who strike over ULPs, and must fire any strikebreakers they have hired as replacements in order to reinstate the striking workers.




Teamsters, wielding pipes, clash with armed police in the streets of Minneapolis during a 1934 strike.


Strikes may be specific to a particular workplace, employer, or unit within a workplace, or they may encompass an entire industry, or every worker within a city or country. Strikes that involve all workers, or a number of large and important groups of workers, in a particular community or region are known as general strikes. Under some circumstances, strikes may take place in order to put pressure on the State or other authorities or may be a response to unsafe conditions in the workplace.
A sympathy strike is, in a way, a small scale version of a general strike in which one group of workers refuses to cross a picket line established by another as a means of supporting the striking workers. Sympathy strikes, once the norm in the construction industry in the United States, have been made much more difficult to conduct due to decisions of the National Labor Relations Board permitting employers to establish separate or "reserved" gates for particular trades, making it an unlawful secondary boycott for a union to establish a picket line at any gate other than the one reserved for the employer it is picketing. Sympathy strikes may be undertaken by a union as an organization or by individual union members choosing not to cross a picket line.
A jurisdictional strike in United States labor law refers to a concerted refusal to work undertaken by a union to assert its members’ right to particular job assignments and to protest the assignment of disputed work to members of another union or to unorganized workers.
A student strike has the students (sometimes supported by faculty) not attending schools. In some cases, the strike is intended to draw media attention to the institution so that the grievances that are causing the students to "strike" can be aired before the public; this usually damages the institution's (or government's) public image. In other cases, especially in government-supported institutions, the student strike can cause a budgetary imbalance and have actual economic repercussions for the institution.
A hunger strike is a deliberate refusal to eat. Hunger strikes are often used in prisons as a form of political protest. Like student strikes, a hunger strike aims to worsen the public image of the target.
A "sickout", or (especially by uniformed police officers) "blue flu", is a type of strike action in which the strikers call in sick. This is used in cases where laws prohibit certain employees from declaring a strike. Police, firefighters, air traffic controllers, and teachers in some U.S. states, are among the groups commonly barred from striking usually by state and federal laws meant to ensure the safety or security of the general public.
Newspaper writers may withhold their names from their stories as a way to protest actions of their employer.[16]
Legal prohibitions[edit]
Canada[edit]
On 30 January 2015, the Supreme Court of Canada ruled that there is a constitutional right to strike.[17] In this 5-2 majority decision, Justice Rosalie Abella ruled that "[a]long with their right to associate, speak through a bargaining representative of their choice, and bargain collectively with their employer through that representative, the right of employees to strike is vital to protecting the meaningful process of collective bargaining..." [paragraph 24]. This decision adopted the dissent by Chief Justice Brian Dickson in a 1987 Supreme Court ruling on a reference case brought by the province of Alberta. The exact scope of this right to strike remains unclear and will no doubt be subject to further litigation. Prior to this Supreme Court decision the federal and/or provincial governments would introduce "back to work legislation" a special law that blocks the strike action (or a lockout) from happening or continuing on further. Canadian governments would also impose binding arbitration or a new contract on the disputing parties. Back to work legislation was first used in 1950 during a railway strike, and as of 2012 has been used 33 times by the federal government for those parts of the economy that are regulated federally (grain handling, rail and air travel, and the postal service), and in more cases provincially. In addition certain parts of the economy can be proclaimed 'essential services' in which case all strikes are illegal.[18]
Examples include, the government of Canada passed back to work legislation during the 2011 Canada Post lockout and the 2012 CP Rail strike, thus effectively ending the strikes.
People's Republic of China and the former Soviet Union[edit]
Main articles: Trade unions in the Soviet Union and All-China Federation of Trade Unions




Lenin Shipyard workers, Poland, on strike in August 1980, with the Soviet-modeled trade union name crossed out in protest


In some Marxist–Leninist states, such as the former USSR or the People's Republic of China, striking was illegal and viewed as counter-revolutionary. Since the government in such systems claims to represent the working class, it has been argued that unions and strikes were not necessary. In 1976, China signed the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, which guaranteed the right to unions and striking, but Chinese officials declared that they had no interest in allowing these liberties.[19] (In June 2008, however, the municipal government in Shenzhen in southern China introduced draft labor regulations, which labor rights advocacy groups say would, if implemented, virtually restore Chinese workers' right to strike.[20]) Trade unions in the Soviet Union served in part as a means to educate workers about the country's economic system. Vladimir Lenin referred to trade unions as "Schools of Communism." They were essentially state propaganda and control organs to regulate the workforce, also providing them with social activities.
France[edit]




Strike in Pas-de-Calais (1906)


In France, the right to strike is recognized and guaranteed by the Constitution.
A "minimum service" during strikes in public transport was a promise of Nicolas Sarkozy during his campaign for the French presidential election. A law "on social dialogue and continuity of public service in regular terrestrial transports of passengers" was adopted on 12 August 2007, and it took effect on 1 January 2008.
This law, amongst other measures, forces certain categories of public transport workers (such as train and bus drivers) to declare to their employer 48 hours in advance if they intend to go on strike. Should they go on strike without having declared their intention to do so beforehand, they leave themselves open to sanctions.
The unions did and still do oppose this law and argue these 48 hours are used not only to pressure the workers but also to keep files on the more militant workers, who will more easily be undermined in their careers by the employers. Most importantly, they argue this law prevents the more hesitant workers from making the decision to join the strike the day before, once they've been convinced to do so by their colleagues and more particularly the union militants, who maximize their efforts in building the strike (by handing out leaflets, organising meetings, discussing the demands with their colleagues) in the last few days preceding the strike. This law makes it also more difficult for the strike to spread rapidly to other workers, as they are required to wait at least 48 hours before joining the strike.
This law also makes it easier for the employers to organize the production as it may use its human resources more effectively, knowing beforehand who is going to be at work and not, thus undermining, albeit not that much, the effects of the strike.
However, this law has not had much effect as strikes in public transports still occur in France and at times, the workers refuse to comply by the rules of this law. The public transport industry - public or privately owned - remains very militant in France and keen on taking strike action when their interests are threatened by the employers or the government.
The public transport workers in France, in particular the "Cheminots" (employees of the national French railway company) are often seen as the most radical "vanguard" of the French working class. This law has not, in the eyes of many, changed this fact.
United Kingdom[edit]
The Industrial Relations Act 1971 was repealed through the Trade Union and Labour Relations Act 1974, sections of which were repealed by the Employment Act 1982.
The Code of Practice on Industrial Action Ballots and Notices, and sections 22 and 25 of the Employment Relations Act 2004, which concern industrial action notices, commenced on 1 October 2005. Lawyers have suggested that the courts are taking an increasingly relaxed approach when interpreting the Trade Union and Labour Relations Act 1974, meaning that it is becoming easier to strike.[citation needed]
Legislation was enacted in the aftermath of the 1919 police strikes, forbidding British police from both taking industrial action, and discussing the possibility with colleagues. The Police Federation which was created at the time to deal with employment grievances, and provide representation to police officers, has increasingly put pressure on the government, and repeatedly threatened strike action.[21]
Prison officers have gained and lost the right to strike over the years; most recently despite it being illegal, they walked out on 10 May 2012.[22]
United States[edit]




A strike leader addressing strikers in Gary, Indiana in 1919.


The Railway Labor Act bans strikes by United States airline and railroad employees except in narrowly defined circumstances. The National Labor Relations Act generally permits strikes, but provides a mechanism to enjoin strikes in industries in which a strike would create a national emergency. The federal government most recently invoked these statutory provisions to obtain an injunction requiring the International Longshore and Warehouse Union return to work in 2002 after having been locked out by the employer group, the Pacific Maritime Association.
Some jurisdictions prohibit all strikes by public employees, under laws such as the "Taylor Law" in New York. Other jurisdictions impose strike bans only on certain categories of workers, particularly those regarded as critical to society: police and firefighters are among the groups commonly barred from striking in these jurisdictions. Some states, such as New Jersey, Michigan, Iowa or Florida, do not allow teachers in public schools to strike. Workers have sometimes circumvented these restrictions by falsely claiming inability to work due to illness — this is sometimes called a "sickout" or "blue flu", the latter receiving its name from the uniforms worn by police officers, who are traditionally prohibited from striking. The term "red flu" has sometimes been used to describe this action when undertaken by firefighters.
Often, specific regulations on strike actions exist for employees in prisons. The Code of Federal Regulations declares "encouraging others to refuse to work, or to participate in a work stoppage" by prisoners to be a "High Severity Level Prohibited Act" and authorizes solitary confinement for periods of up to a year for each violation.[23] The California Code of Regulations states that "[p]articipation in a strike or work stoppage", "[r]efusal to perform work or participate in a program as ordered or assigned", and "[r]ecurring failure to meet work or program expectations within the inmate's abilities when lesser disciplinary methods failed to correct the misconduct" by prisoners is "serious misconduct" under §3315(a)(3)(L), leading to gang affiliation under CCR §3000.[24]
Postal workers involved in 1978 wildcat strikes in Jersey City, Kearny, New Jersey, San Francisco, and Washington, D.C. were fired under the presidency of Jimmy Carter, and President Ronald Reagan fired air traffic controllers and the PATCO union after the air traffic controllers' strike of 1981.
Strikebreakers[edit]
Main article: Strikebreaker




Strikebreaking driver and cart being stoned during sanitation worker strike. New York City, 1911.


A strikebreaker (sometimes derogatorily called a scab, blackleg, or knobstick) is a person who works despite an ongoing strike. Strikebreakers are usually individuals who are not employed by the company prior to the trade union dispute, but rather hired after or during the strike to keep the organization running. "Strikebreakers" may also refer to workers (union members or not) who cross picket lines to work.
Irwin, Jones, McGovern (2008) believe that the term 'scab' is part of a larger metaphor involving strikes. They argue that the picket line is symbolic of a wound and those who break its borders to return to work are the scabs who bond that wound. Others have argued that the word is not a part of a larger metaphor but, rather, originates from the old-fashioned English insult, "scab."
"Blackleg" is an older word and is found in the late-nineteenth/early-twentieth century folk song from Northumberland, Blackleg Miner. The term does not necessarily owe its origins to this tune of unknown origin. The song is, however, notable for its lyrics that encourage violent acts against strikebreakers.




Strike breakers, Chicago Tribune strike, 1986, Chicago, Illinois


Union strikebreaking[edit]
The concept of union strikebreaking or union scabbing refers to any circumstance in which union workers themselves cross picket lines to work.
Unionized workers are sometimes required to cross the picket lines established by other unions due to their organizations having signed contracts which include no-strike clauses. The no-strike clause typically requires that members of the union not conduct any strike action for the duration of the contract; such actions are called sympathy or secondary strikes. Members who honor the picket line in spite of the contract frequently face discipline, for their action may be viewed as a violation of provisions of the contract. Therefore, any union conducting a strike action typically seeks to include a provision of amnesty for all who honored the picket line in the agreement that settles the strike.
No-strike clauses may also prevent unionized workers from engaging in solidarity actions for other workers even when no picket line is crossed. For example, striking workers in manufacturing or mining produce a product which must be transported. In a situation where the factory or mine owners have replaced the strikers, unionized transport workers may feel inclined to refuse to haul any product that is produced by strikebreakers, yet their own contract obligates them to do so.
Historically the practice of union strikebreaking has been a contentious issue in the union movement, and a point of contention between adherents of different union philosophies. For example, supporters of industrial unions, which have sought to organize entire workplaces without regard to individual skills, have criticized craft unions for organizing workplaces into separate unions according to skill, a circumstance that makes union strikebreaking more common. Union strikebreaking is not, however, unique to craft unions.
Antistrike action[edit]
Most strikes called by unions are somewhat predictable; they typically occur after the contract has expired. However, not all strikes are called by union organizations — some strikes have been called in an effort to pressure employers to recognize unions. Other strikes may be spontaneous actions by working people. Spontaneous strikes are sometimes called "wildcat strikes"; they were the key fighting point in May 1968 in France; most commonly, they are responses to serious (often life-threatening) safety hazards in the workplace rather than wage or hour disputes, etc.
Whatever the cause of the strike, employers are generally motivated to take measures to prevent them, mitigate the impact, or to undermine strikes when they do occur.




To bring public attention, a giant inflatable rat is used in the U.S. at the site of a labor dispute.


Strike preparation[edit]
Companies which produce products for sale will frequently increase inventories prior to a strike. Salaried employees may be called upon to take the place of strikers, which may entail advance training. If the company has multiple locations, personnel may be redeployed to meet the needs of reduced staff.
Companies may also take out strike insurance prior to an anticipated strike, to help offset the losses which the strike would cause.
One of the weapons traditionally wielded by already-established unions is strike action. Some companies may decline entirely to negotiate with the union, and respond to the strike by hiring replacement workers. This may create a crisis situation for strikers — do they stick to their original plan and rely upon their solidarity, or is there a chance that the strike may be lost? How long will the strike last? Will strikers' jobs still be there if the strike fails? Are other strikers defecting from the strike? Companies that hire strikebreakers typically play upon these fears when they attempt to convince union members to abandon the strike and cross the union's picket line.
Unions faced with a strikebreaking situation may try to inhibit the use of strikebreakers by a variety of methods — establishing picket lines where the strikebreakers enter the workplace; discouraging strike breakers from taking, or from keeping, strikebreaking jobs; raising the cost of hiring strikebreakers for the company; or employing public relations tactics. Companies may respond by increasing security forces and seeking court injunctions.
Examining conditions in the late 1990s, John Logan observed that union busting agencies helped to "transform economic strikes into a virtually suicidal tactic for U.S. unions." Logan further observed, "as strike rates in the United States have plummeted to historic low levels, the demand for strike management firms has also declined."[25]
In the U.S., as established in the National Labor Relations Act there is a legally protected right for private sector employees to strike to gain better wages, benefits, or working conditions and they cannot be fired. Striking for economic reasons (like protesting workplace conditions or supporting a union's bargaining demands) allows an employer to hire permanent replacements. The replacement worker can continue in the job and then the striking worker must wait for a vacancy. But if the strike is due to unfair labor practices, the strikers replaced can demand immediate reinstatement when the strike ends. If a collective bargaining agreement is in effect, and it contains a "no-strike clause", a strike during the life of the contract could result in the firing of all striking employees which could result in dissolution of that union. Although this is legal it could be viewed as union busting.
Strike breaking[edit]
Some companies negotiate with the union during a strike; other companies may see a strike as an opportunity to eliminate the union. This is sometimes accomplished by the importation of replacement workers, strikebreakers or "scabs". Historically, strike breaking has often coincided with union busting. It was also called 'Black legging' in the early 20th century, during the Russian socialist movement.[26]
Union busting[edit]




Strike, painting by Stanisław Lentz


Main article: Union busting
One method of inhibiting or ending a strike is firing union members who are striking which can result in elimination of the union. Although this has happened it is rare due to laws regarding firing and "right to strike" having a wide range of differences in the US depending on whether union members are public or private sector. Laws also vary country to country . In the UK, "It is important to understand that there is no right to strike in UK law."[27] Employees who strike risk dismissal, unless it is an official strike (one called or endorsed by their union) in which case they are protected from unlawful dismissal, and cannot be fired for at least 12 weeks. UK laws regarding work stoppages and strikes are defined within the Employment Relations Act 1999 and the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992. One of the most significant cases of mass-dismissals in the UK in 2005 involved the sacking of over 600 Gate Gourmet employees at Heathrow Airport[28][29] was viewed as a union busting tactic and caused a great deal of media scrutiny and outrage. Under the direction of Gate Gourmet's HR Director Andy Cook, according to BBC: "Gate Gourmet sacked more than 600 staff last week in a working practices row, prompting a walkout by British Airways ground staff that paralysed flights and stranded thousands of travellers in the UK." Andy Cook, Gate Gourmet's director of human resources at that time, said "The company had not been looking to cut the size of the protests, only stop the minority engaged in harassment.".[30] Cook is now CEO of the UK labor relations advisory firm Marshall-James Global Solutions Ltd.[31]
In 1962 US President John F. Kennedy issued Executive Order #10988 [32] which established the right for public sector employees to form trade unions but made it "illegal" to strike (codified in 1966 at 5 U.S.C. 7311 - Loyalty and Striking). In 1981, after public sector union PATCO (Professional Air Traffic Controllers Organization) went on strike illegally, President Ronald Reagan fired all of the controllers. His action resulted in the dissolution of the union. Although the firing was technically legal, he was criticized at the time for exercising union busting. PATCO reformed to become the National Air Traffic Controllers Association.




Victims of a clash between striking workers and the army in Prostějov, Austria-Hungary, April 1917


In the U.S., as established in the National Labor Relations Act there is a legally protected right for private sector employees to strike to gain better wages, benefits, or working conditions and they cannot be fired. Striking for economic reasons (i.e., protesting workplace conditions or supporting a union's bargaining demands) allows an employer to hire permanent replacements. The replacement worker can continue in the job and then the striking worker must wait for a vacancy. But if the strike is due to unfair labor practices (ULP), the strikers replaced can demand immediate reinstatement when the strike ends. If a collective bargaining agreement is in effect, and it contains a "no-strike clause", a strike during the life of the contract could result in the firing of all striking employees which could result in dissolution of that union. Although this is legal it could be viewed as union busting.
Lockout[edit]
Another counter to a strike is a lockout, the form of work stoppage in which an employer refuses to allow employees to work. Two of the three employers involved in the Caravan park grocery workers strike of 2003-2004 locked out their employees in response to a strike against the third member of the employer bargaining group. Lockouts are, with certain exceptions, lawful under United States labor law.
Violence[edit]




The charge by Ramon Casas (1899)


Main article: Anti-union violence
Historically, some employers have attempted to break union strikes by force. One of the most famous examples of this occurred during the Homestead Strike of 1892. Industrialist Henry Clay Frick sent private security agents from the Pinkerton National Detective Agency to break the Amalgamated Association of Iron and Steel Workers strike at a Homestead, Pennsylvania steel mill. Two strikers were killed, twelve wounded, along with two Pinkertons killed and eleven wounded. In the aftermath, Frick was shot in the neck and then stabbed by Alexander Berkman, surviving the attack, while Berkman was sentenced to 22 years in prison.
Films[edit]
Non-fiction[edit]

Final Offer - A look at the 1984 contract negotiations between General Motors and its union.
Harlan County, USA, Director: Barbara Kopple, USA 1976–A documentary film about a very long and bitter strike of coal miners in Kentucky
American Dream, Director: Barbara Kopple, USA 1990 – A documentary film about the unsuccessful 1985-1986 meatpacker's strike against Hormel Foods in Austin, Minnesota.
Jimmy Hoffa, a labor union leader who ran the International Brotherhood of Teamsters (IBT) union from 1958 until 1971, was portrayed by Robert Blake in the 1983 TV-film Blood Feud, Trey Wilson in the 1985 television miniseries Robert Kennedy &amp; His Times, and by Jack Nicholson in the 1992 biographical film Hoffa.
Bastard Boys, A miniseries based on the 1998 Australian waterfront dispute.

Fiction[edit]

Statschka Strike, Director: Sergei Eisenstein, Soviet Union 1924
Brüder brothers, Director: Werner Hochbaum, Germany 1929–On the general strike in the port of Hamburg, Germany in 1896/97
The Stars Look Down, Director: Carol Reed, England 1939 – Film about a strike over safety standards at a coal mine in North-East England - based on the Cronin novel
The Grapes of Wrath a 1940 film by John Ford includes description of migrant workers striking, and its violent breaking by employers, assisted by the police. Based on the novel by John Steinbeck.
Salt of the Earth, Director: Herbert J. Biberman, USA 1953–Fictionalized account of an actual zinc-miners' strike in Silver City, New Mexico, in which women took over the picket line to circumvent an injunction barring "striking miners" from company property. The striking women were largely played by real members of the strike, and one woman was deported to Mexico while filming. The union organizer Clinton Jencks (from Jencks v. United States fame) also participated.
The Molly Maguires, Director: Martin Ritt, 1970 film starring Sean Connery and Richard Harris. Frustrated by the failure of strike action to achieve their industrial objectives, a secret society among Pennsylvania coal miners sabotages the mine with explosives to try to get what their industrial action failed to obtain. A Pinkerton agent infiltrates them.
F.I.S.T, Director: Norman Jewison, 1978 – loosely based on the Teamsters union and former president Jimmy Hoffa.
Norma Rae, Director: Martin Ritt, 1979.
Matewan, Director: John Sayles, 1987 – critically acclaimed account of a coal mine-workers' strike and attempt to unionize in 1920 in Matewan, a small town in the hills of West Virginia.
Made in Dagenham, 2010 – based on the strike at Fords plant in Dagenham, UK, which won equal pay for female workers.

Other uses[edit]

Sometimes, "to go on strike" is used figuratively for machinery or equipment not working due to malfunction, e.g. "My computer's on strike".

See also[edit]




Organized labour portal







Labor law
General strike
List of strikes
1891 Australian shearers' strike &#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;
Stay away
International comparisons of labor unions




Occupation of factories
Seattle General Strike of 1919
Union Organizer
The Burke Group
Sitdown strike
Sitting on a man
Fare strike
Work-to-rule
Strike in Bangladesh




References[edit]


^ Aleksander Smolar, "Towards 'Self-limiting Revolution': Poland 1970-89", in Adam Roberts and Timothy Garton Ash (eds.), Civil Resistance and Power Politics: The Experience of Non-violent Action from Gandhi to the Present, Oxford University Press, 2009, pp. 127-43. This book contains accounts on certain other strike movements in other countries around the world aimed at overthrowing a regime or a foreign military presence.
^ National Centre for History Education - Commonwealth History Project&#160;:: ozhistorybytes - Issue Eight: The History of Words - Strike
^ "A body of sailors..proceeded..to Sunderland.., and at the cross there read a paper, setting forth their grievances... After this they went on board the several ships in that harbour, and struck (lowered down) their yards, in order to prevent them from proceeding to sea." (Ann. Reg. 92, 1768), quoted in Oxford English Dictionary, 2nd ed., s.v. "strike, v.," sense 17; see also sense 24.
^ Worrall, Simon (1 September 2014). "Were Modern Ideas—and the American Revolution—Born on Ships at Sea?". National Geographic (National Geographic Society). Archived from the original on 31 August 2014. Retrieved 31 August 2014.&#160;
^ François Daumas, (1969). Ägyptische Kultur im Zeitalter der Pharaonen, pp. 309. Knaur Verlag, Munich
^ John Romer, Ancient Lives; the story of the Pharaoh's Tombmakers. London: Phoenix Press, 1984, pp. 116-123 See also E.F. Wente, "A letter of complaint to the Vizier To", in Journal of Near Eastern Studies, 20, 1961 and W.F. Edgerton , "The strikes in Ramses III's Twenty-ninth year", Journal of Near Eastern Studies, 10, 1951.
^ a b H.G. Wells, Outline Of History, Waverly Book Company, 1920, page 225
^ F.C.Mather (1974). "The General Strike of 1842: A Study in Leadership, Organisation and the Threat of Revolution during the Plug Plot Disturbance". web.bham.ac.uk/1848. George Allen &amp; Unwin Ltd London. Retrieved 2008-01-30.&#160;
^ "Strike action history".&#160;
^ The Poverty of Philosophy, Part II, Section 5
^ "Abbreviated Timeline of the Modern Labor Movement", University of Wisconsin-La Crosse
^ U.S. Census Bureau, Statistical Abstract of the United States: 2012 (2011) p 428 table 663
^ Aaron Brenner; et al. (2011). The Encyclopedia of Strikes in American History. M.E. Sharpe. pp.&#160;234–35.&#160;
^ Staughton Lynd
^ "No Strike Clauses Hold Back Unions," Labor Notes
^ A note from the editor - TwinCities.com
^ Saskatchewan Federation of Labour v. Saskatchewan, 2015 SCC 4
^ http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/story/2011/06/15/f-faq-back-to-work-legislation.html
^ "Still waiting for Nike to do it," by Tim Connor, page 70.
^ 'Factory to the world will soon get the right to strike', by Venkatesan Vembu, Daily News and Analysis, 26 June 2008.
^ Police in strike action threat
^ Prison officers stage unofficial walkout on day of public sector action
^ 28 C.F.R. 541.3
^ California Code of Regulations §3000, Gang means any … formal or informal organization, association or group of three or more persons which has a common name or identifying sign or symbol whose members and/or associates, individually or collectively, engage or have engaged, on behalf of that organization, association or group, in two or more acts which include, … acts of misconduct classified as serious pursuant to section 3315.&#160;
^ "The Union Avoidance Industry in the United States", British Journal of Industrial Relations, John Logan, Blackwell Publishing Ltd, December 2006, pages 651–675.
^ Arthur Koestler, Darkness at Noon, p. 60.
^ [LabourList], http://labourlist.org/2011/06/what-is-the-right-to-strike/
^ [Workers Worldwide Back Their Heathrow Colleagues], http://www.itfglobal.org/press-area/index.cfm/pressdetail/566
^ [Reinstate Gate Gourmet Workers], http://www.icl-fi.org/english/wh/192/heathrow.html
^ [BBC News 21 August 2005],http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/business/4168084.stm
^ [Marshall-James website], http://www.mjgsl.com/employee_relations.php
^ [Executive Order 10988], http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/index.php?pid=58926#axzz1iul5EQQB


Further reading[edit]

Norwood, Stephen H. Strikebreaking and Intimidation. Chapel Hill, N.C.: University of North Carolina Press, 2002. ISBN 0-8078-2705-3
Montgomery, David. "Strikes in Nineteenth-Century America," Social Science History (1980) 4#1 pp.&#160;81–104 in JSTOR, includes some comparative data
Silver, Beverly J. Forces of Labor: Workers' Movements and Globalization Since 1870. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2003. ISBN 0-521-52077-0

External links[edit]



Wikiquote has quotations related to: Strike action





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Strikes.





Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article Strikes and Lock-outs.



News and histories of strikes from around the world
"Black Workers and the Labor Movement: Toward a Paradigm of Unity in Afro-American Studies." Intro to Afro-American Studies. eBlackStudies.com.
Labour Law Profile: Ireland
Strike! Famous Worker Uprisings - slideshow by Life magazine









v
t
e


Trade unions and organized labour









Trade union (public sector)
Labor history
Labor rights
Labour movement








Formation





Structure




Labour council
Union organizer
National trade union center
Global union federation
Union representative
Clerk of the Chapel
Father of the Chapel
Local union
Union dues
Vigilance committee
Union label
Salt
Trades Hall
Duty of fair representation









Models




Organising model
Service model
Rank and File
Social Movement Unionism
Community unionism
One Big Union
Open-source unionism
Business unionism
Dual unionism
Solidarity unionism









Types




Company union
Independent union
General union
Professional association











Industrial relations





Shops and hiring




Closed shop
Open shop
Agency shop
Union shop
Hiring hall
Bump
Scope clause









Actions




Unfair list
Strike action

recognition
secondary action


Strike notice
Occupation of factories
Precarious work
Precarity
General strike
Sitdown strike
Slowdown
Bossnapping
Stay away
Labor unrest
Industrial unrest
Grievance
Occupation of factories
Organizational dissent
Overtime ban
Industrial action
Walkout
Contingent work
Contingent workforce
Whipsaw strike
Wildcat strike action
Work-to-rule
Green ban
Picketing









Bargaining




Collective bargaining
Collaborative bargaining
Mutual gains bargaining
Pattern bargaining
Bargaining unit
Union security agreement
Master contract
Enterprise bargaining agreement









Compensation




Strike pay
Union wage premium
Workers' compensation











Reactions



Opposition to trade unions
Labor spies
Union busting
Givebacks
Churn and burn
Paper local
Anti-union violence
Union violence
Big labor
Demarcation dispute
Strikebreaker
Goon squad
Featherbedding








Other topics



International comparisons of labor unions
Labour code
Labour law
Labour organization law
Eight-hour day
















v
t
e


Media culture






Media



Mass media
Mainstream media
24-hour news cycle
Corporate media
News broadcasting
News media
Film
Internet
Radio
Television








Ideology



Mainstream
Advanced capitalism
American Dream
Bipartisanship
Consumerism
Pensée unique
Pop music








Deception





Forms




Advertising
Propaganda
Public relations
Spin
Tabloid journalism









Techniques




Cult of personality
Dumbing down
Framing
Media circus
Media event
Narcotizing dysfunction
Recuperation
Sensationalism









Others




Crowd manipulation
Managing the news
Media manipulation











Philosophers



Theodor W. Adorno
Edward Bernays
Noam Chomsky
Guy Debord
Walter Lippmann
Marshall McLuhan








Counterculture



Boycott
Civil disobedience
Culture jamming
Demonstration
Graffiti
Occupation
Political satire
Protest
Punk
Strike action








In academia



Media influence
Media studies
Semiotic democracy
The Lonely Crowd








Issues



Anonymity
Concentration of media ownership
Freedom of speech
Media bias
Privacy








Synonyms



Advanced capitalism
Culture industry
Mass society
Post-Fordism
Society of the Spectacle
















v
t
e


Syndicalism






Precursors



Guild socialism
Utopian socialism
Revolutions of 1848
Orthodox Marxism











Variants



Anarcho-syndicalism
Green syndicalism
Syndical Communism








Economics



Co-operative economics
Labour

Labour rights
General strike
Workers' self-management
Labour unionisation


Mutual aid








Organisations



Industrial Workers of the World (IWW)
International Workers' Association (IWA-AIT) and affiliates:

Confederación Nacional del Trabajo (CNT-AIT, Spain)
Federação Operária do Rio Grande do Sul – Confederação Operária Brasileira (FORGS-COB-AIT, Brazil)
Federación Obrera Regional Argentina (FORA-AIT, Argentina)
Associação Internacional dos Trabalhadores - Secção Portuguesa (AIT-SP, Portugal)
Anarho-sindikalistička inicijativa (ASI-MUR, Serbia)
Freie Arbeiterinnen- und Arbeiter-Union (FAU, Germany)
Konfederatsiya Revolyutsionnikh Anarkho-Sindikalistov (KRAS-IWA, Russia)
Mreža anarhosindikalista i anarhosindikalistkinja (MASA, Croatia)
Norsk Syndikalistisk Forbund (NSF-IAA, Norway)
Priama Akcia (PA-IWA, Slovakia)
Solidarity Federation (SF-IWA, Britain)










Leaders



Daniel De Leon
Victor Griffuelhes
Hubert Lagardelle
Juan García Oliver
Rudolf Rocker
Georges Sorel
Fernand Pelloutier








Related subjects



Criticism of capitalism
Post-capitalism
Libertarian socialism
Criticism of wage labour
Labour power
Revisionism











 Category













Authority control



LCCN: sh85128731
GND: 4002702-8
NDL: 00571776















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Strike_action&amp;oldid=692100529"					
				Categories: Strikes (protest)Labor termsProtest tacticsHidden categories: Use dmy dates from March 2014All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from May 2015Articles with unsourced statements from June 2008Articles containing Italian-language textArticles with unsourced statements from September 2015Commons category with local link same as on WikidataWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers				
							
		
		
			