


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Sync sound
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				




This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2013)







This article is outdated. Please update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information. (October 2015)


Sync sound (synchronized sound recording) refers to sound recorded at the time of the filming of movies and has been widely used in movies since the birth of sound movies.
History[edit]
Even in the silent film era, films were shown with sounds, often with musical accompaniment by a pianist or an orchestra keeping time with the screen action. The first synchronization was a turning recording device marked with a white spot. As the white spot rotated, the cameraman hand cranked the camera to keep it in sync with the recording. The method was then repeated for playback, but with the projectionist hand cranking the film projector.
"Single-system" sound recorded sound optically to part of the original camera film, or magnetically to a stripe of magnetic coating along the film edge.
"Double-system" sound used independent cameras and sound recorders. The first sync sound standard used recorders and cameras both powered by AC (alternating current) motors - essentially clock motors.[1]
Later the 50&#160;Hz or 60&#160;Hz sine wave, called a "Pilotone", was recorded on a second parallel track of an audio recorder.
In double-system filming, speed variations of camera and recorder, as well as the elasticity of the magnetic recording tape, requires some positive means of keying the dialogue to its appropriate film frame.
The inclusion on the sound recorder of a second, parallel, sync or "Pilotone" track, is the most common method in use today.
If a location camera is driven by a DC motor, with some sort of governor control to hold it fairly accurate at 24 f.p.s., a sync pulse generator geared to the movement or motor shaft could be employed to provide the sync pulse output. A cable conducts the sync pulse from camera to sound recorder. The sync pulse is typically a sine wave of 50 or 60&#160;Hz with an RMS amplitude of approximately 1 volt.[2]
This double-system audio recording could then be transferred or "resolved" to sprocketed magnetic film, with sprocket holes that match one to one with the original camera film. These two sprocketed media could be run through a "Moviola" or flat-bed editing table such as the Steenbeck for synchronous sound editing.
With the introduction of the Bulova "Accutron" watch that used a tuning fork as a time reference (watches later used an oscillating electronic crystal), the camera no longer needed to be connected to the sound recorder with a cable. The camera speed was controlled by one oscillator, and a second oscillator in the recorder generated the Pilotone.
This method was developed in the 1960s by pioneering filmmaker Richard Leacock. It was called Direct Cinema and was the basis for a "New Wave" of Cinéma Vérité films, especially in Europe, made by filmmakers who abandoned the studio and went out on location to film, often with hand-held cameras.
In 1972, Bell &amp; Howell brought out a consumer version of a double-system Super-8 sound filmmaking system called "Filmosound". A compact cassette recorder was attached to the camera with a cable that transmitted a single pulse to the recorder every time a new frame of film was exposed in the camera. On playback, the cassette recorder pulse was used to control the projector speed.
At that time, Ricky Leacock, a professor in the MIT architecture department film section, developed a Super-8 film production system with a crystal-controlled camera, a crystal-generated Pilotone cassette recorder, a sprocketed magnetic film recorder, a flatbed editing table, and a projector. The MIT/Leacock System was funded with a $300,000 grant from the founder of Polaroid, Edwin Land.
In 1973, the one-pulse-per-frame technique was used to control recording directly onto sprocketed magnetic film in the Super8 Sound Recorder.[3] The Super8 Sound Recorder could also "resolve" sound that had been recorded onto cassette tape with this new "digital" sync pulse.[4]
Today, digital video cameras and digital sound recorders have very accurate crystal time references and so can be used for double-system video production.
Sync sound in Asia[edit]
In Hong Kong, sync sound was not widely used until the 1990s, as the generally noisy environment and lower production budgets made such a method impractical.[citation needed]
Most Bollywood films from the 1960s onwards do not employ this technique and for that very reason the 2001 films Lagaan and Dil Chahta Hai were noted for the use of sync sound. More recently it was used on Rock On. The common practice in Bollywood is to 'dub' over the dialogues at the post-production stage. Industry people such as the sound designers and mixers Resul Pookutty and Baylon Fonseca are endeavoring to change this.[citation needed]
The first Indian talkie, Alam Ara (1931), made the first use of sync sound in India and subsequent Indian films were regularly shot in sync sound with the silent Mitchell camera, until the 1960s. With the arrival of the Arri 2C, a noisy but more practical camera particularly for outdoor shoots, 'dubbing' became the norm and was never reversed.[5]
Use of this technique has increased in recent times with the development in film techniques and instrumentation like Arri Blimp cameras. This system has been used in the Hindi movie Jodhaa Akbar.[citation needed]
References[edit]


^ Steven Ascher and Edward Pincus, The Filmmaker's Handbook, Penguin, 1999
^ American Cinematographer Manual, Fourth Edition, p.183
^ Super8 Sound Catalog, 1975 edition
^ Robert O. Doyle, "The Need for Sync Sound Standards", American Cinematographer, November 1975
^ [1]










v
t
e


Filmmaking






Development



Film treatment

scriptment


Step outline
Screenplay

process
Spec Script
Film Adaptation
Hook
Option


Film budgeting
Film finance

pitch


Green-light








Pre-production



Script breakdown

process


Shooting script
Storyboard
Casting

Rehearsal


Production board

production strip


Day Out of Days
Production schedule
Shooting schedule

one-liner










Production



Film crew
Cinematic techniques
Principal photography

Cinematography
Videography


Daily call sheet
Dailies (rushes)
Daily Reports

Film inventory report
Production report
Daily production report
Daily progress report
Sound report
Cost report
Daily editor log










Post-production



Film editing
Re-recording
Sync sound
Soundtrack
Music
Special effects

sound
visual


Negative cost








Distribution



Film distributor

list


Film release

wide
limited
delayed


Roadshow








Related



Box office
Guerrilla filmmaking
Development hell
Film
Filmography
Film industry
Film rights
Turnaround















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sync_sound&amp;oldid=685646700"					
				Categories: Film productionFilm and video technologyFilm editingHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from November 2013All articles needing additional referencesWikipedia articles in need of updating from October 2015All Wikipedia articles in need of updatingAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from November 2013				
							
		
		
			