


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Main Page
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				





Welcome to Wikipedia,
the free encyclopedia that anyone can edit.
5,016,079 articles in English






Arts
Biography
Geography




History
Mathematics
Science




Society
Technology
All portals










From today's featured article







Nadine Gordimer


Burger's Daughter is a political and historical novel by the South African Nobel recipient Nadine Gordimer (pictured), first published in 1979 in the United Kingdom by Jonathan Cape. Banned in South Africa for three months by the Publications Control Board, the book follows a group of white anti-apartheid activists who seek to overthrow the South African government. Rosa, the title character, comes to terms with her father's legacy as an activist in the South African Communist Party. Gordimer was involved in the anti-apartheid movement and knew many of the activists, including Bram Fischer, the defence lawyer at Nelson Mandela's treason trial; she has described the book as a "coded homage" to him. The novel was generally well received by critics; a review in The New York Review of Books described the style of writing as "elegant" and "fastidious", belonging to a "cultivated upper class". In 1980 it won the Central News Agency Literary Award. When Gordimer won the 1991 Nobel Prize in Literature, Burger's Daughter was one of the books cited during the awards ceremony. (Full&#160;article...)

Recently featured:


Ancestry of the Godwins
Trout Creek Mountains
California State Route 75






Archive
By email
More featured articles...







Did you know...







Cyrtopone striata fossil



... that species of the extinct ant genus Cyrtopone (example pictured) are noted for having small heads?
... that Al-Istibsar is one of the four major works of Shiite Islamic traditions authored by Shaykh Tusi, a Shia scholar?
... that the abandoned Newmarket Canal was so short of water that local newspapers joked they could dispense with bridges and just walk across in rubber boots?
... that actor Sarah-Jane Redmond auditioned for the film Hellraiser: Hellseeker using bondage artwork by Eric Stanton instead of a head shot?
... that the HTC One A9 is the first non-Nexus device to come pre-installed with Android Marshmallow?
... that Heinrich Schmitt was arrested in 1935, survived ten years in detention, and re-emerged in 1945 as a leading regional politician in occupied Bavaria?
... that according to the Bhikshuka Upanishad, the ascetic lifestyle of four types of monk includes eating eight mouthfuls of food a day?
... that Blood Money was inspired by the "cuteness" of Mr. Heli?



Recently improved articles
Start a new article
Nominate an article












In the news







Mauricio Macri



Cambiemos candidate Mauricio Macri (pictured) is elected President of Argentina.
Nineteen people are killed after more than 130 people were held hostage by gunmen at the Radisson Blu hotel in Bamako, Mali.
AquAdvantage salmon becomes the first genetically modified animal approved by the US FDA for human consumption.
The second-largest gem-quality diamond is found in Botswana.
Russia's Federal Security Service states that Metrojet Flight 9268 was destroyed by a bomb.


Ongoing events:


Paris attack aftermath
European migrant crisis



Recent deaths:


Kim Young-sam
Kitanoumi Toshimitsu
Mal Whitfield









On this day...





November 23: National Sovereignty Day in Argentina; St George's Day in Georgia; Labor Thanksgiving Day in Japan


Ellen Johnson Sirleaf



1733 – African slaves from Akwamu in the Danish West Indies revolted against their owners, one of the earliest and longest slave revolts in the Americas.
1867 – The Manchester Martyrs were hanged in Manchester, England, for killing a police officer while helping two Irish nationalists escape from police custody.
1955 – The Cocos Islands in the Indian Ocean were transferred from British to Australian control.
1963 – The first episode of Doctor Who, the world's longest-running science fiction television show, was broadcast on BBC television, starring William Hartnell as the first incarnation of the title role.
2005 – Ellen Johnson Sirleaf (pictured) won the Liberian general election, making her the first democratically elected female head of state in Africa.


More anniversaries:


November 22
November 23
November 24






Archive
By email
List of historical anniversaries



Current date: November 23, 2015 (UTC)
Reload this page
















From today's featured list







Jean Dujardin


The 2011 film The Artist received awards and nominations in a variety of categories. Premiering at the 64th Cannes Film Festival on 15 May 2011, The Artist is a French romantic comedy–drama film directed by Michel Hazanavicius and filmed in the style of a black and white silent film. It stars Jean Dujardin (pictured) as George Valentin, a silent film star whose career suffers from the rise of the talkies. At the 84th Academy Awards, the film received ten nominations. It went on to win five awards including Best Picture, Best Directing for Hazanavicius, and Best Actor for Dujardin. The Artist became only the second silent film in Oscar history to win Best Picture after Wings, the inaugural Best Picture winner. The film earned six nominations at the 69th Golden Globes, winning three awards including Best Motion Picture – Musical or Comedy and Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy for Dujardin. At the 65th British Academy Film Awards, the film received twelve nominations, and won seven awards including Best Film. (Full&#160;list...)

Recently featured:


National Treasures of Japan (sculptures)
Cities and towns in California
Awards and nominations received by Lorde






Archive
More featured lists...















Today's featured picture









The European hedgehog (Erinaceus europaeus) is a species of hedgehog found in a wide range of habitat types in western Europe. It is a well-known species, and a favourite in European gardens, both for its endearing appearance and its preference for eating a range of garden pests. While populations are currently stable across much of its range, it is thought to be declining severely in Great Britain.
Photograph: Michael Gäbler

Recently featured:


Grant Park
Fortress of Guaita
Mucous membrane






Archive
More featured pictures...













Other areas of Wikipedia

Community portal – Bulletin board, projects, resources and activities covering a wide range of Wikipedia areas.
Help desk – Ask questions about using Wikipedia.
Local embassy – For Wikipedia-related communication in languages other than English.
Reference desk – Serving as virtual librarians, Wikipedia volunteers tackle your questions on a wide range of subjects.
Site news – Announcements, updates, articles and press releases on Wikipedia and the Wikimedia Foundation.
Village pump – For discussions about Wikipedia itself, including areas for technical issues and policies.



Wikipedia's sister projects
Wikipedia is hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation, a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other projects:



Commons
Free media repository

MediaWiki
Wiki software development

Meta-Wiki
Wikimedia project coordination



Wikibooks
Free textbooks and manuals

Wikidata
Free knowledge base

Wikinews
Free-content news



Wikiquote
Collection of quotations

Wikisource
Free-content library

Wikispecies
Directory of species



Wikiversity
Free learning materials and activities

Wikivoyage
Free travel guide

Wiktionary
Dictionary and thesaurus




Wikipedia languages

This Wikipedia is written in English. Started in 2001&#160;(2001), it currently contains 5,016,079 articles.  Many other Wikipedias are available; some of the largest are listed below.

More than 1,000,000 articles:


Deutsch
Español
Français
Italiano
Nederlands
Polski
Русский
Svenska
Tiếng Việt



More than 250,000 articles:


العربية
Bahasa Indonesia
Bahasa Melayu
Català
Čeština
فارسی
한국어
Magyar
日本語
Norsk bokmål
Português
Română
Srpski / српски
Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски
Suomi
Türkçe
Українська
中文



More than 50,000 articles:


Bosanski
Български
Dansk
Eesti
Ελληνικά
English (simple)
Esperanto
Euskara
Galego
עברית
Hrvatski
Latviešu
Lietuvių
Norsk nynorsk
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
ไทย





Complete list of Wikipedias








					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Main_Page&amp;oldid=688747750"					
								
							
		
		
			