


		
		
		
			

							
						


			Ancient Greece
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				



The Parthenon, a temple dedicated to Athena, located on the Acropolis in Athens, is one of the most representative symbols of the culture and sophistication of the ancient Greeks.





Part of a series on the



History of Greece







Neolithic Greece


Neolithic Greece








Greek Bronze Age


Helladic
Cycladic
Minoan
Mycenaean








Ancient Greece


Homeric Greece
Archaic Greece
Classical Greece
Hellenistic Greece
Roman Greece








Medieval Greece


Byzantine Greece
Frankish and Latin states
Ottoman Greece








Modern Greece


Septinsular Republic
War of Independence
First Hellenic Republic
Kingdom of Greece
National Schism
Second Hellenic Republic
4th of August Regime
Axis occupation (collaborationist regime)
Civil War
Military Junta
Third Hellenic Republic








History by topic


Art
Constitution
Economy
Military
Names






 Greece portal





v
t
e





Ancient Greece was a civilization belonging to a period of Greek history that lasted from the Archaic period of the 8th to 6th centuries BC[citation needed] to the end of antiquity (c. 600 AD). Immediately following this period was the beginning of the Early Middle Ages and the Byzantine era.[1] Included in ancient Greece is the period of Classical Greece, which flourished during the 5th to 4th centuries BC. Classical Greece began with the repelling of a Persian invasion by Athenian leadership. Because of conquests by Alexander the Great of Macedonia, Hellenistic civilization flourished from Central Asia to the western end of the Mediterranean Sea.
Classical Greek culture, especially philosophy, had a powerful influence on the Roman Empire, which carried a version of it to many parts of the Mediterranean Basin and Europe. For this reason Classical Greece is generally considered to be the seminal culture which provided the foundation of modern Western culture and is considered as the cradle of Western civilization.[2][3][4][5][6][7][8][9][10][11][12][13][14][15][16][17]



Contents


1 Chronology
2 Historiography
3 History

3.1 Archaic period
3.2 Classical Greece

3.2.1 5th century
3.2.2 4th century


3.3 Hellenistic Greece
3.4 Roman Greece


4 Geography

4.1 Regions
4.2 Colonies


5 Politics and society

5.1 Political structure
5.2 Government and law
5.3 Social structure
5.4 Education
5.5 Economy
5.6 Warfare


6 Culture

6.1 Philosophy
6.2 Literature and theatre
6.3 Music and dance
6.4 Science and technology
6.5 Art and architecture
6.6 Religion and mythology


7 Legacy
8 See also
9 References
10 Further reading
11 External links



Chronology
Further information: Timeline of ancient Greece
Classical Antiquity in the Mediterranean region is commonly considered to have begun in the 8th century BC[citation needed] (around the time of the earliest recorded poetry of Homer) and ended in the 6th century AD.
Classical Antiquity in Greece is preceded by the Greek Dark Ages (c. 1200 – c. 800 BC), archaeologically characterised by the protogeometric and geometric styles of designs on pottery. This period is succeeded, around the 8th century BC, by the Orientalizing Period during which a strong influence of Syro-Hittite, Assyrian, Phoenician and Egyptian cultures becomes apparent. Traditionally, the Archaic period of ancient Greece is considered to begin with Orientalizing influence, which among other things brought the alphabetic script to Greece, marking the beginning of Greek literature (Homer, Hesiod). The end of the Dark Ages is also frequently dated to 776 BC, the year of the first Olympic Games.[18] The Archaic period gives way to the Classical period around 500 BC, in turn succeeded by the Hellenistic period at the death of Alexander the Great in 323 BC.

Ancient Periods
Astronomical year numbering



















Dates are approximate, consult particular article for details





The history of Greece during Classical Antiquity may thus be subdivided into the following periods:[19]

The Archaic period (c. 800 – c. 500 BC), in which artists made larger free-standing sculptures in stiff, hieratic poses with the dreamlike "archaic smile". The Archaic period is often taken to end with the overthrow of the last tyrant of Athens and the start of Athenian Democracy in 508 BC.
The Classical period (c. 500 – 323 BC) is characterized by a style which was considered by later observers to be exemplary i.e. "classical", as shown in for instance the Parthenon. Politically, the Classical Period was dominated by Athens and the Delian League during the 5th century, but displaced by Spartan hegemony during the early 4th century BC, before power shifted to Thebes and the Boeotian League and finally to the League of Corinth led by Macedon. This period saw the Greco-Persian Wars and the Rise of Macedon.
In the Hellenistic period (323–146 BC) Greek culture and power expanded into the Near and Middle East. This period begins with the death of Alexander and ends with the Roman conquest.
Roman Greece, the period between Roman victory over the Corinthians at the Battle of Corinth in 146 BC and the establishment of Byzantium by Constantine as the capital of the Roman Empire in AD 330.
The final phase of Antiquity is the period of Christianization during the later 4th to early 6th centuries AD, sometimes taken to be complete with the closure of the Academy of Athens by Justinian I in 529.[20]

Historiography
Main article: Greek historiographers
The historical period of ancient Greece is unique in world history as the first period attested directly in proper historiography, while earlier ancient history or proto-history is known by much more circumstantial evidence, such as annals or king lists, and pragmatic epigraphy.
Herodotus is widely known as the "father of history": his Histories are eponymous of the entire field. Written between the 450s and 420s BC, Herodotus' work reaches about a century into the past, discussing 6th century historical figures such as Darius I of Persia, Cambyses II and Psamtik III, and alluding to some 8th century ones such as Candaules.
Herodotus was succeeded by authors such as Thucydides, Xenophon, Demosthenes, Plato and Aristotle. Most of these authors were either Athenians or pro-Athenians, which is why far more is known about the history and politics of Athens than those of many other cities. Their scope is further limited by a focus on political, military and diplomatic history, ignoring economic and social history.[21]
History
Further information: History of Greece
Archaic period
Main article: Archaic period in Greece




Dipylon Vase of the late Geometric period, or the beginning of the Archaic period, c. 750 BC.






Political geography of ancient Greece in the Archaic and Classical periods


In the 8th century BC, Greece began to emerge from the Dark Ages which followed the fall of the Mycenaean civilization. Literacy had been lost and Mycenaean script forgotten, but the Greeks adopted the Phoenician alphabet, modifying it to create the Greek alphabet. From about the 9th century BC written records begin to appear.[22] Greece was divided into many small self-governing communities, a pattern largely dictated by Greek geography: every island, valley and plain is cut off from its neighbors by the sea or mountain ranges.[23] , The Lelantine War (c. 710 – c. 650 BC) is the earliest documented war of the ancient Greek period. It was fought between the important poleis (city-states) of Chalcis and Eretria over the fertile Lelantine plain of Euboea. Both cities seem to have suffered a decline as result of the long war, though Chalcis was the nominal victor.
A mercantile class arose in the first half of the 7th century, shown by the introduction of coinage in about 680 BC.[24] This seems to have introduced tension to many city-states. The aristocratic regimes which generally governed the poleis were threatened by the new-found wealth of merchants, who in turn desired political power. From 650 BC onwards, the aristocracies had to fight not to be overthrown and replaced by populist tyrants. This word derives from the non-pejorative Greek τύραννος tyrannos, meaning 'illegitimate ruler', and was applicable to both good and bad leaders alike.[25][26]
A growing population and a shortage of land also seem to have created internal strife between the poor and the rich in many city-states. In Sparta, the Messenian Wars resulted in the conquest of Messenia and enserfment of the Messenians, beginning in the latter half of the 8th century BC, an act without precedent or antecedent in ancient Greece. This practice allowed a social revolution to occur.[27] The subjugated population, thenceforth known as helots, farmed and labored for Sparta, whilst every Spartan male citizen became a soldier of the Spartan Army in a permanently militarized state. Even the elite were obliged to live and train as soldiers; this commonality between rich and poor citizens served to defuse the social conflict. These reforms, attributed to the shadowy Lycurgus of Sparta, were probably complete by 650 BC.
Athens suffered a land and agrarian crisis in the late 7th century, again resulting in civil strife. The Archon (chief magistrate) Draco made severe reforms to the law code in 621 BC (hence "draconian"), but these failed to quell the conflict. Eventually the moderate reforms of Solon (594 BC), improving the lot of the poor but firmly entrenching the aristocracy in power, gave Athens some stability.




A map showing the Greek territories and colonies during the Archaic period.


By the 6th century BC several cities had emerged as dominant in Greek affairs: Athens, Sparta, Corinth, and Thebes. Each of them had brought the surrounding rural areas and smaller towns under their control, and Athens and Corinth had become major maritime and mercantile powers as well.
Rapidly increasing population in the 8th and 7th centuries had resulted in emigration of many Greeks to form colonies in Magna Graecia (Southern Italy and Sicily), Asia Minor and further afield. The emigration effectively ceased in the 6th century by which time the Greek world had, culturally and linguistically, become much larger than the area of present-day Greece. Greek colonies were not politically controlled by their founding cities, although they often retained religious and commercial links with them.
The emigration process also determined a long series of conflicts between the Greek cities of Sicily, especially Syracuse, and the Carthaginians. These conflicts lasted from 600 BC to 265 BC when Rome entered into an alliance with the Mamertines to fend off the hostilities by the new tyrant of Syracuse, Hiero II and then the Carthaginians. This way Rome became the new dominant power against the fading strength of the Sicilian Greek cities and the Carthaginian supremacy in the region. One year later the First Punic War erupted.
Main article: Greek–Punic Wars
In this period, there was huge economic development in Greece, and also in its overseas colonies which experienced a growth in commerce and manufacturing. There was a great improvement in the living standards of the population. Some studies estimate that the average size of the Greek household, in the period from 800 BC to 300 BC, increased five times, which indicates[citation needed] a large increase in the average income of the population.
In the second half of the 6th century, Athens fell under the tyranny of Peisistratos and then of his sons Hippias and Hipparchos. However, in 510 BC, at the instigation of the Athenian aristocrat Cleisthenes, the Spartan king Cleomenes I helped the Athenians overthrow the tyranny. Afterwards, Sparta and Athens promptly turned on each other, at which point Cleomenes I installed Isagoras as a pro-Spartan archon. Eager to prevent Athens from becoming a Spartan puppet, Cleisthenes responded by proposing to his fellow citizens that Athens undergo a revolution: that all citizens share in political power, regardless of status: that Athens become a "democracy". So enthusiastically did the Athenians take to this idea that, having overthrown Isagoras and implemented Cleisthenes's reforms, they were easily able to repel a Spartan-led three-pronged invasion aimed at restoring Isagoras.[28] The advent of the democracy cured many of the ills of Athens and led to a 'golden age' for the Athenians.
Classical Greece
Main article: Classical Greece




Early Athenian coin, depicting the head of Athena on the obverse and her owl on the reverse—5th century BC






Map showing events of the first phases of the Greco-Persian Wars.






Delian League ("Athenian Empire"), immediately before the Peloponnesian War in 431 BC


5th century
Main articles: Greco-Persian Wars and Peloponnesian War
Athens and Sparta would soon have to become allies in the face of the largest external threat ancient Greece would see until the Roman conquest. After suppressing the Ionian Revolt, a rebellion of the Greek cities of Ionia, Darius I of Persia, King of Kings of the Achaemenid Empire, decided to subjugate Greece. The Persian general Megabyzus re-subjugated Thrace and conquered Macedon in the early stages of the war,[29] but the war eventually ended up with a Greek victory in 490 BC by the Athenian victory at the Battle of Marathon under Miltiades the Younger.
Xerxes I of Persia, son and successor of Darius I, attempted his own invasion 10 years later. Even though at a crucial point in the war, the Persians briefly overran northern and central Greece,[30] the Greek city-states managed to turn this war into a victory too. The notable battles of the Greco-Persian Wars include Marathon, Thermopylae, Salamis, and Plataea. The Greco-Persian Wars continued until 449 BC, led by the Athenians and their Delian League, during which time the Macedon, Thrace, the Aegean Islands and Ionia were all liberated from Persian influence.
The dominant position of the maritime Athenian 'Empire' threatened Sparta and the Peloponnesian League of mainland Greek cities. Inevitably, this led to conflict, resulting in the Peloponnesian War (431–404 BC). Though effectively a stalemate for much of the war, Athens suffered a number of setbacks. The Plague of Athens in 430 BC followed by a disastrous military campaign known as the Sicilian Expedition severely weakened Athens. Around thirty per cent of the population died in a typhoid epidemic in 430–426 BC.[31]
Sparta was able to foment rebellion among Athens's allies, further reducing the Athenian ability to wage war. The decisive moment came in 405 BC when Sparta cut off the grain supply to Athens from the Hellespont. Forced to attack, the crippled Athenian fleet was decisively defeated by the Spartans under the command of Lysander at Aegospotami. In 404 BC Athens sued for peace, and Sparta dictated a predictably stern settlement: Athens lost her city walls (including the Long Walls), her fleet, and all of her overseas possessions.
4th century
Greece thus entered the 4th century under a Spartan hegemony, but it was clear from the start that this was weak. A demographic crisis meant Sparta was overstretched, and by 395 BC Athens, Argos, Thebes, and Corinth felt able to challenge Spartan dominance, resulting in the Corinthian War (395–387 BC). Another war of stalemates, it ended with the status quo restored, after the threat of Persian intervention on behalf of the Spartans.
The Spartan hegemony lasted another 16 years, until, when attempting to impose their will on the Thebans, the Spartans suffered a decisive defeat at Leuctra in 371 BC. The Theban general Epaminondas then led Theban troops into the Peloponnese, whereupon other city-states defected from the Spartan cause. The Thebans were thus able to march into Messenia and free the population.
Deprived of land and its serfs, Sparta declined to a second-rank power. The Theban hegemony thus established was short-lived; at the Battle of Mantinea in 362 BC, Thebes lost its key leader, Epaminondas, and much of its manpower, even though they were victorious in battle. In fact such were the losses to all the great city-states at Mantinea that none could establish dominance in the aftermath.
The weakened state of the heartland of Greece coincided with the Rise of Macedon, led by Philip II. In twenty years, Philip had unified his kingdom, expanded it north and west at the expense of Illyrian tribes, and then conquered Thessaly and Thrace. His success stemmed from his innovative reforms to the Macedon army. Phillip intervened repeatedly in the affairs of the southern city-states, culminating in his invasion of 338 BC.
Decisively defeating an allied army of Thebes and Athens at the Battle of Chaeronea (338 BC), he became de facto hegemon of all of Greece, except Sparta. He compelled the majority of the city-states to join the League of Corinth, allying them to him, and preventing them from warring with each other. Philip then entered into war against the Achaemenid Empire but was assassinated by Pausanias of Orestis early on in the conflict.
Alexander, son and successor of Philip, continued the war. Alexander defeated Darius III of Persia and completely destroyed the Achaemenid Empire, annexing it to Macedon and earning himself the epithet 'the Great'. When Alexander died in 323 BC, Greek power and influence was at its zenith. However, there had been a fundamental shift away from the fierce independence and classical culture of the poleis—and instead towards the developing Hellenistic culture.
Hellenistic Greece
Main articles: Wars of Alexander the Great, Hellenistic Period and Hellenistic civilization




The major Hellenistic realms included the Diadochi kingdoms:
&#160;&#160;Kingdom of Ptolemy I Soter
&#160;&#160;Kingdom of Cassander
&#160;&#160;Kingdom of Lysimachus
&#160;&#160;Kingdom of Seleucus I Nicator
&#160;&#160;Epirus
Also shown on the map:
&#160;&#160;Greek colonies
&#160;&#160;Carthage (non-Greek)
&#160;&#160;Rome (non-Greek)
The orange areas were often in dispute after 281 BC. The kingdom of Pergamon occupied some of this area. Not shown: Indo-Greeks.






Territories and expansion of the Indo-Greeks.[32]


The Hellenistic period lasted from 323 BC, which marked the end of the Wars of Alexander the Great, to the annexation of Greece by the Roman Republic in 146 BC. Although the establishment of Roman rule did not break the continuity of Hellenistic society and culture, which remained essentially unchanged until the advent of Christianity, it did mark the end of Greek political independence.
During the Hellenistic period, the importance of "Greece proper" (that is, the territory of modern Greece) within the Greek-speaking world declined sharply. The great centers of Hellenistic culture were Alexandria and Antioch, capitals of Ptolemaic Egypt and Seleucid Syria respectively.
The conquests of Alexander had numerous consequences for the Greek city-states. It greatly widened the horizons of the Greeks and led to a steady emigration, particularly of the young and ambitious, to the new Greek empires in the east.[33] Many Greeks migrated to Alexandria, Antioch and the many other new Hellenistic cities founded in Alexander's wake, as far away as what are now Afghanistan and Pakistan, where the Greco-Bactrian Kingdom and the Indo-Greek Kingdom survived until the end of the 1st century BC.
After the death of Alexander his empire was, after quite some conflict, divided among his generals, resulting in the Ptolemaic Kingdom (based upon Egypt), the Seleucid Empire (based on the Levant, Mesopotamia and Persia) and the Antigonid dynasty based in Macedon. In the intervening period, the poleis of Greece were able to wrest back some of their freedom, although still nominally subject to the Macedonian Kingdom.
The city-states within Greece formed themselves into two leagues; the Achaean League (including Thebes, Corinth and Argos) and the Aetolian League (including Sparta and Athens). For much of the period until the Roman conquest, these leagues were usually at war with each other, and/or allied to different sides in the conflicts between the Diadochi (the successor states to Alexander's empire).
The Antigonid Kingdom became involved in a war with the Roman Republic in the late 3rd century. Although the First Macedonian War was inconclusive, the Romans, in typical fashion, continued to make war on Macedon until it was completely absorbed into the Roman Republic (by 149 BC). In the east the unwieldy Seleucid Empire gradually disintegrated, although a rump survived until 64 BC, whilst the Ptolemaic Kingdom continued in Egypt until 30 BC, when it too was conquered by the Romans. The Aetolian league grew wary of Roman involvement in Greece, and sided with the Seleucids in the Roman-Syrian War; when the Romans were victorious, the league was effectively absorbed into the Republic. Although the Achaean league outlasted both the Aetolian league and Macedon, it was also soon defeated and absorbed by the Romans in 146 BC, bringing an end to the independence of all of Greece.
Roman Greece
Main article: Roman Greece
Further information: Byzantine Greece
The Greek peninsula came under Roman rule during the 146 BC conquest of Greece after the Battle of Corinth. Macedonia became a Roman province while southern Greece came under the surveillance of Macedonia's prefect; however, some Greek poleis managed to maintain a partial independence and avoid taxation. The Aegean islands were added to this territory in 133 BC. Athens and other Greek cities revolted in 88 BC, and the peninsula was crushed by the Roman general Sulla. The Roman civil wars devastated the land even further, until Augustus organized the peninsula as the province of Achaea in 27 BC.
Greece was a key eastern province of the Roman Empire, as the Roman culture had long been in fact Greco-Roman. The Greek language served as a lingua franca in the East and in Italy, and many Greek intellectuals such as Galen would perform most of their work in Rome.
Geography
Regions
Main article: Regions of ancient Greece




Map showing the major regions of mainland ancient Greece and adjacent "barbarian" lands.


The territory of Greece is mountainous, and as a result, ancient Greece consisted of many smaller regions each with its own dialect, cultural peculiarities, and identity. Regionalism and regional conflicts were a prominent feature of ancient Greece. Cities tended to be located in valleys between mountains, or on coastal plains, and dominated a certain area around them.
In the south lay the Peloponnese, itself consisting of the regions of Laconia (southeast), Messenia (southwest), Elis (west), Achaia (north), Korinthia (northeast), Argolis (east), and Arcadia (center). These names survive to the present day as regional units of modern Greece, though with somewhat different boundaries. Mainland Greece to the north, nowadays known as Central Greece, consisted of Aetolia and Acarnania in the west, Locris, Doris, and Phocis in the center, while in the east lay Boeotia, Attica, and Megaris. Northeast lay Thessaly, while Epirus lay to the northwest. Epirus stretched from the Ambracian Gulf in the south to the Ceraunian mountains and the Aoos river in the north, and consisted of Chaonia (north), Molossia (center), and Thesprotia (south). In the northeast corner was Macedonia,[34] originally consisting Lower Macedonia and its regions, such as Elimeia, Pieria, and Orestis. Around the time of Alexander I of Macedon, the Argead kings of Macedon started to expand into Upper Macedonia, lands inhabited by independent Macedonian tribes like the Lyncestae and the Elmiotae and to the West, beyond the Axius river, into Eordaia, Bottiaea, Mygdonia, and Almopia, regions settled by Thracian tribes.[35] To the north of Macedonia lay various non-Greek peoples such as the Paeonians due north, the Thracians to the northeast, and the Illyrians, with whom the Macedonians were frequently in conflict, to the northwest. Chalcidice was settled early on by southern Greek colonists and was considered part of the Greek world, while from the late 2nd millennium BC substantial Greek settlement also occurred on the eastern shores of the Aegean, in Anatolia.
Colonies
See also: Greeks in pre-Roman Gaul, Magna Graecia and List of Greek cities in Thrace and Dacia




Greek cities &amp; colonies c. 550 BC.


During the Archaic period, the population of Greece grew beyond the capacity of its limited arable land (according to one estimate, the population of ancient Greece increased by a factor larger than ten during the period from 800 BC to 400 BC, increasing from a population of 800,000 to a total estimated population of 10 to 13 million).[36]
From about 750 BC the Greeks began 250 years of expansion, settling colonies in all directions. To the east, the Aegean coast of Asia Minor was colonized first, followed by Cyprus and the coasts of Thrace, the Sea of Marmara and south coast of the Black Sea.
Eventually Greek colonization reached as far northeast as present day Ukraine and Russia (Taganrog). To the west the coasts of Illyria, Sicily and Southern Italy were settled, followed by Southern France, Corsica, and even northeastern Spain. Greek colonies were also founded in Egypt and Libya.
Modern Syracuse, Naples, Marseille and Istanbul had their beginnings as the Greek colonies Syracusae (Συρακούσαι), Neapolis (Νεάπολις), Massalia (Μασσαλία) and Byzantion (Βυζάντιον). These colonies played an important role in the spread of Greek influence throughout Europe and also aided in the establishment of long-distance trading networks between the Greek city-states, boosting the economy of ancient Greece.
Politics and society
Political structure




Cities and towns of ancient Greece


Further information: History of citizenship § Ancient Greece
Ancient Greece consisted of several hundred relatively independent city-states (poleis). This was a situation unlike that in most other contemporary societies, which were either tribal or kingdoms ruling over relatively large territories. Undoubtedly the geography of Greece—divided and sub-divided by hills, mountains, and rivers—contributed to the fragmentary nature of ancient Greece. On the one hand, the ancient Greeks had no doubt that they were "one people"; they had the same religion, same basic culture, and same language. Furthermore, the Greeks were very aware of their tribal origins; Herodotus was able to extensively categorise the city-states by tribe. Yet, although these higher-level relationships existed, they seem to have rarely had a major role in Greek politics. The independence of the poleis was fiercely defended; unification was something rarely contemplated by the ancient Greeks. Even when, during the second Persian invasion of Greece, a group of city-states allied themselves to defend Greece, the vast majority of poleis remained neutral, and after the Persian defeat, the allies quickly returned to infighting.[37]
Thus, the major peculiarities of the ancient Greek political system were firstly, its fragmentary nature, and that this does not particularly seem to have tribal origin, and secondly, the particular focus on urban centers within otherwise tiny states. The peculiarities of the Greek system are further evidenced by the colonies that they set up throughout the Mediterranean Sea, which, though they might count a certain Greek polis as their 'mother' (and remain sympathetic to her), were completely independent of the founding city.
Inevitably smaller poleis might be dominated by larger neighbors, but conquest or direct rule by another city-state appears to have been quite rare. Instead the poleis grouped themselves into leagues, membership of which was in a constant state of flux. Later in the Classical period, the leagues would become fewer and larger, be dominated by one city (particularly Athens, Sparta and Thebes); and often poleis would be compelled to join under threat of war (or as part of a peace treaty). Even after Philip II of Macedon "conquered" the heartlands of ancient Greece, he did not attempt to annex the territory, or unify it into a new province, but simply compelled most of the poleis to join his own Corinthian League.
Government and law
Main article: Ancient Greek law




Inheritance law, part of the Law Code of Gortyn, Crete, fragment of the 11th column. Limestone, 5th century BC


Initially many Greek city-states seem to have been petty kingdoms; there was often a city official carrying some residual, ceremonial functions of the king (basileus), e.g. the archon basileus in Athens.[38] However, by the Archaic period and the first historical consciousness, most had already become aristocratic oligarchies. It is unclear exactly how this change occurred. For instance, in Athens, the kingship had been reduced to a hereditary, lifelong chief magistracy (archon) by c. 1050 BC; by 753 BC this had become a decennial, elected archonship; and finally by 683 BC an annually elected archonship. Through each stage more power would have been transferred to the aristocracy as a whole, and away from a single individual.
Inevitably, the domination of politics and concomitant aggregation of wealth by small groups of families was apt to cause social unrest in many poleis. In many cities a tyrant (not in the modern sense of repressive autocracies), would at some point seize control and govern according to their own will; often a populist agenda would help sustain them in power. In a system racked with class conflict, government by a 'strongman' was often the best solution.
Athens fell under a tyranny in the second half of the 6th century. When this tyranny was ended, the Athenians founded the world's first democracy as a radical solution to prevent the aristocracy regaining power. A citizens' assembly (the Ecclesia), for the discussion of city policy, had existed since the reforms of Draco in 621 BC; all citizens were permitted to attend after the reforms of Solon (early 6th century), but the poorest citizens could not address the assembly or run for office. With the establishment of the democracy, the assembly became the de jure mechanism of government; all citizens had equal privileges in the assembly. However, non-citizens, such as metics (foreigners living in Athens) or slaves, had no political rights at all.
After the rise of the democracy in Athens, other city-states founded democracies. However, many retained more traditional forms of government. As so often in other matters, Sparta was a notable exception to the rest of Greece, ruled through the whole period by not one, but two hereditary monarchs. This was a form of diarchy. The Kings of Sparta belonged to the Agiads and the Eurypontids, descendants respectively of Eurysthenes and Procles. Both dynasty founders were believed to be twin sons of Aristodemus, a Heraclid ruler. However, the powers of these kings was trammeled by both a council of elders (the Gerousia) and magistrates specifically appointed to watch over the kings (the Ephors).
Social structure
Only free, land owning, native-born men could be citizens entitled to the full protection of the law in a city-state (later Pericles introduced exceptions to the native-born restriction). In most city-states, unlike the situation in Rome, social prominence did not allow special rights. Sometimes families controlled public religious functions, but this ordinarily did not give any extra power in the government. In Athens, the population was divided into four social classes based on wealth. People could change classes if they made more money. In Sparta, all male citizens were given the title of equal if they finished their education. However, Spartan kings, who served as the city-state's dual military and religious leaders, came from two families.

Slavery

Main article: Slavery in ancient Greece




Gravestone of a woman with her slave child-attendant, c. 100 BC


Slaves had no power or status. They had the right to have a family and own property, subject to their master's goodwill and permission, but they had no political rights. By 600 BC chattel slavery had spread in Greece. By the 5th century BC slaves made up one-third of the total population in some city-states. Between forty and eighty per cent of the population of Classical Athens were slaves.[39] Slaves outside of Sparta almost never revolted because they were made up of too many nationalities and were too scattered to organize.
Most families owned slaves as household servants and laborers, and even poor families might have owned a few slaves. Owners were not allowed to beat or kill their slaves. Owners often promised to free slaves in the future to encourage slaves to work hard. Unlike in Rome, freedmen did not become citizens. Instead, they were mixed into the population of metics, which included people from foreign countries or other city-states who were officially allowed to live in the state.
City-states legally owned slaves. These public slaves had a larger measure of independence than slaves owned by families, living on their own and performing specialized tasks. In Athens, public slaves were trained to look out for counterfeit coinage, while temple slaves acted as servants of the temple's deity and Scythian slaves were employed in Athens as a police force corralling citizens to political functions.
Sparta had a special type of slaves called helots. Helots were Messenians enslaved during the Messenian Wars by the state and assigned to families where they were forced to stay. Helots raised food and did household chores so that women could concentrate on raising strong children while men could devote their time to training as hoplites. Their masters treated them harshly (every Spartiate male had to kill a helot as a rite of passage), and helots often resorted to slave rebellions.
Education





This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2011)


Main article: Education in ancient Greece




Mosaic from Pompeii depicting Plato's academy


For most of Greek history, education was private, except in Sparta. During the Hellenistic period, some city-states established public schools. Only wealthy families could afford a teacher. Boys learned how to read, write and quote literature. They also learned to sing and play one musical instrument and were trained as athletes for military service. They studied not for a job but to become an effective citizen. Girls also learned to read, write and do simple arithmetic so they could manage the household. They almost never received education after childhood.
Boys went to school at the age of seven, or went to the barracks, if they lived in Sparta. The three types of teachings were: grammatistes for arithmetic, kitharistes for music and dancing, and Paedotribae for sports.
Boys from wealthy families attending the private school lessons were taken care of by a paidagogos, a household slave selected for this task who accompanied the boy during the day. Classes were held in teachers' private houses and included reading, writing, mathematics, singing, and playing the lyre and flute. When the boy became 12 years old the schooling started to include sports such as wrestling, running, and throwing discus and javelin. In Athens some older youths attended academy for the finer disciplines such as culture, sciences, music, and the arts. The schooling ended at age 18, followed by military training in the army usually for one or two years.[40]
A small number of boys continued their education after childhood, as in the Spartan agoge. A crucial part of a wealthy teenager's education was a mentorship with an elder, which in a few places and times may have included pederastic love. The teenager learned by watching his mentor talking about politics in the agora, helping him perform his public duties, exercising with him in the gymnasium and attending symposia with him. The richest students continued their education by studying with famous teachers. Some of Athens' greatest such schools included the Lyceum (the so-called Peripatetic school founded by Aristotle of Stageira) and the Platonic Academy (founded by Plato of Athens). The education system of the wealthy ancient Greeks is also called Paideia.
Economy
Main articles: Economy of ancient Greece, Agriculture of ancient Greece and Slavery in ancient Greece
At its economic height, in the 5th and 4th centuries BC, ancient Greece was the most advanced economy in the world. According to some economic historians, it was one of the most advanced preindustrial economies. This is demonstrated by the average daily wage of the Greek worker which was, in terms of wheat, about 12&#160;kg. This was more than 3 times the average daily wage of an Egyptian worker during the Roman period, about 3.75&#160;kg.[41]
Warfare
Main articles: Ancient Greek warfare and Army of Macedon




Greek hoplite and Persian warrior depicted fighting, on an ancient kylix, 5th century BC


At least in the Archaic Period, the fragmentary nature of ancient Greece, with many competing city-states, increased the frequency of conflict but conversely limited the scale of warfare. Unable to maintain professional armies, the city-states relied on their own citizens to fight. This inevitably reduced the potential duration of campaigns, as citizens would need to return to their own professions (especially in the case of, for example, farmers). Campaigns would therefore often be restricted to summer. When battles occurred, they were usually set piece and intended to be decisive. Casualties were slight compared to later battles, rarely amounting to more than 5% of the losing side, but the slain often included the most prominent citizens and generals who led from the front.
The scale and scope of warfare in ancient Greece changed dramatically as a result of the Greco-Persian Wars. To fight the enormous armies of the Achaemenid Empire was effectively beyond the capabilities of a single city-state. The eventual triumph of the Greeks was achieved by alliances of city-states (the exact composition changing over time), allowing the pooling of resources and division of labor. Although alliances between city-states occurred before this time, nothing on this scale had been seen before. The rise of Athens and Sparta as pre-eminent powers during this conflict led directly to the Peloponnesian War, which saw further development of the nature of warfare, strategy and tactics. Fought between leagues of cities dominated by Athens and Sparta, the increased manpower and financial resources increased the scale, and allowed the diversification of warfare. Set-piece battles during the Peloponnesian war proved indecisive and instead there was increased reliance on attritionary strategies, naval battle and blockades and sieges. These changes greatly increased the number of casualties and the disruption of Greek society. Athens owned one of the largest war fleets in ancient Greece. It had over 200 triremes each powered by 170 oarsmen who were seated in 3 rows on each side of the ship. The city could afford such a large fleet-it had over 34,000 oars men-because it owned a lot of silver mines that were worked by slaves.
Culture




The stadium of ancient Olympia, home of the Ancient Olympic Games


Philosophy
Main article: Ancient Greek philosophy
Ancient Greek philosophy focused on the role of reason and inquiry. In many ways, it had an important influence on modern philosophy, as well as modern science. Clear unbroken lines of influence lead from ancient Greek and Hellenistic philosophers, to medieval Muslim philosophers and Islamic scientists, to the European Renaissance and Enlightenment, to the secular sciences of the modern day.
Neither reason nor inquiry began with the Greeks. Defining the difference between the Greek quest for knowledge and the quests of the elder civilizations, such as the ancient Egyptians and Babylonians, has long been a topic of study by theorists of civilization.
Some well-known philosophers of ancient Greece were Plato, Socrates, and many others. They have aided in information about ancient Greek society through writings such as The Republic, by Plato.
Literature and theatre
Main articles: Ancient Greek literature, Ancient Greek comedy and Theatre of ancient Greece




The theatre of Epidauros, 4th century BC


Ancient Greek society placed considerable emphasis upon literature. Many authors consider the western literary tradition to have begun with the epic poems The Iliad and The Odyssey, which remain giants in the literary canon for their skillful and vivid depictions of war and peace, honor and disgrace, love and hatred. Notable among later Greek poets was Sappho, who defined, in many ways, lyric poetry as a genre.
A playwright named Aeschylus changed Western literature forever when he introduced the ideas of dialogue and interacting characters to playwriting. In doing so, he essentially invented "drama": his Oresteia trilogy of plays is seen as his crowning achievement. Other refiners of playwriting were Sophocles and Euripides. Sophocles is credited with skillfully developing irony as a literary technique, most famously in his play Oedipus the King. Euripedes, conversely, used plays to challenge societal norms and mores—a hallmark of much of Western literature for the next 2,300 years and beyond—and his works such as Medea, The Bacchae and The Trojan Women are still notable for their ability to challenge our perceptions of propriety, gender, and war. Aristophanes, a comic playwright, defines and shapes the idea of comedy almost as Aeschylus had shaped tragedy as an art form—Aristophanes' most famous plays include the Lysistrata and The Frogs.
Philosophy entered literature in the dialogues of Plato, who converted the give and take of Socratic questioning into written form. Aristotle, Plato's student, wrote dozens of works on many scientific disciplines, but his greatest contribution to literature was likely his Poetics, which lays out his understanding of drama, and thereby establishes the first criteria for literary criticism.
Music and dance
Main article: Music of ancient Greece
Music was present almost universally in Greek society, from marriages and funerals to religious ceremonies, theatre, folk music and the ballad-like reciting of epic poetry. There are significant fragments of actual Greek musical notation as well as many literary references to ancient Greek music. Greek art depicts musical instruments and dance. The word music derives from the name of the Muses, the daughters of Zeus who were patron goddesses of the arts.
Science and technology
Main articles: List of Graeco-Roman geographers, Greek astronomy, Greek mathematics, Ancient Greek medicine and Ancient Greek technology




The Antikythera mechanism was an analog computer from 150–100 BC designed to calculate the positions of astronomical objects.


Ancient Greek mathematics contributed many important developments to the field of mathematics, including the basic rules of geometry, the idea of formal mathematical proof, and discoveries in number theory, mathematical analysis, applied mathematics, and approached close to establishing integral calculus. The discoveries of several Greek mathematicians, including Pythagoras, Euclid, and Archimedes, are still used in mathematical teaching today.
The Greeks developed astronomy, which they treated as a branch of mathematics, to a highly sophisticated level. The first geometrical, three-dimensional models to explain the apparent motion of the planets were developed in the 4th century BC by Eudoxus of Cnidus and Callippus of Cyzicus. Their younger contemporary Heraclides Ponticus proposed that the Earth rotates around its axis. In the 3rd century BC Aristarchus of Samos was the first to suggest a heliocentric system. Archimedes in his treatise The Sand Reckoner revives Aristarchus' hypothesis that "the fixed stars and the Sun remain unmoved, while the Earth revolves about the Sun on the circumference of a circle". Otherwise, only fragmentary descriptions of Aristarchus' idea survive.[42] Eratosthenes, using the angles of shadows created at widely separated regions, estimated the circumference of the Earth with great accuracy.[43] In the 2nd century BC Hipparchus of Nicea made a number of contributions, including the first measurement of precession and the compilation of the first star catalog in which he proposed the modern system of apparent magnitudes.
The Antikythera mechanism, a device for calculating the movements of planets, dates from about 80 BC, and was the first ancestor of the astronomical computer. It was discovered in an ancient shipwreck off the Greek island of Antikythera, between Kythera and Crete. The device became famous for its use of a differential gear, previously believed to have been invented in the 16th century, and the miniaturization and complexity of its parts, comparable to a clock made in the 18th century. The original mechanism is displayed in the Bronze collection of the National Archaeological Museum of Athens, accompanied by a replica.
The ancient Greeks also made important discoveries in the medical field. Hippocrates was a physician of the Classical period, and is considered one of the most outstanding figures in the history of medicine. He is referred to as the "father of medicine"[44][45][46] in recognition of his lasting contributions to the field as the founder of the Hippocratic school of medicine. This intellectual school revolutionized medicine in ancient Greece, establishing it as a discipline distinct from other fields that it had traditionally been associated with (notably theurgy and philosophy), thus making medicine a profession.[47][48]
Art and architecture
Main articles: Ancient Greek art and Ancient Greek architecture




The Temple of Hera at Selinunte, Sicily


The art of ancient Greece has exercised an enormous influence on the culture of many countries from ancient times until the present, particularly in the areas of sculpture and architecture. In the West, the art of the Roman Empire was largely derived from Greek models. In the East, Alexander the Great's conquests initiated several centuries of exchange between Greek, Central Asian and Indian cultures, resulting in Greco-Buddhist art, with ramifications as far as Japan. Following the Renaissance in Europe, the humanist aesthetic and the high technical standards of Greek art inspired generations of European artists. Well into the 19th century, the classical tradition derived from Greece dominated the art of the western world.
Religion and mythology
Main articles: Religion in ancient Greece, Hellenistic religion and Greek mythology




Mount Olympus, home of the Twelve Olympians


Greek mythology consists of stories belonging to the ancient Greeks concerning their gods and heroes, the nature of the world and the origins and significance of their religious practices. The main Greek gods were the twelve Olympians, Zeus, his wife Hera, Poseidon, Ares, Hermes, Hephaestus, Aphrodite, Athena, Apollo, Artemis, Demeter, and Dionysus. Other important deities included Hebe, Hades, Helios, Hestia, Persephone and Heracles. Zeus's parents were Cronus and Rhea who also were the parents of Poseidon, Hades, Hera, Hestia, and Demeter.
Legacy
Further information: Classics
The civilization of ancient Greece has been immensely influential on language, politics, educational systems, philosophy, science, and the arts. It became the Leitkultur of the Roman Empire to the point of marginalizing native Italic traditions. As Horace put it,

Graecia capta ferum victorem cepit et artis / intulit agresti Latio (Epistulae 2.1.156f.)
"Captive Greece took captive her uncivilised conqueror and instilled her arts in rustic Latium."

Via the Roman Empire, Greek culture came to be foundational to Western culture in general. The Byzantine Empire inherited Classical Greek culture directly, without Latin intermediation, and the preservation of classical Greek learning in medieval Byzantine tradition further exerted strong influence on the Slavs and later on the Islamic Golden Age and the Western European Renaissance. A modern revival of Classical Greek learning took place in the Neoclassicism movement in 18th- and 19th-century Europe and the Americas.
See also




Ancient Greece portal




Outline of ancient Greece

Regions of ancient Greece


Outline of ancient Rome
Outline of ancient Egypt
Outline of classical studies

Regions in Greco-Roman antiquity
Classical demography
History of science in classical antiquity
Citizenship in ancient Greece (article section)


Macedonia (ancient kingdom)
Toynbee's law of challenge and response.

References

Notes



^ Carol G. Thomas (1988). Paths from ancient Greece. BRILL. pp.&#160;27–50. ISBN&#160;978-90-04-08846-7. Retrieved 12 June 2011.&#160;
^ Maura Ellyn; Maura McGinnis (2004). Greece: A Primary Source Cultural Guide. The Rosen Publishing Group. p.&#160;8. ISBN&#160;978-0-8239-3999-2.&#160;
^ John E. Findling; Kimberly D. Pelle (2004). Encyclopedia of the Modern Olympic Movement. Greenwood Publishing Group. p.&#160;23. ISBN&#160;978-0-313-32278-5.&#160;
^ Wayne C. Thompson; Mark H. Mullin. Western Europe, 1983. Stryker-Post Publications. p.&#160;337. for ancient Greece was the cradle of Western culture&#160;...&#160;
^ Frederick Copleston (1 June 2003). History of Philosophy Volume 1: Greece and Rome. A&amp;C Black. p.&#160;13. ISBN&#160;978-0-8264-6895-6. PART I PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHY CHAPTER II THE CRADLE OF WESTERN THOUGHT:&#160;
^ Mario Iozzo (2001). Art and History of Greece: And Mount Athos. Casa Editrice Bonechi. p.&#160;7. ISBN&#160;978-88-8029-435-1. The capital of Greece, one of the world's most glorious cities and the cradle of Western culture,&#160;
^ Marxiano Melotti (25 May 2011). The Plastic Venuses: Archaeological Tourism in Post-Modern Society. Cambridge Scholars Publishing. p.&#160;188. ISBN&#160;978-1-4438-3028-7. In short, Greece, despite having been the cradle of Western culture, was then an "other" space separate from the West.&#160;
^ Library Journal 97. Bowker. April 1972. p.&#160;1588. Ancient Greece: Cradle of Western Culture (Series), disc. 6 strips with 3 discs, range: 44–60 fr., 17–18 min&#160;
^ Stanley Mayer Burstein (2002). Current Issues and the Study of Ancient History. Regina Books. p.&#160;15. ISBN&#160;978-1-930053-10-6. and making Egypt play the same role in African education and culture that Athens and Greece do in Western culture.&#160;
^ Murray Milner, Jr. (8 January 2015). Elites: A General Model. John Wiley &amp; Sons. p.&#160;62. ISBN&#160;978-0-7456-8950-0. Greece has long been considered the seedbed or cradle of Western civilization.&#160;
^ Aa.Vv. (2011-11-10T00:00:00+01:00). Slavica viterbiensia 003: Periodico di letterature e culture slave della Facoltà di Lingue e Letterature Straniere Moderne dell'Università della Tuscia. Gangemi Editore spa. p.&#160;148. ISBN&#160;978-88-492-6909-3. The Special Case of Greece The ancient Greece was a cradle of the Western culture,&#160; Check date values in: |date= (help)
^ Kim Covert (1 July 2011). Ancient Greece: Birthplace of Democracy. Capstone. p.&#160;5. ISBN&#160;978-1-4296-6831-6. Ancient Greece is often called the cradle of western civilization.&#160;... Ideas from literature and science also have their roots in ancient Greece.&#160;
^ Ricardo Duchesne (7 February 2011). The Uniqueness of Western Civilization. BRILL. p.&#160;297. ISBN&#160;90-04-19248-4. The list of books which have celebrated Greece as the "cradle" of the West is endless; two more examples are Charles Freeman's The Greek Achievement: The Foundation of the Western World (1999) and Bruce Thornton's Greek Ways: How the Greeks Created Western Civilization (2000)&#160;
^ Bruce Thornton, Greek Ways: How the Greeks Created Western Civilization, Encounter Books, 2002
^ Richard Tarnas, The Passion of the Western Mind (New York: Ballantine Books, 1991).
^ Colin Hynson, Ancient Greece (Milwaukee: World Almanac Library, 2006), 4.
^ Carol G. Thomas, Paths from Ancient Greece (Leiden, Netherlands: E. J. Brill, 1988).
^ Short, John R (1987), An Introduction to Urban Geography, Routledge, p.&#160;10&#160;.
^ Pomeroy, Sarah B. (1999). Ancient Greece: a political, social, and cultural history. Oxford University Press. ISBN&#160;978-0-19-509742-9.&#160;
^ Hadas, Moses (1950). A History of Greek Literature. Columbia University Press. p.&#160;273. ISBN&#160;0-231-01767-7.&#160;
^ Grant, Michael (1995). Greek and Roman historians: information and misinformation. Routledge, 1995. p.&#160;74. ISBN&#160;978-0-415-11770-8.&#160;
^ Hall Jonathan M. (2007). A History of the Archaic Greek World. Wiley-Blackwell. ISBN&#160;978-0-631-22667-3.&#160;
^ Sealey, Raphael (1976). A history of the Greek city states, ca. 700–338 B.C. University of California Press. pp.&#160;10–11. ISBN&#160;978-0-631-22667-3.&#160;
^ Slavoj Žižek (18 April 2011). Living in the End Times. Verso. p.&#160;218. ISBN&#160;978-1-84467-702-3. Retrieved 12 June 2011.&#160;
^ "Online Etymology Dictionary". Etymonline.com. Retrieved 2009-01-06.&#160;
^ "tyrant—Definitions from Dictionary.com". Dictionary.reference.com. Archived from the original on 25 January 2009. Retrieved 2009-01-06.&#160;
^ Holland T. Persian Fire p&#160;69–70. ISBN 978-0-349-11717-1
^ Holland T. Persian Fire p&#160;131–138. ISBN 978-0-349-11717-1
^ Olbrycht 2011, pp.&#160;343.
^ Rhodes 2007, p.&#160;3.
^ Typhoid Fever Behind Fall of Athens. LiveScience. January 23, 2006.
^ Sources for the map: "Historical Atlas of Peninsular India" Oxford University Press (dark blue, continuous line), A.K. Narain "The coins of the Indo-Greek kings" (dark blue, dotted line, see File:Indo-GreekWestermansNarain.jpg for reference), Westermans "Atlas zur Weltgeschichte".
^ Alexander's Gulf outpost uncovered. BBC News. August 7, 2007.
^ "Macedonia". Encyclopædia Britannica. Encyclopædia Britannica Online. 2008. Archived from the original on 8 December 2008. Retrieved 2008-11-03.&#160;
^ The Cambridge Ancient History: The fourth century B.C. edited by D.M. Lewis et al. I E S Edwards, Cambridge University Press, D. M. Lewis, John Boardman, Cyril John Gadd, Nicholas Geoffrey Lemprière Hammond, 2000, ISBN 0-521-23348-8, pp.&#160;723–724.
^ Population of the Greek city-states
^ Holland, T. Persian Fire, Abacus, ISBN 978-0-349-11717-1
^ Holland T. Persian Fire, p94 ISBN 978-0-349-11717-1
^ Slavery in Ancient Greece. Britannica Student Encyclopædia.
^ Angus Konstam: "Historical Atlas of Ancient Greece", pp.&#160;94–95. Thalamus publishing, UK, 2003, ISBN 1-904668-16-X
^ W. Schieder, "Real slave prices and the relative cost of slave labor in the Greco-Roman world", Ancient Society, vol. 35, 2005.
^ Pedersen, Early Physics and Astronomy, pp.&#160;55–6
^ Pedersen, Early Physics and Astronomy, pp.&#160;45–7
^ Grammaticos, P. C.; Diamantis, A. (2008). "Useful known and unknown views of the father of modern medicine, Hippocrates and his teacher Democritus". Hellenic journal of nuclear medicine 11 (1): 2–4. PMID&#160;18392218.&#160;
^ Hippocrates, Microsoft Encarta Online Encyclopedia 2006. Microsoft Corporation. Archived 2009-10-31.
^ Strong, W.F.; Cook, John A. (July 2007). "Reviving the Dead Greek Guys". Global Media Journal, Indian Edition. ISSN: 1550-7521. Archived from the original on April 25, 2015.&#160;
^ Garrison, Fielding H. (1966). History of Medicine. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Company. pp.&#160;92–93.&#160;
^ Nuland, Sherwin B. (1988). Doctors. Knopf. p.&#160;5. ISBN&#160;0-394-55130-3.&#160;



Bibliography


Charles Freeman (1996). Egypt, Greece and Rome. Oxford University Press.&#160;
Paul MacKendrick (1962). The Greek Stones Speak: The Story of Archaeology in Greek Lands. St. Martin's Press.&#160;
Thomas Wardle (1835). The history of ancient Greece, its colonies and conquests from the earliest accounts till division of the Macedonian Empire in the East.
Rhodes, P.J. (2007) [1986]. The Greek City-States: A Source Book (2nd ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN&#160;978-1-139-46212-9.&#160;
Olbrycht, Marek Jan (2011). "17. Macedonia and Persia". In Roisman, Joseph; Worthington, Ian. A Companion to Ancient Macedonia. John Wiley &amp; Sons. pp.&#160;342–370. ISBN&#160;1-4443-5163-X.&#160;

Further reading

Goodrich, S. G. (1849). A pictorial history of Greece: Ancient and modern. New York: Huntington &amp; Savage

External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ancient Greece.



The Canadian Museum of Civilization—Greece Secrets of the Past
Ancient Greece website from the British Museum
Economic history of ancient Greece
The Greek currency history
Limenoscope, an ancient Greek ports database
The Ancient Theatre Archive, Greek and Roman theatre architecture
Illustrated Greek History, Dr. Janice Siegel, Department of Classics, Hampden-Sydney College, Virginia









v
t
e


Ancient Greece









Outline
Timeline












&#160;



History
Geography













Periods



Cycladic civilization
Minoan civilization
Mycenaean civilization
Greek Dark Ages
Archaic period
Classical Greece
Hellenistic Greece
Roman Greece








Geography



Aegean Sea
Aeolis
Alexandria
Antioch
Cappadocia
Crete
Cyprus
Doris
Ephesus
Epirus
Hellespont
Ionia
Ionian Sea
Macedonia
Magna Graecia
Miletus
Peloponnesus
Pergamon
Pontus
Ancient Greek colonies


















&#160;



City states
Politics
Military













City states



Argos
Athens
Byzantium
Chalkis
Corinth
Megalopolis
Rhodes
Sparta
Syracuse
Thebes








Politics







Boeotarch
Boule
Koinon
Proxeny
Strategos
Synedrion
Tagus
Tyrant
Amphictyonic League








Athenian



Agora
Areopagus
Ecclesia
Graphē paranómōn
Heliaia
Ostracism








Spartan



Apella
Ephor
Gerousia
Harmost











Military



Wars
Athenian military
Antigonid Macedonian army
Army of Macedon
Ballista
Cretan archers
Hellenistic armies
Hippeis
Hoplite
Hetairoi
Macedonian phalanx
Phalanx
Peltast
Pezhetairos
Sarissa
Sacred Band of Thebes
Sciritae
Seleucid army
Spartan army
Toxotai
Xiphos
Xyston


















&#160;
People











List of ancient Greeks






Rulers



Kings of Argos
Archons of Athens
Kings of Athens
Kings of Commagene
Diadochi
Kings of Lydia
Kings of Macedonia
Kings of Paionia
Attalid kings of Pergamon
Kings of Pontus
Kings of Sparta
Tyrants of Syracuse








Philosophers



Anaxagoras
Anaximander
Anaximenes
Antisthenes
Aristotle
Democritus
Diogenes of Sinope
Empedocles
Epicurus
Gorgias
Heraclitus
Hypatia
Leucippus
Parmenides
Plato
Protagoras
Pythagoras
Socrates
Thales
Zeno








Authors



Aeschylus
Aesop
Alcaeus
Archilochus
Aristophanes
Bacchylides
Euripides
Herodotus
Hesiod
Hipponax
Homer
Ibycus
Lucian
Menander
Mimnermus
Pindar
Plutarch
Polybius
Sappho
Simonides
Sophocles
Stesichorus
Theognis
Thucydides
Timocreon
Tyrtaeus
Xenophon








Others



Agesilaus II
Agis II
Alcibiades
Alexander the Great
Aratus
Archimedes
Aspasia
Demosthenes
Epaminondas
Euclid
Hipparchus
Hippocrates
Leonidas
Lycurgus
Lysander
Milo of Croton
Miltiades
Pausanias
Pericles
Philip of Macedon
Philopoemen
Praxiteles
Ptolemy
Pyrrhus
Solon
Themistocles








Groups



Philosophers
Playwrights
Poets
Tyrants








By culture



Ancient Greek tribes
Thracian Greeks
Ancient Macedonians


















&#160;



Society
Culture













Society



Agriculture
Calendar
Clothing
Coinage
Cuisine
Economy
Education
Festivals
Funeral and burial practices
Homosexuality
Law
Olympic Games
Pederasty
Philosophy
Prostitution
Religion
Slavery
Warfare
Wedding customs
Wine











Arts
Sciences






Architecture (Greek Revival architecture)
Astronomy
Literature
Mathematics
Medicine
Music (Musical system)
Pottery
Sculpture
Technology
Theatre








Religion







Funeral and burial practices
Mythology

mythological figures


Temple
Twelve Olympians
Underworld








Sacred places



Eleusis
Delphi
Delos
Dodona
Mount Olympus
Olympia











Structures







Athenian Treasury
Lion Gate
Long Walls
Philippeion
Theatre of Dionysus
Tunnel of Eupalinos








Temples



Aphaea
Artemis
Athena Nike
Erechtheion
Hephaestus
Hera (Olympia)
Parthenon
Samothrace
Zeus (Olympia)











Language



Proto-Greek
Mycenaean
Homeric
Dialects

Aeolic
Arcadocypriot
Attic
Doric
Ionic
Locrian
Macedonian
Pamphylian


Koine








Writing



Linear A
Linear B
Cypriot syllabary
Greek alphabet
Greek numerals
Attic numerals


















&#160;
Lists









Cities

in Epirus


People
Place names
Stoae
Temples
Theatres














 Category
 Portal
 WikiProject
















v
t
e


Classical antiquity by region






Europa



Graecia
Italia
Gallia
Dacia
Thracia
Illyria
Hispania
Britannia
Germania








Asia



Scythia
Anatolia
Syria
Arabia








Africa



Libya
Aegyptus
Carthage
Igbo-Ukwu
















v
t
e


Ancient Greek and Roman wars






Ancient Greece



Trojan War
First Messenian War
Second Messenian War
Lelantine War
Greek–Punic Wars (Sicilian Wars)
Greco-Persian Wars
Aeginetan War
Wars of the Delian League
Samian War
Peloponnesian War
Corinthian War
First&#160;/ Second&#160;/ Third Sacred War
Social War (357–355 BC)
Rise of Macedon
Wars of Alexander the Great
Wars of the Diadochi
Lamian War
Chremonidean War
Cleomenean War
Social War (220–217 BC)
Cretan War
Aetolian War
War against Nabis
Maccabean Revolt








Roman Republic



Roman–Latin wars&#160;(First Latin War&#160;(Battle of Lake Regillus)
Second Latin War)
Samnite Wars
Pyrrhic War
Punic Wars&#160;(First
Second
Third)
Macedonian Wars&#160;(Illyrian
First Macedonian
Second Macedonian
Seleucid
Third Macedonian
Fourth Macedonian)
Jugurthine War
Cimbrian War
Roman Servile Wars&#160;(First
Second
Third)
Social War (90–88 BC)
Sulla's civil wars&#160;(First
Second)
Mithridatic Wars&#160;(First
Second
Third)
Gallic Wars
Julius Caesar's civil war
Augustus' rise to power&#160;(Battle of Mutina
Liberators' civil war
Sicilian revolt
Perusine War (Fulvia's civil war)
Final War of the Roman Republic)








Roman Empire



Germanic Wars&#160;(Marcomannic
Alemannic
Gothic
Visigothic)
Conquest of Britain
Wars of Boudica
Armenian War
Four Emperors
Jewish wars
Domitian's Dacian War
Trajan's Dacian Wars
Parthian Wars
Wars against Persia
Third-century civil wars
Decline and fall of the Western Empire











Military history















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ancient_Greece&amp;oldid=690689091"					
				Categories: Ancient GreeceHidden categories: CS1 errors: datesWikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalismWikipedia protected pages without expiryAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from July 2015Articles with unsourced statements from July 2013Articles needing additional references from June 2011All articles needing additional referencesCommons category with local link same as on WikidataArticles which contain graphical timelines				
							
		
		
			