


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Broadcasting of sports events
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				




The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject. Please improve this article and discuss the issue on the talk page. (August 2013)


The broadcasting of sports events is the live coverage of sports as a television program, on radio and other broadcasting media. It usually involves one or more sports commentators describing the events as they happen.



Contents


1 By country

1.1 Canada
1.2 United Kingdom
1.3 United States

1.3.1 History




2 Broadcasting rights and contracts

2.1 Protected events


3 Dedicated sports channels

3.1 In Brazil
3.2 In the United Kingdom
3.3 In the United States
3.4 League-owned channels
3.5 Team-owned channels


4 See also
5 References
6 Bibliography



By country[edit]
Canada[edit]
See also: East Coast bias
Broadcasting of sports started with descriptions of play sent via telegraph in the 1890s. In 1896, a telegraph line was connected to the Victoria Rink in Montreal to update fans in Winnipeg of the Stanley Cup challenge series between Montreal and Winnipeg ice hockey teams. In 1923, the first radio broadcast of an ice hockey game took place on 8 February, with the broadcast of the third period of a game between Midland and North Toronto of the Ontario Hockey Association.[1] Later that month, the first full-game broadcast took place in Winnipeg. That same season, hockey broadcasting pioneer Foster Hewitt made his first broadcast.[2]
In 1933, Hewitt called a Canada-wide radio broadcast of an NHL game between the Detroit Red Wings and the Toronto Maple Leafs. Always starting the broadcast with "Hello, Canada, and hockey fans in the United States and Newfoundland!"; this phrase stuck around (albeit without the "Newfoundland" portion after the dominion confederated into Canada in 1949) all the way to CBC's first national television broadcast (the first actual broadcast was on closed-circuit in Maple Leaf Gardens in Spring 1952) of Hockey Night in Canada in October 1952. Today it is consistently among the highest-rated programs in Canada.
Broadcasting of the Canadian Football League has been a fixture of Canadian television since the CBC's debut in 1952. From 1962 (one year after the debut of CTV) through 2007, there were two separate CFL contracts: one for CBC, and one for CTV (or a sister channel such as cable outlet TSN). Terrestrial television broadcasts of CFL games ended in 2008, when TSN acquired exclusive TV rights to the league.
American sports broadcasts are widely available in Canada, both from Canadian stations and from border blasters in the United States. In order to protect Canadian broadcasters' advertising, broadcast stations can invoke simultaneous substitution: any cable or satellite feed of an American station broadcasting the same program as a Canadian broadcast station must be blacked out and replaced by the Canadian feed. This rule is part of the reason the NFL, which is broadcast on terrestrial television in the United States but has only a token presence in Canada, is also broadcast on terrestrial TV in Canada, while the CFL no longer is (the CFL is broadcast only on cable in the United States); the simultaneous substitution benefits are not extended to cable stations. For the purposes of regional sports broadcasting, the Toronto Blue Jays and Toronto Raptors both claim all of Canada as their "territory," allowing Blue Jays and Raptors games to be broadcast nationwide.
United Kingdom[edit]
The first sports event broadcast in the United Kingdom was a Rugby Union international between England and Wales, broadcast from Twickenham in January 1927. Two weeks later the first broadcast of a football match took place, with the BBC covering Arsenal's league fixture against Sheffield United at Highbury. Listeners to the broadcast could use numbered grids published in the Radio Times in order to ascertain in which area of the pitch the action was taking place due to a second commentator reading out grid references during the match.[3]
The United Kingdom saw the first live television broadcast of a football match, with the BBC showing a specially arranged fixture between Arsenal and Arsenal Reserves on 16 September 1937.
The British media is dominated by national outlets, with local media playing a much smaller role. Traditionally the BBC played a dominant role in televising sport, providing extensive high-quality advertisement free coverage and free publicity in exchange for being granted broadcast rights for low fees. ITV broadcast a smaller portfolio of events, and Channel 4 broadcast a few events from the 1980s, mainly horse races and so-called minority sports. In the early 1990s this arrangement was shaken up by the arrival of pay-TV in the form of BSkyB. Their dedicated sports channels have since become the only place for some major sports to be seen. Starting in 2006 the Irish company Setanta Sports emerged as a challenger to Sky Sports' dominance of the British pay-TV sports market; however, Setanta's UK channel went into bankruptcy administration and off the air in 2009. Between 2009 and 2013 ESPN made an attempt to challenge Sky Sports', which ended in failure. Since 2013 Sky's main rival has been BT Sport, a subdidiary of the former national telecommunications monopoly BT plc. There is also a dedicated UK-version of Eurosport, called British Eurosport.
Radio sports coverage is also important. BBC Radio 5 Live broadcasts almost all major sports events. It now has a commercial rival called Talksport, but this has not acquired anywhere near as many exclusive contracts as Sky Sports and dedicates much of its airtime to sports discussions and phone-ins; Absolute Radio has also begun acquiring sports rights. BBC Local Radio also provides extensive coverage of sport, giving more exposure to second-tier clubs which get limited national coverage.
United States[edit]
In the United States, national and local media both serve major roles in sports broadcasting. Depending on the league and event, telecasts are often shown live on network television (traditionally on weekends and during major events — either national through a Television network, or in some cases, regionally syndicated by an operation such as Raycom Sports or a team), and nationally available cable channels (such as ESPN or Fox Sports 1). In some leagues (such as the NHL and the NBA), events are also primarily shown by regional sports networks groups (such as Fox Sports Networks), networks which air telecasts for teams of local interest, which are usually only carried within the relevant market. Additionally, cable channels also exist that are dedicated to specific types of sports, certain college sports conferences, or a specific league. Pay-per-view broadcasts are typically restricted to combat sports such as boxing, mixed martial arts or professional wrestling.
Radio broadcasts are extensive. The national leagues each have national network coverage of league high games in addition to local radio coverage originating with each team, with ESPN Radio and WestwoodOne controlling national rights to the major team sports and the motorsports circuits operating their own networks. Local radio broadcasts cover a wide variety of sports, ranging from the majors to local school and recreational leagues.
Internet broadcasts are also common, though college and major professional sports either use a pay wall or subscriber-based systems such as TV Everywhere to extract payment. Telephone broadcasts are rare, although a few companies provide the service.
History[edit]
See also: East Coast bias
In 1911, more than 1,000 people gathered in downtown Lawrence, Kansas to watch a mechanical reproduction of the 1911 Kansas vs. Missouri football game while it was being played. A Western Union telegraph wire was set up direct from Columbia, Missouri. A group of people then would announce the results of the previous play and used a large model of a football playing field to show the results. Those in attendance cheered as though they were watching the game live, including the school's legendary Rock Chalk, Jayhawk cheer.[4]
The first voice broadcast of a sporting event took place on 11 April 1921 when Westinghouse station KDKA in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania broadcast a 10-round, no decision boxing match between Johnny Dundee and Johnny Ray at Pittsburgh’s Motor Square Garden.[5] Prior to that, an experimental telegraph broadcast of the 1919 Lone Star Showdown was held on Thanksgiving Day of that year on experimental station 5XB, the predecessor of WTAW.[6]
The first radio broadcast of a baseball game occurred on 5 August 1921 over KDKA from Pittsburgh's Forbes Field. Harold W. Arlin announced a game between the Pittsburgh Pirates and the Philadelphia Phillies. Two months later, on 8 October 1921, from the same Forbes Field, Arlin announced the first live radio broadcast of a college football game on KDKA when he gave the play-by-play action of the University of Pittsburgh victory over West Virginia University.
On 17 May 1939, the United States' first televised sporting event, a college baseball game between the Columbia Lions and Princeton Tigers, was broadcast by NBC from Columbia's Baker Field.[7][8] (The world's first live televised sporting event had been the 1936 Summer Olympics in Berlin.[9]) On 30 September 1939, the first American football game, a college contest between Fordham and Waynesburg College was broadcast on television.[10] The first nationwide broadcast of college football, which was also the first live sporting event seen coast-to-coast, was a game between Duke University and the University of Pittsburgh that was televised by NBC on 29 September 1951.[11] The broadcasting of college football games on television in the United States has been a fixture of the major networks on a continuous basis since that time. The NCAA severely restricted broadcasts of college football from the 1950s until a judge ruled that the action was a violation of antitrust rules in 1982, which allowed for a much greater expansion of college football broadcasting.
NBC broadcast the first televised National Football League (NFL) game when they carried the 22 October 1939 game between the Philadelphia Eagles and the Brooklyn Dodgers. The same year, the first nationwide radio broadcast of an NFL championship game was carried on the Mutual Broadcasting System. While the NFL had weak television deals that ranked behind college football and even the Canadian Football League in the 1950s, the broadcast rights of the NFL would go on to become an important property following the 1958 NFL Championship and the later establishment of the American Football League in 1960. Monday Night Football, NFL on Fox, and NBC Sunday Night Football have changed the landscape of American football broadcasts, including the scheduling of the Super Bowl, transforming it into a primetime spectacle from an afternoon broadcast. The price for the NFL's broadcast rights has increased steadily over the past several decades, in part because of bidding wars between the numerous networks and the fear of losing stature due to the loss of NFL programming; as of the most recent contract the league nets annual fees of over $5 billion, or half of the league's overall revenue, from television rights alone. Four of the five major sports television units in the United States, and the four companies that control all of the major broadcast networks, currently own some NFL rights.
NBC also broadcast an NHL game in 1940; the league would briefly air games in the 1950s, but due to a dispute over how much of the rights fee money the players would receive (and difficulties programming around the two Canadian teams in the league at the time), the NHL refused to televise its games in the United States for six years in the 1960s. For this reason, as well as the regional nature of the sport, televised NHL games have struggled to gain a foothold on American television for the past several decades, trailing the other leagues in ratings. After several decades of bouncing around various networks (and a stretch from 1975 to 1994 when the league had no permanent broadcast partner), the NHL established a stable broadcast partner in 2004, when NBC and what was then Outdoor Life Network (since renamed OLN, Versus, and now NBCSN) took over NHL broadcast rights, having since renewed those rights through 2021.
The first ever television broadcast of a basketball game occurred on 28 February 1940 when the University of Pittsburgh defeated Fordham at Madison Square Garden on NBC station W2XBS.[12] Professional basketball has been aired on television since 1953, shortly after the founding of the National Basketball Association, and has been aired on television ever since. College basketball, on the other hand, was much later in gaining a television foothold. Although the NCAA Tournament has aired since 1962, it was not until the mid-1970s that regular-season college basketball games would air on major network television.
Outside of the networks, the only other source for national sports television was through early syndication networks. Sports Network Incorporated (SNI), later renamed the Hughes Television Network, carried Cleveland Browns (NFL) games in the 1950s and NHL games in the late 1970s, after the NHL lost its contract with NBC. TVS Television Network helped popularize the broadcasts of college basketball and also gave an outlet to the short-lived World Football League. Mizlou Television Network earned a reputation for carrying a large number of college football bowl games in an era when televised college football was highly restricted. Modern syndication networks still exist for sporting events, such as Raycom Sports and American Sports Network, both of which specialize in college sports.
The debut of ESPN in 1979 revolutionized the broadcasting of sports events. Within several years of ESPN's founding as a basic cable channel, it had developed a stable of sports broadcasts ranging from major leagues to oddities. ESPN has since grown into a massive multiplexed network, with several channels and a large news bureau that has led to the network bestowing the title of "Worldwide Leader in Sports" upon itself. Cable, and later digital cable and satellite, greatly expanded the number of channels (and, by extension, the room for broadcasting sports events) available on a given set, and also gave channels such as ESPN the ability to broadcast direct and nationwide, as opposed to dealing with local affiliates. Syndication networks gave way to regional sports networks, which carried broadcasts of local sports on a far greater scale than full-service broadcast stations could provide at the time; these combined with out-of-market sports packages (which debuted in the 1990s) allowed the carriage of these networks' sporting events across the country. However, with the increased availability of sports to broadcast came increasing rights fees, which could be recovered by the newly authorized practice of collecting retransmission consent fees from cable subscribers, which has led to numerous disputes and the dropping of channels from cable lineups. Individual leagues began launching their own networks in the 2000s; specialty networks of other sports have had varying levels of success.
The Internet has also allowed greater broadcasting of sports events, both in video and audio forms and through free and subscription channels. With an Internet broadcast, even a locally broadcast high school football game can be heard worldwide on any device with an audio output and an Internet connection. Individual leagues (including major ones) all have subscription services that allow subscribers to watch their sporting events for a fee.
Broadcasting rights and contracts[edit]
See also: List of sports television broadcast contracts
Broadcasting rights and contracts limit who can show footage of the event.
In the United Kingdom BSkyB based its early marketing largely on its acquisition of the broadcast rights of the top division of the English league football, which as part of the deal with The Football Association broke away from The Football League to become the Premier League. This prevented the footage of any major Premier League football game being shown on free-to-air television until much later that evening (as highlights), something the European Commission were very unhappy about. Following warnings of legal action to stop the monopoly, an announcement was made that an alternative structure would be in place when the contract ended in 2007.[13]
In the United States, team sports are broadcast by networks usually only in "game of the week" or championship situations, except for the NFL (see NFL on television) and motorsport. Other sports are broadcast by sports channels, and are limited by who can view them based on various rules set by the leagues themselves, resulting in blackouts. These limitations can be legally overlooked by purchasing out-of-market sports packages, such as MLB Extra Innings or NFL Sunday Ticket. Regular season games involving local teams (except the NFL) may also be viewed on those local stations or regional sports channels that have a contract to broadcast that team's games.
Events that have been described as "the most watched" per various definitions include the FIFA World Cup, Summer Olympic Games, Cricket World Cup, UEFA Champions League, Tour de France, Rugby World Cup (rugby union), Indian Premier League, Super Bowl, and the FIA Formula One World Championship.
TV Rights of the UEFA Champions League, per country. Season 2009-2010, according to FootBiz.[14]

United Kingdom: €179 million
Italy: €98 million
Spain: €91 million
Germany: €85 million
France: €52 million
Croatia: €28 million
Greece: €8.5 million
Poland: €8.1 million
North America: €3.5 million
Belgium: €2.9 million
Australia: €2.9 million
Ireland: €2 million

Protected events[edit]




Ellen van Dijk filmed from a motor during the 2012 Summer Olympics.


In the UK, the regulations set out in the Ofcom Code on Sports and Other Listed and Designated Events dictate that some sporting events must have coverage made available to free-to-air channels. "Category A" events, including the Olympic Games and FIFA World Cup should be available live, while "Category B" events such as all test cricket played in England and the Commonwealth Games should be available as highlights or with a short delay.
A similar concept applies in Italy (law 8/99) and Australia (anti-siphoning law) to some important sport events.
In contrast, no law in the United States or Canada dictates that any given sporting event must broadcast over the air. In both countries, the general trend has been for the major leagues to slowly migrate their broadcasts to subscription channels, a process that has reached virtually every sport as high-profile broadcasts that historically have been free-to-air, such as all Canadian Football League football and most college football bowl games, are now available only by subscription to a cable network. Major events such as the World Cup and Olympics are typically split among both terrestrial and subscription channels.
Nevertheless, the National Football League has an internal policy requiring that its partners broadcast every game over the air, in the very least, in the visiting team's home market (and, if the game sells out, the home team's market as well). Also the league's playoff tournaments and league championship have always been carried nationwide on a terrestrial network, except for a wild card game in 2014.[15][16][17]
Dedicated sports channels[edit]
Main article: List of sports television channels
In Brazil[edit]

SporTV

SporTV2
SporTV3


ESPN Brasil

ESPN
ESPN+


Fox Sports

Fox Sports 2


BandSports
Esporte Interativo

Esporte Interativo Nordeste



Pay-per-view

Premiere FC (State Championships in Brazil, and the Brazilian Championship Série A and Série B)
Combate (Ultimate Fighting Championship and others MMA events)

In the United Kingdom[edit]

Sky Sports
British Eurosport
Trace Sports
Motors TV
ESPN
BT Sport

In the United States[edit]
National General Sports Networks:

CBS Sports Network
ESPN
ESPN2
ESPNEWS
FS1
FS2
NBCSN

Spanish:

ESPN Deportes
Fox Deportes
Univision Deportes Network

Specialty Sports Networks:

beIN Sport USA
GOL TV
Golf Channel
MLB Network
NBA TV
NFL Network
NHL Network
Tennis Channel
TVG Network
Universal Sports
WWE Network

College Sports Networks:

Big Ten Network
ESPNU
Fox College Sports
Pac-12 Network
SEC Network

Regional sports networks:

Comcast SportsNet (NBC Sports)
Fox Sports Networks
Time Warner Cable Sports Channel
Altitude Sports and Entertainment
Mid-Atlantic Sports Network
MSG
New England Sports Network
Root Sports
SportsNet New York

Online sports networks

Audio Sports Online
Game Time Radio
High School Cube
Ihigh
NetCast Sports Network (NCSN)
Internet Digital Sports Network (IDSN)

"'Online Broadcasting'"

The Backfield Press

League-owned channels[edit]

Big Ten Network
Canal del Fútbol
MLB Network
NBA TV
NFL Network
NHL Network
Pac-12 Network
SEC Network

Team-owned channels[edit]
Several sports teams in the United States have their own channels, or own shares in other sports networks. For example, the Boston Red Sox own a majority stake of the regional New England Sports Network, which retains the New England area television broadcast rights for the majority of Red Sox games (except for the few which are carried nationally on Fox or ESPN and playoff games). The New York Mets own SportsNet New York jointly with Comcast and Time Warner Cable. Madison Square Garden has its own network as well, MSG (TV vhannel), where they broadcast New York Rangers, New York Knicks, New York Islanders and high school sports games, as well as original shows. The YES Network, owned by Fox Sports, airs games of the New York Yankees, Brooklyn Nets and New York City FC games.
The Longhorn Network, in which ESPN owns a stake, is even more specialized, designed as an outlet for the athletic program of the University of Texas at Austin (although it has also aired football games of the UT system's San Antonio campus).
Team-owned channels are also common in Europe, most notably Barça TV, Benfica TV, Galatasaray TV, Manchester United TV and Real Madrid TV.
See also[edit]

Sports journalism

References[edit]


^ Kitchen, p.246
^ Hewitt, p. 25
^ "GGM 40: Highbury stages first live broadcast". Arsenal.com. 2007-08-02. Retrieved 2013-05-11.&#160;
^ "100 years ago: Football fans enjoy mechanized reproduction of KU-MU game". Lawrence Journal-World. 27 November 2011. Retrieved 27 December 2011.&#160;
^ "KDKA Firsts". KDKA. 2010. Retrieved 8 November 2010.&#160;
^ "First Play-By-Play Football Broadcast". W5AC. Retrieved 2013-05-11.&#160;
^ "SPORTS AND TELEVISION". Museum of Broadcast Communications. 2008. Retrieved 30 November 2009.&#160;
^ Koppett, Leonard (Spring 1999). "Baker Field: Birthplace of Sports Television". Columbia College Today (Columbia University). Retrieved 30 November 2009.&#160;
^ "1936 German Olympics". Television History. 2010. Retrieved 17 May 2010.&#160;
^ "Sports Knowhow". Sports Knowhow. 2010. Retrieved 8 November 2010.&#160;
^ Pedersen, Paul M.; Parks, Janet B.; Quarterman, Jerome; Thibault, Lucie, eds. (2011). Contemporary Sport Management (4th ed.). Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics. p.&#160;50. ISBN&#160;978-0-7360-8167-2. Retrieved 2012-03-25.&#160;
^ "American Sportscasters Online: Sportscasting firsts". American Sportscasters Association. Retrieved 2012-03-25.&#160;
^ "Football deal ends BSkyB monopoly". BBC News. 2005-11-17. Retrieved 2013-05-11.&#160;
^ "Droits télé de la Champions League: la France à la traîne" (in French). FootBiz. Retrieved 2013-05-11.&#160;
^ Chase, Chris (April 22, 2014). "ESPN to broadcast first ever NFL playoff game in 2015". USA Today. Retrieved October 29, 2014.&#160;
^ "ESPN to air 1st NFL playoff game in 2015". ESPN.com. April 22, 2014. Retrieved April 22, 2014.&#160;
^ "The Tradition Continues: NFL to Remain on Network TV" (Press release). National Football League. December 14, 2011. Retrieved December 14, 2011.&#160;


Bibliography[edit]

Hewitt, Foster (1967). Foster Hewitt, his own story. Ryerson Press.&#160;
Kitchen, Paul (2008). Win, Lose or Wrangle: The Inside Story of the Old Ottawa Senators - 1883-1935. Manotick Ontario: Penumbra Press.&#160;









v
t
e


Sport









History
Clubs
Equipment
Law
Medicine
Regulation
Science
Sociology


Outline of sports











 Portal
 Category
 Commons















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Broadcasting_of_sports_events&amp;oldid=690211933"					
				Categories: BroadcastingBroadcast lawHistory of televisionSports eventsSports journalismSports radioSports televisionTelevision terminologyWorks about sportsHidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr)Use dmy dates from October 2012Articles with limited geographic scope from August 2013				
							
		
		
			