


		
		
		
			

							
						

			History of Iran
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								  (Redirected from Ancient Persia)
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				


Part of a series on the



History of Iran







Mythological history


Pishdadian dynasty
Kayanian dynasty








Ancient period




BC


Kura-Araxes culture
3400–2000


Proto-Elamite
3200–2700


Elam
2700–539


Akkadian Empire
2400–2150


Kassites
c.1500 – c.1155


Neo-Assyrian Empire
911–609


Urartu
860–590


Mannaeans
850–616









Imperial period



Median Empire
678–550 BC


(Scythian Kingdom)
652–625 BC


Achaemenid Empire
550–330 BC


Kingdom of Armenia
331 BC – 428 AD


Atropatene
320s BC – 3rd&#160;century&#160;AD


Seleucid Empire
312–63 BC


Parthian Empire
247 BC – 224 AD


Sasanian Empire
224–651









Medieval period



Umayyad Caliphate
661–750


Abbasid Caliphate
750–1258


Dabuyids
642–760


Bavandids
651–1349


Masmughans of Damavand
651–760


Paduspanids
665–1598


Qarinvandids
7th – 11th century


Justanids
791–974


Alid dynasties
864 – 14th century


Tahirid dynasty
821–873


Samanid dynasty
819–999


Saffarid dynasty
861–1002


Ghurid dynasty
pre-879 – 1141


Sajid dynasty
889–929


Sallarid dynasty
919–1062


Ziyarid dynasty
930–1090


Ilyasids
932–968


Buyid dynasty
934–1062


Ghaznavid Empire
977–1186


Kakuyids
1008-1141


Nasrids
1029-1236


Seljuq Empire
1037–1194


Khwarazmian Empire
1077–1231


Atabegs of Yazd
1141–1319


Eldiguzids
1135–1225


Mihrabanids
1236–1537


Kurt dynasty
1244–1396


Ilkhanate Empire
1256–1335


Chobanid dynasty
1335–1357


Muzaffarid dynasty
1335–1393


Jalayirid dynasty
1337–1376


Sarbadars
1337–1376


Injuids
1335–1357


Afrasiyab dynasty
1349–1504


Marashis
1359–1596


Timurid Empire
1370–1507


Kia'i dynasty
1389–1592


Qara Qoyunlu
1406–1468


Aq Qoyunlu
1468–1508









Early modern period



Safavid Empire
1501–1736


(Hotaki dynasty)
1722–1729


Afsharid dynasty
1736–1796


Talysh Khanate
1747–1826


Zand dynasty
1750–1794


Qajar dynasty
1785–1925









Modern period



Pahlavi dynasty
1925–1979


Interim Government of Iran
1979–1980


Islamic Republic of Iran
1980–present









Related articles



Name
Monarchs
Economic history
Military history
Wars
Chronology







 Iran portal





v
t
e





The history of Iran, commonly also known as Persia in the Western world, is intertwined with the history of a larger region, also to an extent known as Greater Iran, comprising the area from Anatolia, the Bosphorus, and Egypt in the west to the borders of Ancient India and Syr Darya in the east, and from the Caucasus and the Eurasian Steppe in the north to the Persian Gulf and the Gulf of Oman in the south.
Iran is home to one of the world's oldest continuous major civilizations, with historical and urban settlements dating back to 4000 BC.[1] The southwestern and western part of the Iranian plateau participated in the traditional Ancient Near East with Elam, from the Early Bronze Age, and later with various other peoples, such as the Kassites, Manneans, and Gutians. Hegel names the Persians as the first Historical People.[2] The Medes unified Iran as a nation and empire in 625 BC.[3] The Achaemenid Empire (550–330 BC), founded by Cyrus the Great, was the first of the Persian empires to rule from the Balkans to North Africa and also Central Asia, spanning three continents, from their seat of power in Persis (Persepolis). It was the largest empire yet seen and the first world empire.[4] They were succeeded by the Seleucid Empire, the Parthians and the Sasanians who governed Iran for almost 1,000 years, and would put Iran once again as the leading powers in the world, only this time amongst their arch rival, the Roman Empire and the successive Byzantine Empire.
The Persian Empire proper begins in the Iron Age, following the influx of Iranian peoples. Iranian people gave rise to the Medes, the Achaemenids, the Arsacids, and the Sasanians during the classical antiquity.
Once a major empire of superpower proportions,[5][6] having conquered far and wide, Iran has endured invasions too, by the Greeks, Arabs, Turks, and the Mongols. Iran has continually reasserted its national identity throughout the centuries and has developed as a distinct political and cultural entity.
The Islamic conquest of Persia (633–656) ended the Sasanians and was a turning point in Iranian history. Islamicization in Iran took place during 8th to 10th century and led to the eventual decline of the Zoroastrian religion in Persia, as well as many of its dependancies. However, the achievements of the previous Persian civilizations were not lost, but were to a great extent absorbed by the new Islamic polity and civilization.
Iran was once again reunified as an independent state in 1501 by the Safavid dynasty which established Shi'a Islam[7] as the official religion of their empire, marking one of the most important turning points in the history of Islam.[8] Functioning again as a leading power, this time amongst their neighboring Ottoman arch rival for centuries, Iran had been a monarchy ruled by a shah, or emperor, almost without interruption from 1501 until the 1979 Iranian revolution, when Iran officially became an Islamic Republic on 1 April 1979.[9][10]
In the course of the first half of the 19th century, Iran irrevocably lost many of its territories in the Caucasus which it had been ruling intermittently encompassed for millennia, as well as being part of the very concept of Iran for centuries,[11] comprising modern day Georgia, Dagestan, Azerbaijan, and Armenia following the Russo-Persian War (1804-1813) and Russo-Persian War (1826-1828) to its rapidly expanding and emerged neighboring rival, the Russian Empire.[12]



Contents


1 Prehistory

1.1 Paleolithic
1.2 Neolithic to Chalcolithic
1.3 Bronze Age
1.4 Early Iron Age


2 Classical Antiquity

2.1 Median and Achaemenid Empire (650 BC–330 BC)
2.2 Hellenic conquest and Seleucid Empire (312 BC – 248 BC)
2.3 Parthian Empire (248 BC – 224 AD)
2.4 Sasanian Empire (224 – 651 AD)


3 Medieval Iran

3.1 Caliphate and Sultanate era

3.1.1 Islamic conquest of Persia (633–651)
3.1.2 The Umayyad Caliphate and its incursions into the Caspian coast
3.1.3 The Abbasid Caliphate and Iranian semi-independent governments
3.1.4 Islamic golden age, Shu'ubiyya movement and Persianization process
3.1.5 Persianate states and dynasties (977–1219)


3.2 Mongol invasion (1219–1221)

3.2.1 Destruction under the Mongols
3.2.2 Ilkhanate (1256–1335)
3.2.3 Sunnism and Shiism in pre-Safavid Iran




4 Timurid Empire (1370–1507)
5 Ak Koyunlu
6 Kara Koyunlu
7 Early modern era (1502–1925)

7.1 Safavid Empire (1501–1736)
7.2 Nader Shah and his successors
7.3 Qajar dynasty (1794–1925)
7.4 Migration of Caucasian Muslims
7.5 Constitutional Revolution and deposement


8 Pahlavi era (1925–1979)

8.1 Reza Shah (1925–1941)
8.2 World War II
8.3 Mohammad-Reza Shah (1941–1979)

8.3.1 1953: U.S. organized coup removes Mosaddeq




9 Iranian Revolution and the Islamic Republic (1979)

9.1 Ideology of the 1979 Iranian Revolution
9.2 Khomeini Takes Power (1979–1989)

9.2.1 Iran hostage crisis (1979–1981)
9.2.2 Iran–Iraq War (1980–1988)


9.3 Rule Under Khamenei (1989–present)

9.3.1 The First Eight Years (1989-1997)
9.3.2 Reforms and Consequences (1997-2005)
9.3.3 2005 Presidential Election and Consequences (2005-2009)
9.3.4 2013 Presidential Election and Improving US Iran Relations (2013-present)




10 See also
11 References
12 Sources
13 Further reading
14 External links



Prehistory[edit]




A gold cup at the National Museum of Iran, dating from the first half of 1st millennium BC.






Arg-e Bam Before the 2003 earthquake.






Chogha Zanbil is one of the few extant ziggurats outside of Mesopotamia and is considered to be the best preserved example in the world.


Further information: Archaeological sites in Iran and Prehistory of Iran
Further information: Tappeh Sialk, Jiroft culture and Shahr-i Sokhta
Paleolithic[edit]
The earliest archaeological artifacts in Iran were found in the Kashafrud and Ganj Par sites that are thought to date back to 100,000 years ago in the Middle Paleolithic.[13] Mousterian Stone tools made by Neanderthal man have also been found.[14] There are more cultural remains of Neanderthal man dating back to the Middle Paleolithic period, which mainly have been found in the Zagros region and fewer in central Iran at sites such as Kobeh, Kunji, Bisetun, Tamtama, Warwasi, and Yafteh Cave.[15] In 1949 a Neanderthal radius was discovered by CS Coon in Bisitun Cave.[16] Evidence for Upper Paleolithic and Epipaleolithic periods are known mainly from the Zagros region in the caves of Kermanshah and Khoramabad and a few number of sites in the Alborz range and Central Iran.
Neolithic to Chalcolithic[edit]
There are also 10,000-year-old human and animal figurines from Teppe Sarab in Kermanshah Province among the many other ancient artifacts.[14] Early agricultural communities such as Chogha Golan in 10,000 BC[17][18] along with settlements such as Chogha Bonut (the earliest village in Susiana) in 8000 BC,[19][20] began to flourish in and around the Zagros Mountains region in western Iran.[21] Around about the same time the earliest known clay vessels and modeled human and animal terracotta figurines were produced at Ganj Dareh, also in western Iran.[21]
The south-western part of Iran was part of the Fertile Crescent where most of humanity's first major crops were grown, in villages such as Susa (where a settlement was first founded possibly as early as 4395 cal BC)[22] and settlements such as Chogha Mish, dating back to 6800 BC;[1][23] there are 7,000-year-old jars of wine excavated in the Zagros Mountains[24] (now on display at the University of Pennsylvania) and ruins of 7,000-year-old settlements such as Sialk are further testament to that. The two main Neolithic Iranian settlements were the Zayandeh River Culture and Ganj Dareh.
Bronze Age[edit]
Further information: Tappeh Sialk, Jiroft civilization, Elam, Kura-Araxes culture, Akkadian Empire, Kassites and Mannaeans
Parts of what is modern-day northwestern Iran was part of the Kura-Araxes culture (circa 3,400 B.C. — circa 2,000 B.C.), that stretched up into the neighboring regions of the Caucasus and Anatolia.[12][25]
Susa is one of the oldest-known settlements of Iran and the world. Based on C14 dating, the time of foundation of the city is as early as 4395 BC,[26] a time that goes beyond the age of civilization in Mesopotamia. The general perception among archeologists is that Susa was an extension of the Sumerian city state of Uruk.[27][28] In its later history, Susa became the capital of Elam, which emerged as a state found 4000 BC.[26] There are also dozens of pre-historic sites across the Iranian plateau pointing to the existence of ancient cultures and urban settlements in the 4th millennium BC,[1] One of the earliest civilizations in Iranian plateau was the Jiroft Civilization in southeastern Iran, in the province of Kerman.
It is one of the most artifact-rich archaeological sites in the Middle East. Archaeological excavations in Jiroft led to the discovery of several objects belonging to the 4th millennium BC.[29] There is a large quantity of objects decorated with highly distinctive engravings of animals, mythological figures, and architectural motifs. The objects and their iconography are unlike anything ever seen before by archeologists. Many are made from chlorite, a gray-green soft stone; others are in copper, bronze, terracotta, and even lapis lazuli. Recent excavations at the sites have produced the world's earliest inscription which pre-dates Mesopotamian inscriptions.[30][31]
There are records of numerous other ancient civilizations on the Iranian plateau before the emergence of Iranian tribes during the Early Iron Age. The Early Bronze Age saw the rise of urbanization into organized city states and the invention of writing (the Uruk period) in the Near East. While Bronze Age Elam made use of writing from an early time, the Proto-Elamite script remains undeciphered, and records from Sumer pertaining to Elam are scarce.
Russian historian Igor M. Diakonoff determines the present day Iranian population of Iranian plateau as descendants of mainly non-Persian groups: "It is the autochthones of the Iranian plateau, and not the Proto-Indo-European tribes of Europe, which are, in the main, the ancestors, in the physical sense of the word, of the present-day Iranians."[32]
Early Iron Age[edit]
See also: Neo-Assyrian Empire and Urartu
Records become more tangible with the rise of the Neo-Assyrian Empire and its records of incursions from the Iranian plateau. As early as the 20th century BC, tribes came to the Iranian Plateau from the Pontic-Caspian steppe. The arrival of Iranians on the Iranian plateau forced the Elamites to relinquish one area of their empire after another and to take refuge in Susiana, Khuzistan and nearby area, which only then became coterminous with Elam.[33] Bahman Firuzmandi say that the southern Iranians might be intermixed with the Elamite peoples living in the plateau.[34] By the mid-1st millennium BC, Medes, Persians, and Parthians populated the Iranian plateau. Until the rise of the Medes, they all remained under Assyrian domination, like the rest of the Near East. In the first half of the 1st millennium BC, parts of northwestern Iran were incorporated into Urartu.
Classical Antiquity[edit]
Median and Achaemenid Empire (650 BC–330 BC)[edit]
Main articles: Median Empire and Achaemenid Empire
See also: Greco-Persian Wars







A map of the Achaemenid Empire









The Achaemenid Empire at its greatest extent









The monument generally assumed to be the tomb of Cyrus the Great









Representation of the palace of Darius I at Persepolis (T.Chipiez)




In 646 BC, The Assyrian king Ashurbanipal sacked Susa, which ended Elamite supremacy in the region.[35] For over 150 years Assyrian kings of nearby Northern Mesopotamia were seeking to conquer Median tribes of Western Iran.[36] Under pressure from the Assyrian empire, the small kingdoms of the western Iranian plateau coalesced into increasingly larger and more centralized states.[35]
In the second half of the 7th century BC, the Median tribes gained their independence and were united by Deioces. In 612 BC Cyaxares the Great, Deioces' grandson, and the Babylonian king Nabopolassar invaded Assyria and laid siege to and eventually destroyed Nineveh, the Assyrian capital, which led to the fall of the Neo-Assyrian Empire.[37] Urartu was later on conquered and dissolved as well by the Medes.[38][39] The Medes are credited with the foundation of Iran as a nation and empire, and established the first Iranian empire, the largest of its day until Cyrus the Great established a unified empire of the Medes and Persians leading to the Achaemenian Empire (c.550–330 BC).
Cyrus the Great overthrew, in turn, Median Empire, Lydian Empire, and Neo-Babylonian Empire, creating an empire far larger than Assyria. He was better able, through more benign policies, to reconcile his subjects to Persian rule; and the longevity of his empire was one result. The Persian king, like the Assyrian, was also "King of Kings", xšāyaθiya xšāyaθiyānām (shāhanshāh in modern Persian) – "great king," Megas Basileus, as known by the Greeks.
Cyrus's son, Cambyses II, conquered the last major power of the region, Ancient Egypt, causing the collapse of the Dynasty XXVI. Since he became ill and died before, or while, leaving Egypt, stories developed, as related by Herodotus, that he was struck down for impiety against the Egyptian pantheon. Be that as it may, it led to a succession crisis. The winner, Darius I of Persia, based his claim on membership in a collateral line of the Achaemenid Dynasty.
Darius' first capital was at Susa, and he started the building programme at Persepolis. He rebuilt a canal between the Nile and the Red Sea, a forerunner of the modern Suez Canal. He improved the extensive road system, and it is during his reign that mention is first made of the Royal Road (shown on map), a great highway stretching all the way from Susa to Sardis with posting stations at regular intervals. Major reforms took place under Darius. Coinage, in the form of the daric (gold coin) and the shekel (silver coin) was standardized (coinage had already been invented over a century before in Lydia c. 660 BC but not standardized),[40] and administrative efficiency was increased.
The Old Persian language appears in royal inscriptions, written in a specially adapted version of cuneiform. Under Cyrus the Great and Darius the Great, the Persian Empire eventually became the largest empire in human history up until that point, ruling and administrating over most of the then known world,[41] as well as spanning three continents, namely Europe, Asia, and Africa. Their greatest achievement was the empire itself. The Persian Empire represented the world's first superpower[5][42] that was based on a model of tolerance and respect for other cultures and religions.[43]




Map showing key sites during the Persian invasions of Greece


In the late 6th century BC, Darius launched his European campaign, in which he defeated the Paeonians, conquered Thrace, and subdued all coastal Greek cities, as well as defeating the European Scythians around the Danube river.[44] In 513/512, Macedon became a vassal kingdom of Persia.[44]
In 499 BC, Athens lent support to a revolt in Miletus which resulted in the sacking of Sardis. This led to an Achaemenid campaign against mainland Greece known as the Greco-Persian Wars which lasted the first half of the 5th century BC, and is known as one of the most important wars in European history. In the First Persian invasion of Greece, the Persian general Mardonius re-subjugated Thrace and made Macedon a full part of Persia.[44] The war eventually turned out in defeat however. Darius' successor Xerxes I launched the Second Persian invasion of Greece. At a crucial moment in the war, almost all of mainland Greece was overran by the Persians, including all territories to the north of the Isthmus of Corinth,[45] however, this was also turned out in a Greek victory, by which Persia lost its footholds in Europe. During the Greco-Persian wars Persia made some major territorial advantages and razed and captured Athens in 480 BC, but after a string of Greek victories the Persians were forced to withdraw while losing control of Macedonia, Thrace and Ionia. Fighting ended with the peace of Callias in 449 BC. In 404 BC following the death of Darius II Egypt rebelled under Amyrtaeus. Later Egyptian Pharaohs successfully resisted Persian attempts to reconquer Egypt until 343 BC when Egypt was reconquered by Artaxerxes III.





A panoramic view of Persepolis.



Hellenic conquest and Seleucid Empire (312 BC – 248 BC)[edit]




The Seleucid Empire in 200 BC, (before Antiochus was defeated by the Romans).


Main article: Seleucid Empire
In 334 BC-331 BC Alexander the Great, also known in the Zoroastrian Arda Wiraz Nâmag as "the accursed Alexander", defeated Darius III in the battles of Granicus, Issus and Gaugamela, swiftly conquering the Persian Empire by 331 BC. Alexander's empire broke up shortly after his death, and Alexander's general, Seleucus I Nicator, tried to take control of Persia, Mesopotamia, and later Syria and Asia Minor.
His ruling family is known as the Seleucid Dynasty. He was killed in 281 BC by Ptolemy Keraunos. Greek language, philosophy, and art came with the colonists. During the Seleucid Dynasty throughout Alexander's former empire, Greek became the common tongue of diplomacy and literature.




Bagadates I, first native Persian ruler after Greek rule.


Parthian Empire (248 BC – 224 AD)[edit]




Bronze Statue of a Parthian prince, National Museum of Iran.


Main article: Parthian Empire
See also: Roman-Parthian Wars
The Parthian Empire was the realm of the Arsacid dynasty (اشکانیان), who reunited and governed the Iranian plateau after conquering Parthia and defeating the Greek Seleucid Empire (سلوکیان) in the later 3rd century BC, and intermittently controlled Mesopotamia between ca 150 BC and 224 AD. The Parthian Empire quickly included Eastern Arabia.
Parthia was the Eastern arch-enemy of the Roman Empire; and it limited Rome's expansion beyond Cappadocia (central Anatolia). The Parthian armies included two types of cavalry: the heavily armed and armoured cataphracts and lightly armed but highly mobile mounted archers.
For the Romans, who relied on heavy infantry, the Parthians were too hard to defeat, as both types of cavalry were much faster and more mobile than foot soldiers. The Parthian shot used by the Parthian cavalry was most notably feared by the Roman soldiers, which proved pivotal in the crushing Roman defeat at the Battle of Carrhae. On the other hand, the Parthians found it difficult to occupy conquered areas as they were unskilled in siege warfare. Because of these weaknesses, neither the Romans nor the Parthians were able completely to annex each other's territory.
The Parthian empire subsisted for five centuries, longer than most Eastern Empires. The end of this empire came at last in 224 CE, when the empire's organization had loosened and the last king was defeated by one of the empire's vassal peoples, the Persians under the Sassanian dynasty. However, the Arsacid dynasty continued to exist for centuries onwards under the Arsacid dynasty of Armenia, the Arsacid dynasty of Iberia, and the Arsacid Dynasty of Caucasian Albania, which were all eponymous branches of the Arsacid dynasty of Parthia.
Sasanian Empire (224 – 651 AD)[edit]
See also: Roman-Persian relations, Byzantine-Sassanid Wars and Byzantine–Sasanian War of 602–628




Rock-face relief at Naqsh-e Rustam of Iranian emperor Shapur I (on horseback) capturing Roman emperor Valerian (kneeing) and Philip the Arab (standing).


Main article: Sasanian Empire
The first shah of the Sasanian Empire, Ardashir I, started reforming the country both economically and militarily. For a period of more than 400 years, Iran was once again one of the leading powers in the world, alongside its neighboring rival, the Roman-Byzantine Empire.[46][47] The empire's territory, at its height, encompassed all of today's Iran, Iraq, Azerbaijan, Armenia, Georgia, Abkhazia, Dagestan, Israel, Lebanon, Jordan, Palestine, Israel, parts of Afghanistan, Turkey, Syria, parts of Pakistan, Central Asia, Eastern Arabia, and parts of Egypt.
Most of the Sassanian empire's lifespan it was overshadowed by the frequent Byzantine-Sassanid Wars, a continuation of the Roman-Parthian Wars and the all-comprising Roman-Persian Wars, the latter otherwise known as the longest lasting conflict in human history. Started in the 1st century BC by their predecessors the Parthians and Romans, the last Roman-Persian War would only be fought in the 7th century. The Persians defeated the Romans in the Battle of Edessa in 260 and took the Roman emperor, Valerian, prisoner for the remainder of his life.
Eastern Arabia was conquered early on. During Khosrau II's rule in 590–628, Egypt, Jordan, Palestine and Lebanon were also annexed to the Empire. The Sassanians called their empire Erânshahr (or Iranshahr, "Dominion of the Aryans", i.e. of Iranians).[48]




Battle between Heraclius' army and Persians under Khosrau II. Fresco by Piero della Francesca, c. 1452.


A chapter of Iran's history followed after roughly six hundred years of conflict with the Roman Empire. During this time, the Sassanian and Romano-Byzantine armies clashed for influence in Anatolia, the western Caucasus (mainly Lazica and Caucasian Iberia; modern-day Georgia and Abkhazia), Mesopotamia, Armenia and the Levant. Under Justinian I, the war came to an uneasy peace with payment of tribute to the Sassanians.
However the Sasanians used the deposition of the Byzantine Emperor Maurice as a casus belli to attack the Empire. After many gains, the Sassanians were defeated at Issus, Constantinople and finally Nineveh, resulting in peace. With the conclusion of the over 700 years lasting Roman-Persian wars through the climactic Byzantine–Sasanian War of 602–628 which included the very siege of the Byzantine capital Constantinople, the war-exhausted Persians lost the Battle of al-Qâdisiyah (632) in Hilla, (present day Iraq) to the invading forces of Islam.
The Sassanian era, encompassing the length of the Late Antiquity period, is considered to be one of the most important and influential historical periods in Iran, and had a major impact on the world. In many ways the Sassanian period witnessed the highest achievement of Persian civilization, and constitutes the last great Iranian Empire before the adoption of Islam. Persia influenced Roman civilization considerably during Sassanian times,[49] their cultural influence extending far beyond the empire's territorial borders, reaching as far as Western Europe,[50] Africa,[51] China and India[52] and also playing a prominent role in the formation of both European and Asiatic medieval art.[53]
This influence carried forward to the Islamic world. The dynasty's unique and aristocratic culture transformed the Islamic conquest and destruction of Iran into a Persian Renaissance.[50] Much of what later became known as Islamic culture, architecture, writing and other contributions to civilization, were taken from the Sassanian Persians into the broader Muslim world.[54]
Medieval Iran[edit]
Caliphate and Sultanate era[edit]
Islamic conquest of Persia (633–651)[edit]
Main article: Muslim conquest of Persia




Phases of the Islamic conquest
&#160;&#160;Expansion under Muhammad, 622–632
&#160;&#160;Expansion during the Patriarchal Caliphate, 632–661
&#160;&#160;Expansion during the Umayyad Caliphate, 661–750



In 633, when the Sasanian king Yazdegerd III was ruling over Iran, the Muslims under Umar invaded the country right after it had been in a bloody civil war. Several Iranian nobles and families such as king Dinar of the House of Karen, and later Kanarangiyans of Khorasan, mutinied against their Sasanian overlords. Although the House of Mihran had claimed the Sasanian throne under the two prominent generals Bahram Chobin and Shahrbaraz, it remained royal to the Sasanians during their struggle against the Arabs, but the Mihrans were eventually betrayed and defeated by their own kinsmen, the House of Ispahbudhan, under their leader Farrukhzad, who had mutinied against Yazdegerd III.
Yazdegerd III, fled from one district to another until a local miller killed him for his purse at Merv in 651.[55] By 674, Muslims had conquered Greater Khorasan (which included modern Iranian Khorasan province and modern Afghanistan and parts of Transoxania).
The Islamic conquest of Persia ended the Sasanian Empire and led to the eventual decline of the Zoroastrian religion in Persia. Over time, the majority of Iranians converted to Islam. Most of the aspects of the previous Persian civilizations were not discarded, but were absorbed by the new Islamic polity.
As Bernard Lewis has commented:[56]

"These events have been variously seen in Iran: by some as a blessing, the advent of the true faith, the end of the age of ignorance and heathenism; by others as a humiliating national defeat, the conquest and subjugation of the country by foreign invaders. Both perceptions are of course valid, depending on one's angle of vision."

The Umayyad Caliphate and its incursions into the Caspian coast[edit]
Main article: Umayyad Caliphate
After the fall of Sasanian dynasty in 651, the Umayyad Arabs adopted many Persian customs especially the administrative and the court mannerisms. Arab provincial governors were undoubtedly either Persianized Arameans or ethnic Persians; certainly Persian remained the language of official business of the caliphate until the adoption of Arabic toward the end of the 7th century,[57] when in 692 minting began at the caliphal capital, Damascus. The new Islamic coins evolved from imitations of Sassanian coins (as well as Byzantine), and the Pahlavi script on the coinage was replaced with Arabic alphabet.
During the reign of the Ummayad dynasty, the Arab conquerors imposed Arabic as the primary language of the subject peoples throughout their empire. Hajjāj ibn Yusuf, who was not happy with the prevalence of the Persian language in the divan, ordered the official language of the conquered lands to be replaced by Arabic, sometimes by force.[58] In Al-Biruni's From The Remaining Signs of Past Centuries for example it is written:

"When Qutaibah bin Muslim under the command of Al-Hajjaj bin Yousef was sent to Khwarazmia with a military expedition and conquered it for the second time, he swiftly killed whomever wrote the Khwarazmian native language that knew of the Khwarazmian heritage, history, and culture. He then killed all their Zoroastrian priests and burned and wasted their books, until gradually the illiterate only remained, who knew nothing of writing, and hence their history was mostly forgotten."[59]

There are a number of historians who see the rule of the Umayyads as setting up the "dhimmah" to increase taxes from the dhimmis to benefit the Arab Muslim community financially and by discouraging conversion.[60] Governors lodged complaints with the caliph when he enacted laws that made conversion easier, depriving the provinces of revenues.




Map of Tabaristan and its neighbouring territories


In the 7th century, when many non-Arabs such as Persians entered Islam, they were recognized as Mawali and treated as second class citizens by the ruling Arab elite until the end of the Umayyad dynasty. During this era, Islam was initially associated with the ethnic identity of the Arab and required formal association with an Arab tribe and the adoption of the client status of mawali.[60] The half-hearted policies of the late Umayyads to tolerate non-Arab Muslims and Shi'as had failed to quell unrest among these minorities.
However, all of Iran was still not under Arab control, and the region of Daylam was under Dailamite control, while Tabaristan was under Dabuyid and Paduspanid control, and the Damavand region under Masmughan control. The Arabs had invaded these regions several times, but achieved no decisive result because of the inaccessible terrain of the regions. The most prominent ruler of the Dabuyids, known as Farrukhan the Great (r. 712-728), managed to hold his domains during his long struggle against the Arab general Yazid ibn al-Muhallab, who was defeated by a combined Dailamite-Dabuyid army, and was forced to retreat from Tabaristan.[61]
With the death of the Umayyad Caliph Hisham ibn Abd al-Malik in 743, the Islamic world was launched into civil war. Abu Muslim was sent to Khorasan by the Abbasids initially as a propagandist and then to revolt on their behalf. He took Merv defeating the Umayyad governor there Nasr ibn Sayyar. He became the de facto Abbasid governor of Khurasan. During the same period, the Dabuyid ruler Khurshid declared independence from the Umayyads, but was shortly forced to recognize Abbasid authority. In 750, Abu Muslim became leader of the Abbasid army and defeated the Umayyads at the Battle of the Zab. Abu Muslim stormed Damascus, the capital of the Umayyad caliphate, later that year.
The Abbasid Caliphate and Iranian semi-independent governments[edit]




The Saffarid dynasty in 900.






Map of the Iranian dynasties in the mid 10th-century


Main articles: Abbasid Caliphate, Tahirid dynasty, Saffarid dynasty, Ziyarid dynasty, Samanids, Sajid dynasty, Sallarid dynasty, Ilyasids, Buyid dynasty and Kakuyids
The Abbasid army consisted primarily of Khorasanians and was led by an Iranian general, Abu Muslim Khorasani. It contained both Iranian and Arab elements, and the Abbasids enjoyed both Iranian and Arab support. The Abbasids overthrew the Umayyads in 750.[62] According to Amir Arjomand, the Abbasid Revolution essentially marked the end of the Arab empire and the beginning of a more inclusive, multiethnic state in the Middle East.[63]
One of the first changes the Abbasids made after taking power from the Umayyads was to move the empire's capital from Damascus, in the Levant, to Iraq. The latter region was influenced by Persian history and culture, and moving the capital was part of the Persian mawali demand for Arab influence in the empire. The city of Baghdad was constructed on the Tigris River, in 762, to serve as the new Abbasid capital.[64]
The Abbasids established the position of vizier like Barmakids in their administration, which was the equivalent of a "vice-caliph", or second-in-command. Eventually, this change meant that many caliphs under the Abbasids ended up in a much more ceremonial role than ever before, with the vizier in real power. A new Persian bureaucracy began to replace the old Arab aristocracy, and the entire administration reflected these changes, demonstrating that the new dynasty was different in many ways to the Umayyads.[64]
By the 9th century, Abbasid control began to wane as regional leaders sprang up in the far corners of the empire to challenge the central authority of the Abbasid caliphate.[64] The Abbasid caliphs began enlisting mamluks, Turkic-speaking warriors, who had been moving out of Central Asia into Transoxiana as slave warriors as early as the 9th century. Shortly thereafter the real power of the Abbasid caliphs began to wane; eventually they became religious figureheads while the warrior slaves ruled.[62]
As the power of the Abbasid caliphs diminished, a series of dynasties rose in various parts of Iran, some with considerable influence and power. Among the most important of these overlapping dynasties were the Tahirids in Khorasan (821–873); the Saffarids in Sistan (861–1003, their rule lasted as maliks of Sistan until 1537); and the Samanids (819–1005), originally at Bukhara. The Samanids eventually ruled an area from central Iran to Pakistan.[62]
By the early 10th century, the Abbasids almost lost control to the growing Persian faction known as the Buyid dynasty (934–1062). Since much of the Abbasid administration had been Persian anyway, the Buyids were quietly able to assume real power in Baghdad. The Buyids were defeated in the mid-11th century by the Seljuq Turks, who continued to exert influence over the Abbasids, while publicly pledging allegiance to them. The balance of power in Baghdad remained as such – with the Abbasids in power in name only – until the Mongol invasion of 1258 sacked the city and definitively ended the Abbasid dynasty.[64]
During the Abbassid period an enfranchisement was experienced by the mawali and a shift was made in political conception from that of a primarily Arab empire to one of a Muslim empire[65] and c. 930 a requirement was enacted that required all bureaucrats of the empire be Muslim.[60]

Islamic golden age, Shu'ubiyya movement and Persianization process[edit]
See also: Islamization of Iran, Islamic Golden Age and Shu'ubiyya




Persian manuscript describing how an ambassador from India brought chess to the Persian court.


Islamization was a long process by which Islam was gradually adopted by the majority population of Iran. Richard Bulliet's "conversion curve" indicates that only about 10% of Iran converted to Islam during the relatively Arab-centric Umayyad period. Beginning in the Abassid period, with its mix of Persian as well as Arab rulers, the Muslim percentage of the population rose. As Persian Muslims consolidated their rule of the country, the Muslim population rose from approximately 40% in the mid-9th century to close to 100% by the end of the 11th century.[65] Seyyed Hossein Nasr suggests that the rapid increase in conversion was aided by the Persian nationality of the rulers.[66]
Although Persians adopted the religion of their conquerors, over the centuries they worked to protect and revive their distinctive language and culture, a process known as Persianization. Arabs and Turks participated in this attempt.[67][68][69]
In the 9th and 10th centuries, non-Arab subjects of the Ummah created a movement called Shu'ubiyyah in response to the privileged status of Arabs. Most of those behind the movement were Persian, but references to Egyptians, Berbers and Aramaeans are attested.[70] Citing as its basis Islamic notions of equality of races and nations, the movement was primarily concerned with preserving Persian culture and protecting Persian identity, though within a Muslim context. The most notable effect of the movement was the survival of the Persian language to the present day.
The Samanid dynasty led the revival of Persian culture and the first important Persian poet after the arrival of Islam, Rudaki, was born during this era and was praised by Samanid kings. The Samanids also revived many ancient Persian festivals. Their successor, the Ghaznawids, who were of non-Iranian Turkic origin, also became instrumental in the revival of Persian.[71]
The culmination of the Persianization movement was the Shahnameh, the national epic of Iran, written almost entirely in Persian. This voluminous work, reflects Iran's ancient history, its unique cultural values, its pre-Islamic Zoroastrian religion, and its sense of nationhood.




An extract from a medieval manuscript by Qotbeddin Shirazi (1236–1311), a Persian Astronomer. The image depicts an epicyclic planetary model.


According to Bernard Lewis:[56]

"Iran was indeed Islamized, but it was not Arabized. Persians remained Persians. And after an interval of silence, Iran reemerged as a separate, different and distinctive element within Islam, eventually adding a new element even to Islam itself. Culturally, politically, and most remarkable of all even religiously, the Iranian contribution to this new Islamic civilization is of immense importance. The work of Iranians can be seen in every field of cultural endeavor, including Arabic poetry, to which poets of Iranian origin composing their poems in Arabic made a very significant contribution. In a sense, Iranian Islam is a second advent of Islam itself, a new Islam sometimes referred to as Islam-i Ajam. It was this Persian Islam, rather than the original Arab Islam, that was brought to new areas and new peoples: to the Turks, first in Central Asia and then in the Middle East in the country which came to be called Turkey, and of course to India. The Ottoman Turks brought a form of Iranian civilization to the walls of Vienna..."

The Islamization of Iran was to yield deep transformations within the cultural, scientific, and political structure of Iran's society: The blossoming of Persian literature, philosophy, medicine and art became major elements of the newly forming Muslim civilization. Inheriting a heritage of thousands of years of civilization, and being at the "crossroads of the major cultural highways",[72] contributed to Persia emerging as what culminated into the "Islamic Golden Age". During this period, hundreds of scholars and scientists vastly contributed to technology, science and medicine, later influencing the rise of European science during the Renaissance.[73]
The most important scholars of almost all of the Islamic sects and schools of thought were Persian or lived in Iran, including the most notable and reliable Hadith collectors of Shia and Sunni like Shaikh Saduq, Shaikh Kulainy, Hakim al-Nishaburi, Imam Muslim and Imam Bukhari, the greatest theologians of Shia and Sunni like Shaykh Tusi, Imam Ghazali, Imam Fakhr al-Razi and Al-Zamakhshari, the greatest physicians, astronomers, logicians, mathematicians, metaphysicians, philosophers and scientists like Avicenna, and Nasīr al-Dīn al-Tūsī, the greatest Shaykh of Sufism like Rumi, Abdul-Qadir Gilani.
Persianate states and dynasties (977–1219)[edit]




The Kharaghan twin towers, built in 1067, Persia, contain tombs of Seljuq princes.


Main articles: Persianate, Ghaznavids, Great Seljuq and Khwarezmid Dynasty
In 977 a Turkic governor of the Samanids, Sabuktigin, conquered Ghazna (in present-day Afghanistan) and established a dynasty, the Ghaznavids, that lasted to 1186.[62] The Ghaznavid empire grew by taking all of the Samanid territories south of the Amu Darya in the last decade of the 10th century, and eventually occupied parts of Eastern Iran, Afghanistan, Pakistan and northwest India.[64]
The Ghaznavids are generally credited with launching Islam into a mainly Hindu India. The invasion of India was undertaken in 1000 by the Ghaznavid ruler, Mahmud, and continued for several years. They were unable to hold power for long, however, particularly after the death of Mahmud in 1030. By 1040 the Seljuqs had taken over the Ghaznavid lands in Iran.[64]
The Seljuqs, who like the Ghaznavids were Persianate in nature and of Turkic origin, slowly conquered Iran over the course of the 11th century.[62] The dynasty had its origins in the Turcoman tribal confederations of Central Asia and marked the beginning of Turkic power in the Middle East. They established a Sunni Muslim rule over parts of Central Asia and the Middle East from the 11th to 14th centuries. They set up an empire known as Great Seljuq Empire that stretched from Anatolia in the west to western Afghanistan in the east and the western borders of (modern-day) China in the northeast; and was the target of the First Crusade. Today they are regarded as the cultural ancestors of the Western Turks, the present-day inhabitants of Azerbaijan, Turkey, and Turkmenistan, and they are remembered as great patrons of Persian culture, art, literature, and language.[67][74][75]
The dynastic founder, Tughril Beg, turned his army against the Ghaznavids in Khorasan. He moved south and then west, conquering but not wasting the cities in his path. In 1055 the caliph in Baghdad gave Tughril Beg robes, gifts, and the title King of the East. Under Tughril Beg's successor, Malik Shah (1072–1092), Iran enjoyed a cultural and scientific renaissance, largely attributed to his brilliant Iranian vizier, Nizam al Mulk. These leaders established the observatory where Omar Khayyám did much of his experimentation for a new calendar, and they built religious schools in all the major towns. They brought Abu Hamid Ghazali, one of the greatest Islamic theologians, and other eminent scholars to the Seljuq capital at Baghdad and encouraged and supported their work.[62]




Seljuq empire at the time of its greatest extent, at the death of Malik Shah I[citation needed]


When Malik Shah I died in 1092, the empire split as his brother and four sons quarrelled over the apportioning of the empire among themselves. In Anatolia, Malik Shah I was succeeded by Kilij Arslan I who founded the Sultanate of Rûm and in Syria by his brother Tutush I. In Persia he was succeeded by his son Mahmud I whose reign was contested by his other three brothers Barkiyaruq in Iraq, Muhammad I in Baghdad and Ahmad Sanjar in Khorasan. As Seljuq power in Iran weakened, other dynasties began to step up in its place, including a resurgent Abbasid caliphate and the Khwarezmshahs. The Khwarezmid Empire was a Sunni Muslim Persianate dynasty, of East Turkic origin, that ruled in Central Asia. Originally vassals of the Seljuqs, they took advantage of the decline of the Seljuqs to expand into Iran.[76] In 1194 the Khwarezmshah Ala ad-Din Tekish defeated the Seljuq sultan Toghrul III in battle and the Seljuq empire in Iran collapsed. Of the former Seljuq Empire, only the Sultanate of Rum in Anatolia remained.
A serious internal threat to the Seljuqs during their reign came from the Ismailis, a secret sect with headquarters at Alamut between Rasht and Tehran. They controlled the immediate area for more than 150 years and sporadically sent out adherents to strengthen their rule by murdering important officials. Several of the various theories on the etymology of the word assassin derive from these killers.[62]

Parts of northwestern Iran were conquered in the early 13th century AD by the Kingdom of Georgia, led by Tamar the Great.[77]
Mongol invasion (1219–1221)[edit]




Eurasia on the eve of the Mongol invasions, c. 1200.


Main articles: Mongol invasion of Central Asia, Mongol invasion of Khwarezmia and Eastern Iran and Mongol Empire
The Khwarezmid Empire only lasted for a few decades, until the arrival of the Mongols. Genghis Khan had unified the Mongols, and under him the Mongol Empire quickly expanded in several directions, until by 1218 it bordered Khwarezm. At that time, the Khwarezmid Empire was ruled by Ala ad-Din Muhammad (1200–1220). Muhammad, like Genghis, was intent on expanding his lands and had gained the submission of most of Iran. He declared himself shah and demanded formal recognition from the Abbasid caliph an-Nasir. When the caliph rejected his claim, Ala ad-Din Muhammad proclaimed one of his nobles caliph and unsuccessfully tried to depose an-Nasir.
The Mongol invasion of Iran began in 1219, after two diplomatic missions to Khwarezm sent by Genghis Khan had been massacred. During 1220–21 Bukhara, Samarkand, Herat, Tus and Nishapur were razed, and the whole populations were slaughtered. The Khwarezm-Shah fled, to die on an island off the Caspian coast.[78] During the invasion of Transoxania in 1219, along with the main Mongol force, Genghis Khan used a Chinese specialist catapult unit in battle, they were used again in 1220 in Transoxania. The Chinese may have used the catapults to hurl gunpowder bombs, since they already had them by this time.[79]
While Genghis Khan was conquering Transoxania and Persia, several Chinese who were familiar with gunpowder were serving in Genghis's army.[80] "Whole regiments" entirely made out of Chinese were used by the Mongols to command bomb hurling trebuchets during the invasion of Iran.[81] Historians have suggested that the Mongol invasion had brought Chinese gunpowder weapons to Central Asia. One of these was the huochong, a Chinese mortar.[82] Books written around the area afterward depicted gunpowder weapons which resembled those of China.[83]
Destruction under the Mongols[edit]
Before his death in 1227, Genghis had reached western Azerbaijan, pillaging and burning cities along the way.
The Mongol invasion was disastrous to the Iranians. Although the Mongol invaders were eventually converted to Islam and accepted the culture of Iran, the Mongol destruction of the Islamic heartland marked a major change of direction for the region. Much of the six centuries of Islamic scholarship, culture, and infrastructure was destroyed as the invaders burned libraries, and replaced mosques with Buddhist temples.[84]
The Mongols killed many civilians. Destruction of qanat irrigation systems destroyed the pattern of relatively continuous settlement, producing numerous isolated oasis cities in a land where they had previously been rare.[85] A large number of people, particularly males, were killed; between 1220 and 1258, the total population of Iran may have dropped from 2,500,000 to 250,000 as a result of mass extermination and famine.[86]
Ilkhanate (1256–1335)[edit]




The Mongol Empire's expansion and its successor khanates


Main article: Ilkhanate
After Genghis's death, Iran was ruled by several Mongol commanders. Genghis' grandson, Hulagu Khan, was tasked with the westward expansion of Mongol dominion. However, by time he ascended to power, the Mongol Empire had already dissolved, dividing into different factions. Arriving with an army, he established himself in the region and founded the Ilkhanate, a breakaway state of the Mongol Empire, which would rule Iran for the next eighty years and become Persianate in the process.
Hulagu Khan seized Baghdad in 1258 and put the last Abbasid caliph to death. The westward advance of his forces was stopped by the Mamelukes, however, at the Battle of Ain Jalut in Palestine in 1260. Hulagu's campaigns against the Muslims also enraged Berke, khan of the Golden Horde and a convert to Islam. Hulagu and Berke fought against each other, demonstrating the weakening unity of the Mongol empire.
The rule of Hulagu's great-grandson, Ghazan Khan (1295–1304) saw the establishment of Islam as the state religion of the Ilkhanate. Ghazan and his famous Iranian vizier, Rashid al-Din, brought Iran a partial and brief economic revival. The Mongols lowered taxes for artisans, encouraged agriculture, rebuilt and extended irrigation works, and improved the safety of the trade routes. As a result, commerce increased dramatically.
Items from India, China, and Iran passed easily across the Asian steppes, and these contacts culturally enriched Iran. For example, Iranians developed a new style of painting based on a unique fusion of solid, two-dimensional Mesopotamian painting with the feathery, light brush strokes and other motifs characteristic of China. After Ghazan's nephew Abu Said died in 1335, however, the Ilkhanate lapsed into civil war and was divided between several petty dynasties – most prominently the Jalayirids, Muzaffarids, Sarbadars and Kartids.
The mid-14th-century Black Death killed about 30% of the country's population.[87]
Sunnism and Shiism in pre-Safavid Iran[edit]




Imam Reza shrine, the greatest religious site in Iran, which was built in the 9th century and the pilgrimage site for all Muslims since then.


Main article: Islam in Iran
Prior to the rise of the Safavid Empire, Sunni Islam was the dominant religion, accounting for around 90% of the population at the time. According to Mortaza Motahhari the majority of Iranian scholars and masses remained Sunni until the time of the Safavids.[88] The domination of Sunnis did not mean Shia were rootless in Iran. The writers of The Four Books of Shia were Iranian, as well as many other great Shia scholars.
The domination of the Sunni creed during the first nine Islamic centuries characterized the religious history of Iran during this period. There were however some exceptions to this general domination which emerged in the form of the Zaydīs of Tabaristan, the Buyids, the Kakuyids, the rule of Sultan Muhammad Khudabandah (r. Shawwal 703-Shawwal 716/1304-1316) and the Sarbedaran.[89]
Apart from this domination there existed, firstly, throughout these nine centuries, Shia inclinations among many Sunnis of this land and, secondly, original Imami Shiism as well as Zaydī Shiism had prevalence in some parts of Iran. During this period, Shia in Iran were nourished from Kufah, Baghdad and later from Najaf and Hillah.[89] Shiism was the dominant sect in Tabaristan, Qom, Kashan, Avaj and Sabzevar. In many other areas merged population of Shia and Sunni lived together.
During the 10th and 11th centuries, Fatimids sent Ismailis Da'i (missioners) to Iran as well as other Muslim lands. When Ismailis divided into two sects, Nizaris established their base in Iran. Hassan-i Sabbah conquered fortresses and captured Alamut in 1090 AD. Nizaris used this fortress until a Mongol raid in 1256.
After the Mongol raid and fall of the Abbasids, Sunni hierarchies faltered. Not only did they lose the caliphate but also the status of official madhab. Their loss was the gain of Shia, whose center wasn't in Iran at that time. Several local Shia dynasties like Sarbadars were established during this time.
The main change occurred in the beginning of the 16th century, when Ismail I founded the Safavid dynasty and initiated a religious policy to recognize Shi'a Islam as the official religion of the Safavid Empire, and the fact that modern Iran remains an officially Shi'ite state is a direct result of Ismail's actions.
Timurid Empire (1370–1507)[edit]




A map of the Timurid Empire.


Main article: Timurid Empire
Iran remained divided until the arrival of Timur, who is variously described as of Mongol or Turkic origin[90] belonging to the Timurid dynasty. Like its predecessors, the Timurid Empire was also part of the Persianate world. After establishing a power base in Transoxiana, Timur invaded Iran in 1381 and eventually conquered most of it. Timur's campaigns were known for their brutality; many people were slaughtered and several cities were destroyed.[91]
His regime was characterized by its inclusion of Iranians in administrative roles and its promotion of architecture and poetry. His successors, the Timurids, maintained a hold on most of Iran until 1452, when they lost the bulk of it to Black Sheep Turkmen. The Black Sheep Turkmen were conquered by the White Sheep Turkmen under Uzun Hasan in 1468; Uzun Hasan and his successors were the masters of Iran until the rise of the Safavids.[91]
Ak Koyunlu[edit]
Main article: Ak Koyunlu
Kara Koyunlu[edit]
Main article: Kara Koyunlu
Early modern era (1502–1925)[edit]
Persia underwent a revival under the Safavid dynasty (1502–1736), the most prominent figure of which was Shah Abbas I. Some historians credit the Safavid dynasty for founding the modern nation-state of Iran. Iran's contemporary Shia character, and significant segments of Iran's current borders take their origin from this era (e.g. Treaty of Zuhab).
Safavid Empire (1501–1736)[edit]




The Safavid Empire at its greatest extent.






Painting of Shah Abbas I.


Main article: Safavid Empire
See also: Ottoman-Persian Wars and Safavid conversion of Iran to Shia Islam
The Safavid dynasty was one of the most significant ruling dynasties of Persia (modern Iran), and "is often considered the beginning of modern Persian history".[92] They ruled one of the greatest Persian empires after the Muslim conquest of Persia[93][94][95][96] and established the Twelver school of Shi'a Islam[7] as the official religion of their empire, marking one of the most important turning points in Muslim history. The Safavids ruled from 1501 to 1722 (experiencing a brief restoration from 1729 to 1736) and at their height, they controlled all of modern Iran, Azerbaijan and Armenia, most of Georgia, the North Caucasus, Iraq, Kuwait and Afghanistan, as well as parts of Turkey, Syria, Pakistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan. Safavid Iran was one of the Islamic "gunpowder empires", along with its neighbours, its arch rival the Ottoman Empire, and the Mughal Empire.
The Safavid ruling dynasty was founded by Ismāil, who styled himself Shāh Ismāil I.[97] Practically worshipped by his Qizilbāsh followers, Ismāil invaded Shirvan to avenge the death of his father, Shaykh Haydar, who had been killed during his siege of Derbent, in Dagestan. Afterwards he went on a campaign of conquest, and following the capture of Tabriz in July 1501, he enthroned himself as the Shāh of Azerbaijan,[98][99][100] minted coins in this name, and proclaimed Shi'ism the official religion of his domain.[7]
Although initially the masters of Azerbaijan and southern Dagestan only, the Safavids had, in fact, won the struggle for power in Persia which had been going on for nearly a century between various dynasties and political forces following the fragmentation of the Kara Koyunlu and the Ak Koyunlu. A year after his victory in Tabriz, Ismāil proclaimed most of Persia as his domain, and [7] quickly conquered and unified Iran under his rule. Soon afterwards, the new Safavid Empire rapidly conquered regions, nations, and peoples in all directions, including Armenia, Azerbaijan, parts of Georgia, Mesopotamia (Iraq), Kuwait, Syria, Dagestan, large parts of what is now Afghanistan, parts of Turkmenistan, and large chunks of Anatolia, laying the foundation of its multi-ethnic character which would heavily influence the empire itself (most notably the Caucasus and its peoples).
During Tahmasp' reign, he carried out multiple invasions in the Caucasus which had been incorporated in the Safavid empire since Shah Ismail I and for many centuries afterwards, and started with the trend of deporting and moving hundreds of thousands of Circassians, Georgians, and Armenians to Iran's heartlands. Initially only solely put in the royal harems, royal guards, and minor other sections of the Empire, Tahmasp believed he could eventually reduce the power of the Qizilbash, by creating and fully integrating a new layer in Iranian society. As Encyclopedia Iranica states, for Tahmãsp, the problem circled around the military tribal elite of the empire, the Qezelbāš, who believed that physical proximity to and control of a member of the immediate Safavid family guaranteed spiritual advantages, political fortune, and material advancement.[101] With this new Caucasian layer in Iranian society, the indisputed might of the Qizilbash (who functioned much like the ghazis of the neighboring Ottoman Empire) would be questioned and fully diminished as society would become fully meritocratic.
Shah Abbas I and his successors would significantly expand this policy and plan initiated by Tahmasp, deporting during his reign alone around some 200,000 Georgians, 300,000 Armenians and 100,000-150,000 Circassians to Iran, completing the foundation of a new layer in Iranian society. With this, and the complete systematic disorganisation of the Qizilbash by his personal orders, he eventually fully succeeded in replacing the power of the Qizilbash, with that of the Caucasian ghulams. These new Caucasian elements (the so-called ghilman / غِلْمَان / "servants"), almost always after conversion to Shi'ism depending on given function would be, were unlike the Qizilbash, fully loyal only to the Shah. The other masses of Caucasians were deployed in all other possible functions and positions available in the empire, as well as in the harem, regular military, craftsmen, farmers, etc. This system of mass usage of Caucasian subjects remained to exist until the fall of the Qajar Dynasty.




Rostom (also known as Rustam Khan), viceroy of Kartli, eastern Georgia, from 1633-1658.


The greatest of the Safavid monarchs, Shah Abbas I the Great (1587–1629) came to power in 1587 aged 16. Abbas I first fought the Uzbeks, recapturing Herat and Mashhad in 1598, which had been lost by his predecessor Mohammad Khodabanda by the Ottoman-Safavid War (1578-1590). Then he turned against the Ottomans, the Safavids their arch rivals, recapturing Baghdad, eastern Iraq and the Caucasian provinces and beyond by 1618. Between 1616-1618, following the disobedience of his most loyal Georgian subjects Teimuraz I and Luarsab II, Abbas carried out a punitive campaign in his territories of Georgia, devastating Kakheti and Tbilisi and carrying away 130,000[102] - 200,000[103] Georgian captives towards mainland Iran. His new army, which had dramatically been improved with the advent of Robert Shirley and his brothers following the first diplomatic mission to Europe, pitted the first crushing victory over the Safavids' arch rivals, the Ottomans in the abovementioned 1603-1618 war and would surpass the Ottomans in military strength. He also used his new force to dislodge the Portuguese from Bahrain (1602) and Hormuz (1622) with aid of the English navy, in the Persian Gulf.
He expanded commercial links with the Dutch East India Company and established firm links with the European royal houses, which had been initiated by Ismail I earlier on by the Habsburg-Persian alliance. Thus Abbas I was able to break the dependence on the Qizilbash for military might and therefore was able to centralize control. The Safavid dynasty had already established itself during Shah Ismail I, but under Abbas I it really became a major power in the world along its arch rival the Ottoman Empire, against whom it became able to compete with on equal foot. It also started the promotion of tourism in Iran. Under their rule Persian Architecture flowered again and saw many new monuments in various Iranian cities, of which Isfahan is the most notable example.
Except for Shah Abbas the Great, Shah Ismail I, Shah Tahmasp I, and Shah Abbas II, many of the Safavid rulers were ineffectual, often being more interested in their women, alcohol and other leisure activities. The end of Abbas II' reign in 1666, marked the beginning of the end of the Safavid dynasty. Despite falling revenues and military threats, many of the later shahs had lavish lifestyles. Shah Soltan Hosain (1694–1722) in particular was known for his love of wine and disinterest in governance.[104]
The declining country was repeatedly raided on its frontiers. Finally, Ghilzai Pashtun chieftain named Mir Wais Khan began a rebellion in Kandahar and defeated the Safavid army under the Iranian Georgian governor over the region, Gurgin Khan. In 1722, Peter the Great of neighbouring Imperial Russia launched the Russo-Persian War (1722-1723), capturing many of Iran's Caucasian territories, including Derbent, Shaki, Baku, but also Gilan, Mazandaran and Astrabad. At the mids of all chaos, in the same year 1722 an Afghan army led by Mir Wais' son Mahmud marched across eastern Iran, besieged and took Isfahan. Mahmud proclaimed himself 'Shah' of Persia. Meanwhile, Persia's imperial rivals, the Ottomans and the Russians, took advantage of the chaos in the country to seize more territory for themselves.[105] By these events, the Safavid dynasty had effectively ended. In 1724, conform the Treaty of Constantinople, the Ottomans and the Russians agreed to divide the newly conquered territories of Iran amongst themselves.[106]
Nader Shah and his successors[edit]




Nader Shah


Main articles: Afsharid dynasty and Zand dynasty
Iran's territorial integrity was restored by a native Iranian Turkic Afshar warlord from Khorasan, Nader Shah. He defeated and banished the Afghans, defeated the Ottomans, reinstalled the Safavids on the throne, and negotiated Russian withdrawal from Irans Caucasian territories, by the Treaty of Resht and Treaty of Ganja. By 1736, Nader had become so powerful he was able to depose the Safavids and have himself crowned shah. Nader was one of the last great conquerors of Asia and briefly possessed over what was probably the most powerful empire in the world. To financially aid his wars against Persia's arch rival, the Ottoman Empire, he fixated his mind on the weak but rich Mugal Empire to the east. In 1739, accompanied by his loyal Caucasian vassals including Erekle II,[107] he invaded Mughal India, defeated a numerically superior Mughal army in less than three hours, and completely sacked and looted Delhi, bringing back immense wealth to Persia. On his way back, he also conquered all Uzbek khanates - except Kokand - and made the Uzbeks his vassals. He also firmly reestablished Persian rule over the entire Caucasus, Bahrain, as well as large parts of Anatolia and Mesopotamia. Undefeated for years, his defeat in Dagestan, following guerrilla rebellions by the Lezgins and the assassination attempt on him near Mazandaran is often marked as the turning point in Naders impressive career. Frustratingly for him, the Dagestanis resorted to guerrilla warfare and Nader with his standard army could make little headway against them.[108] At the Battle of Andalal and the Battle of Avaria, Nader's army was crushingly defeated and he lost half of his entire force, as well forcing him to flee for the mountains.[109] Though Nader managed to take most of Dagestan during his campaign, the effective guerrilla warfare as deployed by the Lezgins, but also the Avars and Laks made the Iranian re-conquest of the particular North Caucasian region this time a short lived one; several years later, Nader was forced to withdraw. Around the same time, the assassination attempt was made on him near Mazandaran which accelerated the course of history; he slowly grew ill and megalomaniac, blinding his sons whom he suspected of the assassination attempts, and increasing cruelty against his subjects and officers. In his later years this eventually provoked multiple revolts and, ultimately, Nader's assassination in 1747.[110]
Nader's death was followed by a period of anarchy in Iran as rival army commanders fought for power. Nader's own family, the Afsharids, were soon reduced to holding on to a small domain in Khorasan. Many of the Caucasian territories broke away in various Caucasian khanates. Oman and the Uzbek khanates of Bukhara and Khiva regained independence. Ahmad Shah Durrani, one of Nader's officers, founded an independent state which eventually became modern Afghanistan. Erekle II, who had been appointed king of Kakheti by Nader himself in 1744,[111] had declared de facto independence, and took over the neighbouring Kingdom of Kartli as well. He would reunite both later through the Kingdom of Kartli-Kakheti, and become the new Georgian king of a politically united eastern Georgia for the first time in three centuries.[112] From his capital Shiraz, Karim Khan of the Zand dynasty ruled "an island of relative calm and peace in an otherwise bloody and destructive period,"[113] however the extent of Zand power was confined to contemporary Iran and parts of the Caucasus. Between 1747 and 1795, through the Zand period, Erekle was therefore by the turn of events in Iran able to maintain Georgia's autonomy.[114] Karim Khan's death in 1779 led to yet another civil war in which the Qajar dynasty eventually triumphed and became kings of Iran.
Qajar dynasty (1794–1925)[edit]
Main articles: Qajar dynasty, Russo-Persian War (1804-1813) and Russo-Persian War (1826-1828)
See also: Battle of Krtsanisi, Treaty of Gulistan, Treaty of Turkmenchay and Iranian Constitutional Revolution




Mihr 'Ali (Iranian, active ca. 1800-1830). Portrait of Fath-Ali Shah Qajar. Brooklyn Museum.






Qajar era currency bill with depiction of Nasser al-Din Shah Qajar.






A map of Iran under the Qajar dynasty in the 19th century.






Map showing Irans's northwestern borders in the 19th century, comprising Eastern Georgia, Dagestan, Armenia, and Azerbaijan, before being forced to cede the territories to Imperial Russia per the two Russo-Persian Wars of the 19th century.


Agha Mohammad Khan emerged victorious out of the civil war that commenced with the death of the last Zand king. His reign is noted for the reemergence of a centrally led and united Iran. After the death of Nader Shah and the last of the Zands, most of Iran's integral Caucasian territories had broken away into various Caucasian khanates. Agha Mohammad Khan, like the Safavid kings and Nader Shah before him, viewed the region as no different than the territories in mainland Iran. Therefore, his first objective after having secured mainland Iran, was to reincorpate the Caucasus region into Iran.[115] Georgia was seen as one of the most integral territories.[114] For Agha Mohammad Khan, the resubjugation and reintegration of Georgia into the Iranian Empire was part of the same process that had brought Shiraz, Isfahan, and Tabriz under his rule.[114] As the Cambridge History of Iran states, its permanent secession was inconceivable and had to be resisted in the same way as one would resist an attempt at the separation of Fars or Gilan.[114] It was therefore natural for Agha Mohammad Khan to perform whatever necessary means in the Caucasus in order to subdue and reincorporate the recently lost regions following Nader Shah's death and the demise of the Zands, including putting down what in Iranian eyes was seen as treason on the part of the wali of Georgia, namely the Georgian king Erekle II (Heraclius II) who was appointed viceroy (wali) of Georgia by Nader Shah himself.[114]
Agha Mohammad Khan subsequently demanded Heraclius II to renounce the treaty with Russia of several years earlier, that formally denounced any dependence on Persia and for full Russian protection and assistance in its affairs, and to reaccept Persian suzerainty,[115] in return for peace and the security of his kingdom. The Ottomans, Iran's neighboring rival, recognized the latters rights over Kartli and Kakheti for the first time in four centuries.[116] Heraclius appealed then to his theoretical protector, Empress Catherine II of Russia, pledging for at least 3,000 Russian troops,[116] but he was ignored, leaving Georgia to fend off the Persian threat alone.[117] Nevertheless, Heraclius II still rejected the Khan’s ultimatum.[118] As a response, Agha Mohammad Khan invaded the Caucasus region after crossing the Aras river, and, while on his way to Georgia, he re-subjugated Iran's territories of the Erivan Khanate, Shirvan, Nakhchivan Khanate, Ganja khanate, Derbent Khanate, Baku khanate, Talysh Khanate, Shaki Khanate, Karabakh Khanate, which comprise modern-day Armenia, Azerbaijan, Dagestan, and Igdir. Having reached Georgia with his large army, it culminated in the Battle of Krtsanisi, which resulted in the capture, and sack of Tbilisi, as well as the effective resubjugation of Georgia into Iran.[12][119] Upon his return from his successful campaign in Tbilisi and in effective control over Georgia, together with some 15,000 Georgian captives that were moved back to mainland Iran,[117] Agha Mohammad was formally crowned Shah in 1796 in the Mughan plain, just like his predecessor Nader Shah was about sixty years earlier.
Agha Mohammad Shah was later assassinated while preparing a second expedition against Georgia in 1797 in Shusha[120] (nowadays part of the Republic of Azerbaijan) and the seasoned king Heraclius died early in 1798. Reassessment of Iranian hegemony over Georgia did not last long; in 1799 the Russians marched into Tbilisi.[121] The Russians were already actively occupied with an expansionistic policy towards its neighboring empires to its south, namely the Ottoman Empire and the successive Iranian kingdoms since the late 17th/early 18th century. The next two years following Russia's entrance into Tbilisi were a time of muddle and confusion, and the weakened and devastated Georgian kingdom, with its capital half in ruins, was easily absorbed by Russia in 1801.[117][118] As Iran could not permit or allow the cession of Transcaucasia and Dagestan, which had formed part of the very concept of Iran for centuries,[11] it would also become the direct uplead to the wars of several years later, namely the Russo-Persian War (1804-1813) and Russo-Persian War (1826-1828), which would eventually prove for the irrevocable forced cession and loss of what is nowadays Georgia, Dagestan, Armenia, and Azerbaijan to Imperial Russia per the Gulistan and Turkmenchay of 1813 and 1828 respectively, as the ancient ties could be severed by a superior force from outside.[120][12] By this, millennia old close ties between the region and Iran would be, thus, eventually severed in the course of the 19th century by which Iran losts swaths of its integral territories.
The area to the North of the river Aras, among which the territory of the contemporary republic of Azerbaijan, eastern Georgia, Dagestan, and Armenia were Iranian territory until they were occupied by Russia in the course of the 19th century.[122][123][124][125][126][127][128]







Painting showing the Battle of Sultanabad, 13 February 1812. State Hermitage Museum.









Storming of Lankaran, 1812. Painted by Franz Roubaud.









Battle of Elisabethpol (Ganja), 1828. Franz Roubaud. Part of the collection of the Museum for History, Baku.




Migration of Caucasian Muslims[edit]
See also: Ayrums, Qarapapaqs and Ethnic Cleansing of Circassians




Persian Cossack Brigade in Tabriz in 1909


Following the official losing of the aforementioned vast territories in the Caucasus, major demographic shifts were bound to take place. Solidly Persian-speaking territories of Iran were lost, with all its inhabitants in it. Following the 1804-1814 War, but also per the 1826-1828 war which ceded the last territories, large migrations, so called Caucasian Muhajirs, set off to migrate to mainland Iran. Some of these groups included the Ayrums, Qarapapaqs, Circassians, Shia Lezgins, and other Transcaucasian Muslims.[129]
Through the Battle of Ganja of 1804 during the Russo-Persian War (1804-1813), many thousands of Ayrums and Qarapapaqs were settled in Tabriz. During the remaining part of the 1804-1813 war, as well as through the 1826-1828 war, the absolute bulk of the Ayrums and Qarapapaqs that were still remaining in newly conquered Russian territories were settled in and migrated to Solduz (in modern-day Iran's West Azerbaijan province).[130]
In 1864 until the early 20th century, another mass expulsion took place of Caucasian Muslims as a result of the Russian victory in the Caucasian War. Others simply voluntarily refused to live under Christian Russian rule, and thus disembarked for Turkey or Iran. These migrations once again, towards Iran, included masses of Caucasian Azerbaijanis, other Transcaucasian Muslims, as well as many North Caucasian Muslims, such as Circassians, Shia Lezgins and Laks.[129][131] Many of these migrants would prove to play a pivotal role in further Iranian history, as they formed most of the ranks of the Persian Cossack Brigade, which was also to be established in the late 19th century.[132] The initial ranks of the brigade would be entirely composed of Circassians and other Caucasian Muhajirs.[132] This brigade would prove decisive in the following decades to come in Qajar history.
Furthermore, the 1828 Treaty of Turkmenchay included the official rights for the Russian Empire to encourage settling of Armenians from Iran in the newly conquered Russian territories.[133][134] This also helped in changing the demographics of the regions considerably.[135] The Treaty of Adrianople, concluded with Turkey in 1829 granted for more mass settling of Armenians in the newly incorporated territories. Slowly but surely, the number of Christians, that formerly made out since the 17th century a relatively small minority in the region (except for Georgia), were starting to compose an ever growing number of the total population, especially in the former Iranian-ruled Armenian and Georgian territories.
Following the resettlement of Persian Armenians in the newly conquered Russian territories after 1828, thus significant demographic shifts were bound to take place. The Armenian-American historian George Bournoutian gives a summary of the ethnic makeup prior to the events of 1828 just for the territory of the Erivan administrative division as an example:[136]


“
In the first quarter of the 19th century the Khanate of Erevan included most of Eastern Armenia and covered an area of approximately 7,000 square miles. The land was mountainous and dry, the population of about 100,000 was roughly 80 percent Muslim (Persian, Azeri, Kurdish) and 20 percent Christian (Armenian).
”


After the incorporation of the Erivan khanate into the Russian Empire, Muslim majority of the area gradually changed, at first the Armenians who were left captive were accouraged to return.[137] As a result of which an estimated 57,000 Armenian refugees from Persia returned to the territory of the Erivan khanates after 1828, while about 35,000 Muslims (Persians, Turkic groups, Kurds, Lezgis, etc.) out total population of over 100,000 left the region.[138]
Fath Ali Shah's reign saw increased diplomatic contacts with the West and the beginning of intense European diplomatic rivalries over Iran. His grandson Mohammad Shah, who fell under the Russian influence and made two unsuccessful attempts to capture Herat, succeeded him in 1834. When Mohammad Shah died in 1848 the succession passed to his son Nasser-e-Din, who proved to be the ablest and most successful of the Qajar sovereigns.[citation needed]
Constitutional Revolution and deposement[edit]
The Great Persian Famine of 1870–1871 is believed to have caused the death of 2 million persons.[139]
A new era in the History of Persia dawned with the Constitutional Revolution of Iran against the Shah in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. The Shah managed to remain in power, granting a limited constitution in 1906 (making the country a constitutional monarchy). The first Majlis (parliament) was convened on October 7, 1906.
The discovery of petroleum in 1908 by the British in Khuzestan spawned intense renewed interest in Persia by the British Empire (see William Knox D'Arcy and Anglo-Iranian Oil Company, now BP). Control of Persia remained contested between the United Kingdom and Russia, in what became known as The Great Game, and codified in the Anglo-Russian Convention of 1907, which divided Persia into spheres of influence, regardless of her national sovereignty.
During World War I, the country was occupied by British, Ottoman and Russian forces but was essentially neutral (see Persian Campaign). In 1919, after the Russian revolution and their withdrawal, Britain attempted to establish a protectorate in Iran, which was unsuccessful.
Finally, the Constitutionalist movement of Gilan and the central power vacuum caused by the instability of the Qajar government resulted in the rise of Reza Shah Pahlavi and the establishment of the Pahlavi dynasty in 1925.
In 1921, a military coup established Reza Khan, an officer of the Persian Cossack Brigade, as the dominant figure for the next 20 years. Seyyed Zia'eddin Tabatabai was also a leader and important figure in the perpetration of the coup. The Iranian coup of 1921 was not actually directed at the Qajar monarchy; according to Encyclopædia Iranica, it was targeted at officials who were in power and actually had a role in controlling the government; the cabinet and others who had a role in governing Persia.[140] In 1925, after being prime minister for a couple of years, Reza Shah became the king of Iran and established the Pahlavi dynasty.

Pahlavi era (1925–1979)[edit]
Main article: Pahlavi dynasty
Reza Shah (1925–1941)[edit]




Reza Shah Pahlavi


Main articles: Persian Cossack Brigade and 1921 Persian coup d'état
Reza Shah ruled for almost 16 years until September 16, 1941, when he was forced to abdicate by the Anglo-Soviet invasion of Iran. He established an authoritarian government that valued nationalism, militarism, secularism and anti-communism combined with strict censorship and state propaganda.[141] Reza Shah introduced many socio-economic reforms, reorganizing the army, government administration, and finances.[142]
To his supporters his reign brought "law and order, discipline, central authority, and modern amenities – schools, trains, buses, radios, cinemas, and telephones".[143] However, his attempts of modernisation have been criticised for being "too fast"[144] and "superficial",[145] and his reign a time of "oppression, corruption, taxation, lack of authenticity" with "security typical of police states."[143]
Many of the new laws and regulations created resentment among devout Muslims and the clergy. For example, mosques were required to use chairs; most men were required to wear western clothing, including a hat with a brim; women were encouraged to discard the hijab; men and women were allowed to freely congregate, violating Islamic mixing of the sexes. Tensions boiled over in 1935, when bazaaris and villagers rose up in rebellion at the Imam Reza shrine in Mashhad, chanting slogans such as 'The Shah is a new Yezid.' Dozens were killed and hundreds were injured when troops finally quelled the unrest.[146]
World War II[edit]
See also: Anglo-Soviet Invasion of Iran, Polish civilian camps in World War II and Persian Corridor




Mohammad Reza Pahlavi with FDR at the Tehran Conference, 1943






Polish refugee camp on the outskirts of Teheran, c.1943


In August 1941, Iran was invaded by Soviet, British and other Commonwealth armed forces. The invasion lasted from 25 August to 17 September 1941, and was codenamed Operation Countenance. The purpose was to secure Iranian oil fields and ensure Allied supply lines (see Persian Corridor) for the Soviets fighting against Axis forces on the Eastern Front. Though Iran was officially neutral, according to the Allies its monarch Rezā Shāh was friendly toward the Axis powers and was deposed during the subsequent occupation and replaced with his young son Mohammad Reza Pahlavi, who ruled until 1979.
At the Tehran Conference of 1943, the Tehran Declaration guaranteed the post-war independence and boundaries of Iran. However, when the war actually ended, Soviet troops stationed in northwestern Iran not only refused to withdraw but backed revolts that established short-lived, pro-Soviet separatist national states in the northern regions of Azerbaijan and Iranian Kurdistan, the Azerbaijan People's Government and the Republic of Kurdistan respectively, in late 1945. Soviet troops did not withdraw from Iran proper until May 1946 after receiving a promise of oil concessions. The Soviet republics in the north were soon overthrown and the oil concessions were revoked.
Mohammad-Reza Shah (1941–1979)[edit]




Tehran men celebrating the 1953 Iranian coup d'état






Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi.


Initially there were hopes that post-occupation Iran could become a constitutional monarchy. The new, young Shah Mohammad Reza Shah Pahlavi initially took a very hands-off role in government, and allowed parliament to hold a lot of power. Some elections were held in the first shaky years, although they remained mired in corruption. Parliament became chronically unstable, and from the 1947 to 1951 period Iran saw the rise and fall of six different prime ministers. Pahlavi increased his political power by convening the Iran Constituent Assembly, 1949, which finally formed the Senate of Iran—a legislative upper house allowed for in the 1906 constitution but never brought into being. The new senators were largely supportive of Pahlavi, as he had intended.
In 1951 Prime Minister Mohammed Mosaddeq received the vote required from the parliament to nationalize the British-owned oil industry, in a situation known as the Abadan Crisis. Despite British pressure, including an economic blockade, the nationalization continued. Mosaddeq was briefly removed from power in 1952 but was quickly re-appointed by the shah, due to a popular uprising in support of the premier and he, in turn, forced the Shah into a brief exile in August 1953 after a failed military coup by Imperial Guard Colonel Nematollah Nassiri.
1953: U.S. organized coup removes Mosaddeq[edit]
Main article: 1953 Iranian coup d'état
Shortly thereafter on August 19 a successful coup was headed by retired army general Fazlollah Zahedi, organized by the United States (CIA)[147] with the active support of the British (MI6) (known as Operation Ajax and Operation Boot to the respective agencies).[148] The coup—with a black propaganda campaign designed to turn the population against Mosaddeq—forced Mosaddeq from office. Mosaddeq was arrested and tried for treason. Found guilty, his sentence reduced to house arrest on his family estate while his foreign minister, Hossein Fatemi, was executed. Zahedi succeeded him as prime minister, and suppressed opposition to the Shah, specifically the National Front and Communist Tudeh Party.


Play media


1971 film about Iran under the Shah


Iran was ruled as an autocracy under the shah with American support from that time until the revolution. The Iranian government entered into agreement with an international consortium of foreign companies which ran the Iranian oil facilities for the next 25 years splitting profits fifty-fifty with Iran but not allowing Iran to audit their accounts or have members on their board of directors. In 1957 martial law was ended after 16 years and Iran became closer to the West, joining the Baghdad Pact and receiving military and economic aid from the US. In 1961, Iran initiated a series of economic, social, agrarian and administrative reforms to modernize the country that became known as the Shah's White Revolution.
The core of this program was land reform. Modernization and economic growth proceeded at an unprecedented rate, fueled by Iran's vast petroleum reserves, the third-largest in the world. However the reforms, including the White Revolution, did not greatly improve economic conditions and the liberal pro-Western policies alienated certain Islamic religious and political groups. In early June 1963 several days of massive rioting occurred in support of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini following the cleric's arrest for a speech attacking the shah.
Two years later, premier Hassan Ali Mansur was assassinated and the internal security service, SAVAK, became more violently active. In the 1970s leftist guerilla groups such as Mujaheddin-e-Khalq (MEK), emerged and attacked regime and foreign targets.
Nearly a hundred Iran political prisoners were killed by the SAVAK during the decade before the revolution and many more were arrested and tortured.[149] The Islamic clergy, headed by the Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini (who had been exiled in 1964), were becoming increasingly vociferous.
Iran greatly increased its defense budget and by the early 1970s was the region's strongest military power. Bilateral relations with its neighbor Iraq were not good, mainly due to a dispute over the Shatt al-Arab waterway. In November 1971, Iranian forces seized control of three islands at the mouth of the Persian Gulf; in response, Iraq expelled thousands of Iranian nationals. Following a number of clashes in April 1969, Iran abrogated the 1937 accord and demanded a renegotiation.
In mid-1973, the Shah returned the oil industry to national control. Following the Arab-Israeli War of October 1973, Iran did not join the Arab oil embargo against the West and Israel. Instead, it used the situation to raise oil prices, using the money gained for modernization and to increase defense spending.
A border dispute between Iraq and Iran was resolved with the signing of the Algiers Accord on March 6, 1975.
Iranian Revolution and the Islamic Republic (1979)[edit]




Ayatollah Khomeini returns to Iran after 14 years exile in France on 1 February 1979.


Main articles: Iranian Revolution and History of the Islamic Republic of Iran
The Iranian Revolution, also known as the Islamic Revolution,[150] was the revolution that transformed Iran from an absolute monarchy under Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi, to an Islamic republic under Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, one of the leaders of the revolution and founder of the Islamic Republic.[10] Its time span can be said to have begun in January 1978 with the first major demonstrations,[151] and concluded with the approval of the new theocratic Constitution—whereby Ayatollah Khomeini became Supreme Leader of the country—in December 1979.[152]
In between, Mohammad Reza Pahlavi left the country for exile in January 1979 after strikes and demonstrations paralyzed the country, and on February 1, 1979 Ayatollah Khomeini returned to Tehran to a greeting of several million Iranians.[152] The final collapse of the Pahlavi dynasty occurred shortly after on February 11 when Iran's military declared itself "neutral" after guerrillas and rebel troops overwhelmed troops loyal to the Shah in armed street fighting. Iran officially became an Islamic Republic on April 1, 1979, when Iranians overwhelmingly approved a national referendum to make it so.[153]
Ideology of the 1979 Iranian Revolution[edit]
Further information: Ideology of the 1979 Iranian Revolution
The ideology of revolutionary government was populist, nationalist and most of all Shi'a Islamic. Its unique constitution is based on the concept of velayat-e faqih the idea advanced by Khomeini that Muslims – in fact everyone – requires "guardianship", in the form of rule or supervision by the leading Islamic jurist or jurists.[154] Khomeini served as this ruling jurist, or supreme leader, until his death in 1989.
Iran's rapidly modernising, capitalist economy was replaced by populist and Islamic economic and cultural policies. Much industry was nationalized, laws and schools Islamicized, and Western influences banned.
The Islamic revolution also created great impact around the world. In the non-Muslim world it has changed the image of Islam, generating much interest in the politics and spirituality of Islam,[155] along with "fear and distrust towards Islam" and particularly the Islamic Republic and its founder.[156]
Khomeini Takes Power (1979–1989)[edit]
Khomeini served as leader of the revolution or as Supreme Leader of Iran from 1979 to his death on June 3, 1989. This era was dominated by the consolidation of the revolution into a theocratic republic under Khomeini, and by the costly and bloody war with Iraq.
The consolidation lasted until 1982–3,[157][158] as Iran coped with the damage to its economy, military, and apparatus of government, and protests and uprisings by secularists, leftists, and more traditional Muslims—formerly ally revolutionaries but now rivals—were effectively suppressed. Many political opponents were executed by the new regimes. Following the events of the revolution, Marxist guerrillas and federalist parties revolted in some regions comprising Khuzistan, Kurdistan and Gonbad-e Qabus, which resulted in severe fighting between rebels and revolutionary forces. These revolts began in April 1979 and lasted between several months to over a year, depending on the region. The Kurdish uprising, led by the KDPI, was the most violent, lasting until 1983 and resulting in 10,000 casualties.
In the summer of 1979 a new constitution giving Khomeini a powerful post as guardian jurist Supreme Leader[159] and a clerical Council of Guardians power over legislation and elections, was drawn up by an Assembly of Experts for Constitution. The new constitution was approved by referendum in December 1979.
Iran hostage crisis (1979–1981)[edit]
Main article: Iran hostage crisis
An early event in the history of the Islamic republic that had a long-term impact was the Iran hostage crisis. Following the admitting of the former Shah of Iran into the United States for cancer treatment, on November 4, 1979, Iranian students seized US embassy personnel, labeling the embassy a "den of spies."[160] Fifty-two hostages were held for 444 days until January 1981.[161] An American military attempt to rescue the hostages failed.[162]
The takeover was enormously popular in Iran, where thousands gathered in support of the hostage takers, and it is thought to have strengthened the prestige of the Ayatollah Khomeini and consolidated the hold of anti-Americanism. It was at this time that Khomeini began referring to America as the "Great Satan." In America, where it was considered a violation of the long-standing principle of international law that diplomats may be expelled but not held captive, it created a powerful anti-Iranian backlash. Relations between the two countries have remained deeply antagonistic and American international sanctions have hurt Iran's economy.[163]
Iran–Iraq War (1980–1988)[edit]
Main article: Iran–Iraq War




An Iranian soldier with gas mask during the Iran–Iraq War.


During this political and social crisis, Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein attempted to take advantage of the disorder of the Revolution, the weakness of the Iranian military and the revolution's antagonism with Western governments. The once-strong Iranian military had been disbanded during the revolution, and with the Shah ousted, Hussein had ambitions to position himself as the new strong man of the Middle East, and sought to expand Iraq's access to the Persian Gulf by acquiring territories that Iraq had claimed earlier from Iran during the Shah's rule.
Of chief importance to Iraq was Khuzestan which not only boasted a substantial Arab population, but rich oil fields as well. On the unilateral behalf of the United Arab Emirates, the islands of Abu Musa and the Greater and Lesser Tunbs became objectives as well. With these ambitions in mind, Hussein planned a full-scale assault on Iran, boasting that his forces could reach the capital within three days. On September 22, 1980, the Iraqi army invaded Iran at Khuzestan, precipitating the Iran–Iraq War. The attack took revolutionary Iran completely by surprise.
Although Saddam Hussein's forces made several early advances, Iranian forces had pushed the Iraqi army back into Iraq by 1982. Khomeini sought to export his Islamic revolution westward into Iraq, especially on the majority Shi'a Arabs living in the country. The war then continued for six more years until 1988, when Khomeini, in his words, "drank the cup of poison" and accepted a truce mediated by the United Nations.
Tens of thousands of Iranian civilians and military personnel were killed when Iraq used chemical weapons in its warfare. Iraq was financially backed by Egypt, the Arab countries of the Persian Gulf, the Soviet Union and the Warsaw Pact states, the United States (beginning in 1983), France, the United Kingdom, Germany, Brazil, and the People's Republic of China (which also sold weapons to Iran).
There were more than 100,000 Iranian victims[164] of Iraq's chemical weapons during the eight-year war. The total Iranian casualties of the war were estimated to be between 500,000 and 1,000,000. Almost all relevant international agencies have confirmed that Saddam engaged in chemical warfare to blunt Iranian human wave attacks; these agencies unanimously confirmed that Iran never used chemical weapons during the war.[165][166][167][168]
Starting on 19 July 1988 and lasting about five months the government systematically executed thousands of political prisoners across Iran. This is commonly referred to as the 1988 executions of Iranian political prisoners or the 1988 Iranian Massacre. The main target was the membership of the People's Mojahedin Organization of Iran (PMOI), although a lesser number of political prisoners from other leftist groups were also included such as the Tudeh Party of Iran (Communist Party).[169][170] Estimates of the number executed vary from 1,400[171] to 30,000.[172][173]
Rule Under Khamenei (1989–present)[edit]
The First Eight Years (1989-1997)[edit]
On his deathbed in 1989, Khomeini appointed a 25-man Constitutional Reform Council which named then president Ali Khamenei as the next Supreme Leader, and made a number of changes to Iran's constitution.[174] A smooth transition followed Khomeini's death on June 3, 1989. While Khamenei lacked Khomeini's "charisma and clerical standing", he developed a network of supporters within Iran's armed forces and its economically powerful religious foundations.[175] Under his reign Iran's regime is said – by at least one observer – to resemble more "a clerical oligarchy ... than an autocracy."[175]
Succeeding Khamenei as president was pragmatic conservative Ali-Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani, who served two four-year terms and focused his efforts on rebuilding Iran's economy and war-damaged infrastructure though low oil prices hampered this endeavour. His regime also successfully promoted birth control, cut military spending and normalized relations with neighbors such as Saudi Arabia.[176] During the Persian Gulf War in 1991 the country remained neutral, restricting its action to the condemnation of the U.S. and allowing fleeing Iraqi aircraft and refugees into the country.
Reforms and Consequences (1997-2005)[edit]




Mohammad Khatami, reformist President of Iran from 1997 to 2005.


Rafsanjani was succeeded in 1997 by the reformist Mohammad Khatami. His presidency was soon marked by tensions between the reform-minded government and an increasingly conservative and vocal clergy. This rift reached a climax in July 1999 when massive anti-government protests erupted in the streets of Tehran. The disturbances lasted over a week before police and pro-government vigilantes dispersed the crowds.
Khatami was re-elected in June 2001 but his efforts were repeatedly blocked by the conservatives in the parliament. Conservative elements within Iran's government moved to undermine the reformist movement, banning liberal newspapers and disqualifying candidates for parliamentary elections. This clampdown on dissent, combined with the failure of Khatami to reform the government, led to growing political apathy among Iran's youth.
In June 2003, anti-government protests by several thousand students took place in Tehran.[177][178] Several human rights protests also occurred in 2006.
2005 Presidential Election and Consequences (2005-2009)[edit]
In 2005 Iranian presidential election, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, mayor of Tehran, became the sixth president of Iran, after winning 62 percent of the vote in the run-off poll, against former president Ali-Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani.[179] During the authorization ceremony he kissed Khamenei's hand in demonstration of his loyalty to him.[180][181]
During this time, the American invasion of Iraq, overthrow of Sadam Hussein's regime and empowerment of its Shi'a majority, all strengthened Iran's position in the region particularly in the mainly Shia south of Iraq, where a top Shia leader in the week of September 3, 2006 renewed demands for an autonomous Shia region.[182] At least one commentator (Former U.S. Defense Secretary William S. Cohen) has stated that as of 2009 Iran's growing power has eclipsed anti-Zionism as the major foreign policy issue in the middle east.[183]
During 2005 and 2006, there were claims that the United States and Israel were planning to attack Iran, with the most cited reason being Iran's civilian nuclear energy program which the United States and some other states fear could lead to a nuclear weapons program. P.R. China and Russia oppose military action of any sort and oppose economic sanctions. Ayatollah Ali Khamenei issued a fatwa forbidding the production, stockpiling and use of nuclear weapons. The fatwa was cited in an official statement by the Iranian government at an August 2005 meeting of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in Vienna.[184][185]
In 2009 Ahmadinejad's reelection was hotly disputed and marred by large protests that formed the "greatest domestic challenge" to the leadership of the Islamic Republic "in 30 years".[186] Reformist opponent Mir-Hossein Mousavi and his supporters alleged voting irregularities and by 1 July 2009, 1000 people had been arrested and 20 killed in street demonstrations.[187] Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei and other Islamic officials blamed foreign powers for fomenting the protest.[188]









































2013 Presidential Election and Improving US Iran Relations (2013-present)[edit]
On 15 June 2013, Hassan Rouhai won the presidential election in Iran, with a total number of 36,704,156 ballots cast; Rouhani won 18,613,329 votes. In his press conference one day after election day, Rouhani reiterated his promise to recalibrate Iran’s relations with the world.
On April 2, 2015, following eight days of tortuous discussions in Switzerland, which lasted through the night to Thursday, Iran and six world powers agreed on the outlines of an understanding to limit Iran's nuclear programs, negotiators indicated, as both sides prepared for announcements. Iranian Foreign Minister Mohammad Javad Zarif tweeted: "Found solutions. Ready to start drafting immediately." European Union foreign policy chief Federica Mogherini tweeted that she would meet the press with Zarif after a final meeting of the seven nations in the nuclear talks. She wrote: "Good news."
Reading out a joint statement, European Union foreign policy chief Federica Mogherini hailed what she called a "decisive step" after more than a decade of work. Iranian Foreign Minister Mohammad Javad Zarif followed with the same statement in Farsi. U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry and the top diplomats of Britain, France and Germany also briefly took the stage behind them. The deal is intended to be a provisional framework for a comprehensive agreement that is not due to be signed until the end of June, but if it includes concrete facts and figures, it will mark a significant breakthrough in the 12-year history of negotiations with Iran over its nuclear programme.
See also[edit]

Timeline of Tehran
List of articles related to Iranian history
List of rulers of Iran
Politics of Iran
Safavid conversion of Iran from Sunnism to Shiism
Religion and culture in ancient Iran


General


History of the Middle East
History of the Caucasus

References[edit]


^ a b c Xinhua, "New evidence: modern civilization began in Iran", 10 Aug 2007, retrieved 1 October 2007
^ Azadpour, M. "HEGEL, GEORG WILHELM FRIEDRICH". Encyclopædia Iranica. Retrieved 2015-04-11.&#160;
^ http://www.britannica.com/ebc/article-9371723 Encyclopædia Britannica Concise Encyclopedia Article: Media
^ David Sacks, Oswyn Murray, Lisa R. Brody; Oswyn Murray; Lisa R. Brody (2005). Encyclopedia of the ancient Greek world. Infobase Publishing. pp.&#160;256 (at the right portion of the page). ISBN&#160;978-0-8160-5722-1.&#160;
^ a b http://anthropology.net/user/kambiz_kamrani/blog/2006/12/05/engineering_an_empire_the_persians
^ Persia and the Greeks. Persian Fire: The First World Empire
^ a b c d R.M. Savory, Safavids, Encyclopedia of Islam, 2nd edition Cite error: Invalid &lt;ref&gt; tag; name "savoryeiref" defined multiple times with different content (see the help page).
^ "The Islamic World to 1600", The Applied History Research Group, The University of Calgary, 1998, retrieved 1 October 2007
^ Iran Islamic Republic, Encyclopædia Britannica retrieved 23 January 2008
^ a b Encyclopædia Britannica 23 January 2008 Cite error: Invalid &lt;ref&gt; tag; name "Britannica" defined multiple times with different content (see the help page).
^ a b Fisher et al. 1991, pp.&#160;329-330.
^ a b c d Timothy C. Dowling Russia at War: From the Mongol Conquest to Afghanistan, Chechnya, and Beyond pp 729 ABC-CLIO, 2 dec. 2014 ISBN 1598849484 Cite error: Invalid &lt;ref&gt; tag; name "books.google.nl" defined multiple times with different content (see the help page). Cite error: Invalid &lt;ref&gt; tag; name "books.google.nl" defined multiple times with different content (see the help page).
^ Ancient Iran, Encyclopedia Britannica, www.britannica.com
^ a b http://www.pbase.com/k_amj/tehran_museum retrieved 27 March 2008
^ J.D. Vigne, J. Peters and D. Helmer, First Steps of Animal Domestication, Proceedings of the 9th Conference of the International Council of Archaeozoology, Durham, August 2002, ISBN 1-84217-121-6
^ TRINKAUS, E.; BIGLARI, F. "M IDDLE P ALEOLITHIC H UMAN R EMAINS FROM B ISITUN C AVE , I RAN". http://www.academia.edu.&#160; Missing or empty |url= (help); |access-date= requires |url= (help)
^ "Early humans in Iran were growing wheat 12,000 years ago", http://www.nbcnews.com/science/science-news/early-humans-iran-were-growing-wheat-12-000-years-ago-f6C10536898, First published July 5th 2013
^ Riehl, Simone. "Emergence of Agriculture in the Foothills of the Zagros Mountains of Iran (Supplement)". www.researchgate.net. Retrieved 1 March 2015.&#160;
^ "Excavations at Chogha Bonut: The earliest village in Susiana". Oi.uchicago.edu. Retrieved 21 June 2013.&#160;
^ Hole, Frank (20 July 2004). "NEOLITHIC AGE IN IRAN". Encyclopedia Iranica. Encyclopaedia Iranica Foundation. Retrieved 9 August 2012.&#160;
^ a b "Iran, 8000–2000 BC". The Timeline of Art History. The Metropolitan Museum of Art. October 2000. Retrieved 2008-08-09.&#160;
^ The Archaeology of Elam: Formation and Transformation of an Ancient Iranian State - by D. T. Potts, Cambridge University Press, 29/07/1999 - page 46-47 - ISBN 0521563585 hardback
^ Chogha Mish (Iran), By K. Kris Hirst – http://archaeology.about.com/od/cterms/g/choghamish.htm
^ Research
^ Antonio Sagona,Paul Zimansky. "Ancient Turkey" Routledge 2015. ISBN 1134440278 p 163
^ a b The Archaeology of Elam: Formation and Transformation of an Ancient Iranian State - by D. T. Potts, Cambridge University Press, 29/07/1999 - pp. 45-46 - ISBN 0521563585 hardback
^ Algaze, Guillermo. 2005. The Uruk World System: The Dynamics of Expansion of Early Mesopotamian Civilization
^ http://oi.uchicago.edu/pdf/saoc63.pdf
^ 5000-Y-Old Inscribed Tablets Discovered in Jiroft
^ Cultural Heritage news agency retrieved 27 March 2008
^ Yarshater, Yarshater. "Iranian history". Encyclopædia Iranica. Retrieved 2008-06-23.&#160;
^ Diakonoff, I., M., “Media”, Cambridge History of Iran, II, Cambridge, 1985, p.43 [within the pp.36-148]. This paper is cited in the Journal of Eurasian Studies at page 51.
^ Lackenbacher, Sylvie. "Elam". Encyclopædia Iranica. Retrieved 2008-06-23.&#160;
^ ^ Bahman Firuzmandi "Mad, Hakhamanishi, Ashkani, Sasani" pp. 20
^ a b "Iran, 1000 BC–1 AD". The Timeline of Art History. The Metropolitan Museum of Art. October 2000. Retrieved 2008-08-09.&#160;
^ Medvedskaya, I.N. (January 2002). "The rise and fall of Media". International Journal of Kurdish Studies (BNET). Retrieved 2008-08-10.&#160;
^ Sicker, Martin (2000). The pre-Islamic Middle East. Greenwood Publishing Group. pp.&#160;68/69. ISBN&#160;978-0-275-96890-8.&#160;
^ Urartu – Lost Kingdom of Van
^ Urartu civilization – All About Turkey
^ FORGOTTEN EMPIRE the world of Ancient Persia | The Persian Empire | Darius I
^ Hooker, Richard (1996). "The Persians". Retrieved 2006-08-20.&#160;
^ Persia and the Greeks. (Persian Fire: The First World Empire
^ Benevolent Persian Empire
^ a b c Joseph Roisman,Ian Worthington. "A companion to Ancient Macedonia" John Wiley &amp; Sons, 2011. ISBN 144435163X pp 135-138, pp 343-345
^ Brian Todd Carey, Joshua Allfree, John Cairns. Warfare in the Ancient World Pen and Sword, 19 jan. 2006 ISBN 1848846304
^ Norman A. Stillman The Jews of Arab Lands pp 22 Jewish Publication Society, 1979 ISBN 0827611552
^ International Congress of Byzantine Studies Proceedings of the 21st International Congress of Byzantine Studies, London, 21–26 August 2006, Volumes 1-3 pp 29. Ashgate Pub Co, 30 sep. 2006 ISBN 075465740X
^ Garthwaite, Gene R., The Persians, p. 2
^ J. B. Bury, p.109.
^ a b Durant.
^ Transoxiana 04: Sassanians in Africa
^ Sarfaraz, pp. 329–330.
^ Iransaga: The art of Sassanians
^ Zarinkoob, p.305.
^ "Iran". Encyclopædia Britannica.&#160;
^ a b Lewis, Bernard. "Iran in history". Tel Aviv University. Retrieved 2007-04-03.&#160;
^ Hawting G., The First Dynasty of Islam. The Umayyad Caliphate AD 661–750, (London) 1986, pp. 63–64
^ Cambridge History of Iran, by Richard Nelson Frye, Abdolhosein Zarrinkoub, et al. Section on The Arab Conquest of Iran and . Vol 4, 1975. London. p.46
^ Al-Biruni. الآثار الباقية عن القرون الخالية, p.35,36,48 وقتی قتبیه بن مسلم سردار حجاج، بار دوم بخوارزم رفت و آن را باز گشود هرکس را که خط خوارزمی می نوشت و از تاریخ و علوم و اخبار گذشته آگاهی داشت از دم تیغ بی دریغ درگذاشت و موبدان و هیربدان قوم را یکسر هلاک نمود و کتابهاشان همه بسوزانید و تباه کرد تا آنکه رفته رفته مردم امی ماندند و از خط و کتابت بی بهره گشتند و اخبار آنها اکثر فراموش شد و از میان رفت
^ a b c Fred Astren pg.33–35
^ Pourshariati (2008), pp. 312-313
^ a b c d e f g Islamic Conquest
^ Saïd Amir Arjomand, Abd Allah Ibn al-Muqaffa and the Abbasid Revolution. Iranian Studies, vol. 27, #1-4. London: Routledge, 1994.
^ a b c d e f "The Islamic World to 1600". Applied History Research Group, University of Calagary. Retrieved August 26, 2006.&#160;
^ a b Tobin 113–115
^ Nasr, Hoseyn; Islam and the pliqht of modern man
^ a b Encyclopædia Britannica, "Seljuq", Online Edition, (LINK) Cite error: Invalid &lt;ref&gt; tag; name "britannica" defined multiple times with different content (see the help page).
^ Richard Frye, The Heritage of Persia, p. 243.
^ Rayhanat al- adab, (3rd ed.), vol. 1, p. 181.
^ Enderwitz, S. "Shu'ubiyya". Encyclopedia of Islam. Vol. IX (1997), pp. 513–14.
^ Samanid Dynasty
^ Caheb C., Cambridge History of Iran, Tribes, Cities and Social Organization, vol. 4, p305–328
^ Kühnel E., in Zeitschrift der deutschen morgenländischen Gesell, Vol. CVI (1956)
^ O.Özgündenli, "Persian Manuscripts in Ottoman and Modern Turkish Libraries", Encyclopædia Iranica, Online Edition, (LINK)
^ M. Ravandi, "The Seljuq court at Konya and the Persianisation of Anatolian Cities", in Mesogeios (Mediterranean Studies), vol. 25–6 (2005), pp. 157–69
^ Encyclopædia Britannica
^ Lordkipanidze, Mariam (1987), Georgia in the XI-XII Centuries. Tbilisi: Ganatleba, p. 154.
^ Mongol invasion of Iran
^ Kenneth Warren Chase (2003). Firearms: a global history to 1700 (illustrated ed.). Cambridge University Press. p.&#160;58. ISBN&#160;0-521-82274-2. Retrieved 2011-11-28. Chinggis Khan organized a unit of Chinese catapult specialists in 1214, and these men formed part of the first Mongol army to invade Transoxania in 1219. This was not too early for true firearms, and it was nearly two centuries after catapult-thrown gunpowder bombs had been added to the Chinese arsenal. Chinese siege equipment saw action in Transoxania in 1220 and in the north Caucasus in 1239–40.&#160;
^ David Nicolle, Richard Hook (1998). The Mongol Warlords: Genghis Khan, Kublai Khan, Hulegu, Tamerlane (illustrated ed.). Brockhampton Press. p.&#160;86. ISBN&#160;1-86019-407-9. Retrieved 2011-11-28. Though he was himself a Chinese, he learned his trade from his father, who had accompanied Genghis Khan on his invasion of Muslim Transoxania and Iran. Perhaps the use of gunpowder as a propellant, in other words the invention of true guns, appeared first in the Muslim Middle East, whereas the invention of gunpowder itself was a Chinese achievement&#160;
^ Arnold Pacey (1991). Technology in world civilization: a thousand-year history (reprint, illustrated ed.). MIT Press. p.&#160;46. ISBN&#160;0-262-66072-5. Retrieved 2011-11-28. During the 1250s, the Mongols invaded Iran with 'whole regiments' of Chinese engineers operating trebuchets (catapults) throwing gunpowder bombs. Their progress was rapid and devastating until, after the sack of Baghdad in 1258, they entered Syria. There they met an Islamic army similarly equipped and experienced their first defeat. In 1291, the same sort of weapon was used during the siege of Acre, when the European Crusaders were expelled form Palestine.&#160;
^ Chahryar Adle, Irfan Habib (2003). Ahmad Hasan Dani, Chahryar Adle, Irfan Habib, ed. History of Civilizations of Central Asia: Development in contrast&#160;: from the sixteenth to the mid-nineteenth century. Volume 5 of History of Civilizations of Central Asia (illustrated ed.). UNESCO. p.&#160;474. ISBN&#160;92-3-103876-1. Retrieved 2011-11-28. Indeed, it is possible that gunpowder devices, including Chinese mortar (huochong), had reached Central Asia through the Mongols as early as the thirteenth century.71 Yet the potential remained unexploited; even Sultan Husayn's use of cannon may have had Ottoman inspiration.&#160;
^ Arnold Pacey (1991). Technology in world civilization: a thousand-year history (reprint, illustrated ed.). MIT Press. p.&#160;46. ISBN&#160;0-262-66072-5. Retrieved 2011-11-28. The presence of these individuals in China in the 1270s, and the deployment of Chinese engineers in Iran, mean that there were several routes by which information about gunpowder weapons could pass from the Islamic world to China, or vice versa. Thus when two authors from the eastern Mediterranean region wrote books about gunpowder weapons around the year 1280, it is not surprising that they described bombs, rockets and fire-lances very similar to some types of Chinese weaponry.&#160;
^ The Il-khanate
^ Water, ch. 3
^ Battuta's Travels: Part Three – Persia and Iraq
^ Q&amp;A with John Kelly on The Great Mortality on National Review Online.
^ Islam and Iran: A Historical Study of Mutual Services
^ a b Four Centuries of Influence of Iraqi Shiism on Pre-Safavid Iran
^ Peter B. Golden Central Asia in World History (New Oxford World History) (Oxford University Press, 2011), page 94: "He was born some 100 km (62 miles) south of Samarkand into a clan of the Barlas, a Turkicized tribe of Mongol descent."
^ a b This section incorporates test from the public domain Library of Congress Country Studies [1]
^ "SAFAVID DYNASTY". Encyclopædia Iranica.&#160;
^ Helen Chapin Metz. Iran, a Country study. 1989. University of Michigan, p. 313.
^ Emory C. Bogle. Islam: Origin and Belief. University of Texas Press. 1989, p. 145.
^ Stanford Jay Shaw. History of the Ottoman Empire. Cambridge University Press. 1977, p. 77.
^ Andrew J. Newman, Safavid Iran: Rebirth of a Persian Empire, IB Tauris (March 30, 2006).
^ "Ismail Safavi" Encyclopedia Iranica.
^ Richard Tapper. "Shahsevan in Safavid Persia", Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies, University of London, Vol. 37, No. 3, 1974, p. 324
^ Lawrence Davidson, Arthur Goldschmid, "A Concise History of the Middle East", Westview Press, 2006, p. 153
^ "Safavid Dynasty", Britannica Concise. Online Edition 2007
^ "ṬAHMĀSP I". Retrieved 12 May 2015.&#160;
^ Eskandar Beg, pp. 900-901, tr. Savory, II, p. 1116
^ Malekšāh Ḥosayn, p. 509
^ Mottahedeh, Roy, The Mantle of the Prophet&#160;: Religion and Politics in Iran, One World, Oxford, 1985, 2000, p.204
^ Michael Axworthy, biography of Nader, The Sword of Persia (I.B. Tauris, 2006) pp. 17–56
^ Alexander Mikaberidze. "Conflict and Conquest in the Islamic World: A Historical Encyclopedia" ABC-CLIO 2011. p 726
^ David Marshall Lang. Russia and the Armenians of Transcaucasia, 1797-1889: a documentary record Columbia University Press, 1957 (digitalised March 2009, originally from the University of Michigan) p 142
^ Spencer C. Tucker. "A Global Chronology of Conflict: From the Ancient World to the Modern Middle East: From the Ancient World to the Modern Middle East" p 739
^ Ramazan Gadzhimuradovich Abdulatipov. "Russia and the Caucasus: On the Arduous Path to Unity" Edwin Mellen Press, 2000. p 15
^ Axworthy Iran: Empire of the Mind (Penguin, 2008) pp. 152–167
^ Ronald Grigor Suny. "The Making of the Georgian Nation" Indiana University Press, 1994. p 55
^ Yar-Shater, Ehsan. Encyclopaedia Iranica, Vol. 8, parts 4-6 Routledge &amp; Kegan Paul (original from the University of Michigan) p 541
^ Axworthy p.168
^ a b c d e Fisher et al. 1991, p.&#160;328.
^ a b Mikaberidze 2011, p.&#160;409.
^ a b Donald Rayfield. Edge of Empires: A History of Georgia Reaktion Books, 15 feb. 2013 ISBN 1780230702 p 255
^ a b c Lang, David Marshall (1962), A Modern History of Georgia, p. 38. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson.
^ a b Suny, Ronald Grigor (1994), The Making of the Georgian Nation, p. 59. Indiana University Press, ISBN 0-253-20915-3
^ Fisher, William Bayne (1991). The Cambridge History of Iran 7. Cambridge University Press. pp.&#160;128–129. Agha Muhammad Khan remained nine days in the vicinity of Tiflis. His victory proclaimed the restoration of Iranian military power in the region formerly under Safavid domination.&#160;
^ a b Fisher et al. 1991, p.&#160;329.
^ Alekseĭ I. Miller. Imperial Rule Central European University Press, 2004 ISBN 9639241989 p 204
^ Swietochowski, Tadeusz (1995). Russia and Azerbaijan: A Borderland in Transition. Columbia University Press. pp.&#160;69, 133. ISBN&#160;978-0-231-07068-3.&#160;
^ L. Batalden, Sandra (1997). The newly independent states of Eurasia: handbook of former Soviet republics. Greenwood Publishing Group. p.&#160;98. ISBN&#160;978-0-89774-940-4.&#160;
^ Timothy C. Dowling Russia at War: From the Mongol Conquest to Afghanistan, Chechnya, and Beyond pp 728-729 ABC-CLIO, 2 dec. 2014 ISBN 1598849484
^ E. Ebel, Robert, Menon, Rajan (2000). Energy and conflict in Central Asia and the Caucasus. Rowman &amp; Littlefield. p.&#160;181. ISBN&#160;978-0-7425-0063-1.&#160;
^ Andreeva, Elena (2010). Russia and Iran in the great game: travelogues and orientalism (reprint ed.). Taylor &amp; Francis. p.&#160;6. ISBN&#160;978-0-415-78153-4.&#160;
^ Çiçek, Kemal, Kuran, Ercüment (2000). The Great Ottoman-Turkish Civilisation. University of Michigan. ISBN&#160;978-975-6782-18-7.&#160;
^ Ernest Meyer, Karl, Blair Brysac, Shareen (2006). Tournament of Shadows: The Great Game and the Race for Empire in Central Asia. Basic Books. p.&#160;66. ISBN&#160;978-0-465-04576-1.&#160;
^ a b "Caucasus Survey". Retrieved 23 April 2015.&#160;
^ Mansoori, Firooz (2008). "17". Studies in History,Language and Culture of Azerbaijan (in Persian). Tehran: Hazar-e Kerman. p.&#160;245. ISBN&#160;978-600-90271-1-8.&#160; |access-date= requires |url= (help)
^ А. Г. Булатова. Лакцы (XIX — нач. XX вв.). Историко-этнографические очерки. — Махачкала, 2000.
^ a b "The Iranian Armed Forces in Politics, Revolution and War: Part One". Retrieved 23 May 2014.&#160;
^ "Griboedov not only extended protection to those Caucasian captives who sought to go home but actively promoted the return of even those who did not volunteer. Large numbers of Georgian and Armenian captives had lived in Iran since 1804 or as far back as 1795." Fisher, William Bayne;Avery, Peter; Gershevitch, Ilya; Hambly, Gavin; Melville, Charles. The Cambridge History of Iran Cambridge University Press, 1991. p. 339.
^ (Russian) A. S. Griboyedov. "Записка о переселеніи армянъ изъ Персіи въ наши области", Фундаментальная Электронная Библиотека
^ Bournoutian. Armenian People, p. 105
^ Bournoutian, George A. (1982). Eastern Armenia in the Last Decades of Persian Rule, 1807 - 1828. Malibu: Undena Publications. pp.&#160;xxii + 165.&#160;
^ The Cambridge History of Iran by William Bayne Fisher, Peter Avery, Ilya Gershevitch, Gavin Hambly, Charles Melville, Cambridge University Press, 1991 p. 339
^ Potier, Tim (2001). Conflict in Nagorno-Karabakh, Abkhazia and South Ossetia: A Legal Appraisal. Martinus Nijhoff Publishers. p.&#160;2. ISBN&#160;90-411-1477-7.&#160;
^ "The Great Persian Famine of 1870–1871". Links.jstor.org. Retrieved 2010-08-25.&#160;
^ "COUP D’ETAT OF 1299/1921". Encyclopædia Iranica.
^ Michael P. Zirinsky; "Imperial Power and Dictatorship: Britain and the Rise of Reza Shah, 1921–1926", International Journal of Middle East Studies 24 (1992), 639–663, Cambridge University Press
^ The Columbia Encyclopedia, Sixth Edition: Reza Shah
^ a b Ervand, History of Modern Iran, (2008), p.91
^ The Origins of the Iranian Revolution by Roger Homan. International Affairs (Royal Institute of International Affairs 1944–), Vol. 56, No. 4 (Autumn, 1980), pp. 673–677 Link
^ Richard W. Cottam, Nationalism in Iran, University of Pittsburgh Press, ISBN o-8229-3396-7
^ Bakhash, Shaul, Reign of the Ayatollahs&#160;: Iran and the Islamic Revolution by Shaul, Bakhash, Basic Books, c1984, p.22
^ "CIA documents acknowledge its role in Iran's 1953 coup". BBC News. Retrieved 20 August 2013.&#160;
^ Kinzer, Stephen (2013). The Brothers: John Foster Dulles, Allen Dulles, and Their Secret World War. New York: Times Books.&#160;
^ Abrahamian, Tortured Confessions (1999), pp. 135–6, 167, 169
^ Islamic Revolution, Iran Chamber.
^ The Iranian Revolution.
^ a b Ruhollah Khomeini, Encyclopædia Britannica.
^ Iran Islamic Republic, Encyclopædia Britannica.
^ Dabashi, Theology of Discontent (1993), p.419, 443
^ Shawcross, William, The Shah's Last Ride (1988), p. 110.
^ Nasr, Vali, The Shia Revival, Norton, (2006), p.138
^ Encyclopedia of Islam and Muslim World, Thomson Gale, 2004, p.357 (article by Stockdale, Nancy, L.)
^ Keddie, Modern Iran, (2006), p.241
^ [2]
^ PBS, American Experience, Jimmy Carter, "444 Days: America Reacts", retrieved 1 October 2007
^ Guests of the Ayatollah: The Iran Hostage Crisis: The First Battle in America's War with Militant Islam, Mark Bowden, p. 127, 200
^ The Desert One Debacle
^ History Of US Sanctions Against Iran, Middle East Economic Survey, 26 August 2002
^ Centre for Documents of The Imposed War, Tehran. (مرکز مطالعات و تحقیقات جنگ)
^ Iran, 'Public Enemy Number One'
^ Federation of American Scientists&#160;:: Introduction to Chemical Weapons
^ Iraqi General: US Helped Us as We Used Chemical Weapons, by Aaron Glantz
^ NTI Chemical profile of Iran
^ Iranian party demands end to repression
^ Abrahamian, Ervand, Tortured Confessions, University of California Press, 1999, 209–228
^ Massacre 1988 (Pdf)
^ Memories of a slaughter in Iran
^ Khomeini fatwa 'led to killing of 30,000 in Iran'
^ Abrahamian, History of Modern Iran, (2008), p.182
^ a b "Who's in Charge?" by Ervand Abrahamian London Review of Books, 6 November 2008
^ Treacherous Alliance&#160;: the secret dealings of Israel, Iran and the United States by Trita Pasri, Yale University Press, 2007, p.145
^ Iranians protest against clerics
^ Uprising in Iran
^ "Iran hardliner becomes president". BBC. August 3, 2005. Retrieved 2006-12-06.&#160;
^ "Behind Ahmadinejad, a Powerful Cleric". New York Times. September 9, 2006. Retrieved 2006-12-06.&#160;
^ http://tofoiran.packdeal.com/clips/DrIman/20060906-DrIman-CNN-225.asx
^ "Iraq prime minister to visit Iran". Al Jazeera. September 9, 2006.&#160;
^ Cohen: Middle East fearful of Iran Tops wrath against Israel. July 29, 2009
^ Iran issues anti-nuke fatwa
^ Iran, holder of peaceful nuclear fuel cycle technology
^ Iran's top leader digs in heels on election, By Ramin Mostaghim. 25 Jun 2009
^ Mousavi says new Ahmadinejad government 'illegitimate,' 1 July 2009
^ Timeline: 2009 Iran presidential elections


Sources[edit]

Fisher, William Bayne; Avery, P.; Hambly, G. R. G; Melville, C. (1991). The Cambridge History of Iran 7. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN&#160;0521200954.&#160;
Mikaberidze, Alexander (2011). Conflict and Conquest in the Islamic World: A Historical Encyclopedia 1. ABC-CLIO. ISBN&#160;1598843362.&#160;

Further reading[edit]

Abrahamian, Ervand (2008). A History of Modern Iran. Cambridge University Press. ISBN&#160;0-521-82139-8.&#160;
Cambridge University Press (1968–1991). Cambridge History of Iran. (8 vols.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN&#160;0-521-45148-5.&#160;
Daniel, Elton L. (2000). The History of Iran. Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood. ISBN&#160;0-313-36100-2.&#160;
Foltz, Richard (2015). Iran in World History. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN&#160;9780199335497.&#160;
Rudi Matthee, Willem Floor. "The Monetary History of Iran: From the Safavids to the Qajars" I.B.Tauris, 25 apr. 2013
Del Guidice, Marguerite (August 2008). "Persia – Ancient soul of Iran". National Geographic Magazine.&#160;
Joseph Roisman, Ian Worthington. "A companion to Ancient Macedonia" pp 342–346, pp 135–138. (Achaemenid rule in the Balkans and Eastern Europe). John Wiley &amp; Sons, 7 jul. 2011. ISBN 144435163X.
Olmstead, Albert T. E. (1948). The History of the Persian Empire: Achaemenid Period. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.&#160;
Van Gorde, A. Christian. Christianity in Persia and the Status of Non-Muslims in Iran (Lexington Books; 2010) 329 pages. Traces the role of Persians in Persia and later Iran since ancient times, with additional discussion of other non-Muslim groups.
Sabri Ateş. "Ottoman-Iranian Borderlands: Making a Boundary, 1843–1914" Cambridge University Press, 21 okt. 2013. ISBN 1107245087.
Askolʹd Igorevich Ivanchik, Vaxtang Ličʻeli. "Achaemenid Culture and Local Traditions in Anatolia, Southern Caucasus and Iran". BRILL, 2007.
Benjamin Walker, Persian Pageant: A Cultural History of Iran, Arya Press, Calcutta, 1950.
Nasr, Hossein (1972). Sufi Essays. Suny press. ISBN&#160;978-0-87395-389-4.&#160;
Rezvani, Babak., "Ethno-territorial conflict and coexistence in the Caucasus, Central Asia and Fereydan" Amsterdam University Press, 15 mrt. 2014.
Stephanie Cronin., "Iranian-Russian Encounters: Empires and Revolutions Since 1800" Routledge, 2013. ISBN 0415624339.
Chopra, R.M., article on "A Brief Review of Pre-Islamic Splendour of Iran", INDO-IRANICA, Vol.56 (1-4), 2003.
Vladimir Minorsky. "The Turks, Iran and the Caucasus in the Middle Ages" Variorum Reprints, 1978.

External links[edit]



Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Iranian History



Persian History Persian History
Iran an article by Encyclopædia Iranica
Iran an article by Encyclopædia Britannica online by Janet Afary
Ancient Iran an article by Encyclopædia Britannica online by Adrian David Hugh Bivar and Mark J. Dresden
Iran History
Iran chamber
WWW-VL History Index: Iran
The History of Persia from 1715
[3] RUSSIA i. Russo-Iranian Relations up to the Bolshevik Revolution









v
t
e


History of Asia






Sovereign states



Afghanistan
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei
Cambodia
China
Cyprus
East Timor (Timor-Leste)
Egypt
Georgia
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
North Korea
South Korea
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Lebanon
Malaysia
Maldives
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nepal
Oman
Pakistan
Philippines
Qatar
Russia
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Syria
Tajikistan
Thailand
Turkey
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen








States with
limited recognition



Abkhazia
Nagorno-Karabakh
Northern Cyprus
Palestine
South Ossetia
Taiwan








Dependencies and
other territories



British Indian Ocean Territory
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Hong Kong
Macau
















v
t
e


 Iran topics










&#160;
History











Prehistory






Ancient




3400–550 BCE



Kura-Araxes culture (3400–2000 BC)
Proto-Elamite civilization (3200–2800 BC)
Elamite dynasties (2800–550 BC)
Akkadian Empire (c.2334 BC–c.2154 BC)
Kassites (c.1500–c.1155 BC)
Kingdom of Mannai (10th–7th century BC)
Neo-Assyrian Empire (911–609 BC)
Urartu (860 BC–590 BC)
Median Empire (728–550 BC)
(Scythian Kingdom) (652–625 BC)








550 BC – 224 AD



Achaemenid Empire (550–330 AD)
Kingdom of Armenia (331 BC–428 AD)
Atropatene (320s BC–3rd century AD)
Seleucid Empire (330 BC–150 AD)
Parthian Empire (248&#160;BC&#160;– &#160;224&#160;AD)








224–651 AD



Sasanian Empire (224–651 AD)











Medieval




637&#160;– 1055



Patriarchal Caliphate (637–651)
Umayyad Caliphate (661–750)
Abbasid Caliphate (750–1258)
Tahirid dynasty (821–873)
Alavid dynasty (864–928)
Saffarid dynasty (861–1003)
Samanid dynasty (819–999)
Ziyarid dynasty (928–1043)
Buyid dynasty (934–1062)








975–1432



Ghaznavid Empire (975–1187)
Ghurid dynasty (1011–1215)
Seljuk Empire (1037–1194)
Khwarazmian dynasty (1077–1231)
Eldiguzids (1135/36-1225)
Ilkhanate (1256–1335)
Kurt dynasty (1231–1389)
Muzaffarid dynasty (1314–1393)
Chobanid dynasty (1337–1357)
Jalairid Sultanate dynasty (1339–1432)








1370–1925



Timurid Empire (1370–1507)
Qara Qoyunlu Turcomans (1375–1468)
Ag Qoyunlu Turcomans (1378–1508)
Safavid Empire (1501&#160;– 1722 / 1736)
Afsharid dynasty (1736–50)
Zand Dynasty (1750–94)
Qajar Dynasty (1794–1925)

Khanates of the Caucasus (18th century–20th century)













Modern




1925–1979



Pahlavi dynasty (1925–1979)
Iran Constituent Assembly, 1949
1953 coup d'état
Iranian Revolution (1979)
Interim Government








Islamic Republic



History (1979–)
Arab separatism in Khuzestan

Embassy siege (1980)


Iran–Iraq War (1980–88)
Iranian pilgrim massacre (1987)
Iran Air Flight 655 shootdown (1988)
PJAK insurgency
Balochistan conflict
Syrian Civil War
Military intervention against ISIL











See also



Ancient Iran
Greater Iran
Indo-Iranians&#160;(languages)
Kura–Araxes culture
Jiroft culture
Aryans
Persian people
Azerbaijanis
Caucasian peoples
Kings of Persia
Military history
List of years in Iran


















&#160;
Geography









Cities&#160;(list)
Earthquakes
Iranian Azerbaijan
Iranian Balochistan
Caspian Hyrcanian mixed forests
Caucasus
Iranian Kurdistan
Iranian Plateau
Lake Urmia
Islands
Mountains
Provinces
Wildlife















&#160;
Politics










General



Censorship
Constitution&#160;(Persian Constitutional Revolution)
Elections&#160;(2009 presidential
Green Revolution)
Foreign relations
Human rights&#160;(LGBT)
Judicial system
Military&#160;(Army
Air Force
Navy)
Ministry of Intelligence and National Security
Cyberwarfare
Nuclear program&#160;(UN Security Council Resolution 1747)
Political parties
Principlists
Propaganda
Reformists
Terrorism&#160;(state-sponsorship allegations)
White Revolution (1963)
Women's rights movement








Councils



Assembly (or Council) of Experts
Expediency Discernment Council
City and Village Councils
Guardian Council
Islamic Consultative Assembly (parliament)
Supreme National Security Council








Officials



Ambassadors
President
Provincial governors
Supreme Leader


















&#160;
Economy










General



Bonyad (charitable trust)
Brain drain
Companies&#160;(Automotive industry)
Corruption
Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO)
Economic history
Economic Reform Plan
Energy
Environmental issues
Foreign direct investment
Intellectual property
International oil bourse
International rankings
Iran and the World Trade Organization
Taxation
Main economic laws
Economy of the Middle East
Milad Tower and complex
Military equipment manufactured
Nuclear program&#160;(UN Security Council Resolution 1747)
Privatization
Rial (currency)
Space Agency
Setad
Supreme Audit Court
Tehran Stock Exchange
Venture capital&#160;(Technology start-ups)








Sectors



Agriculture&#160;(fruit)
Banking and insurance&#160;(Banks&#160;(Central Bank)
Electronic banking)
Construction
Defense
Health care&#160;(Pharmaceuticals)
Industry
Mining
Petroleum&#160;(Anglo-Persian Oil Company)
Telecommunications and IT&#160;(TCI)
Transport&#160;(airlines
metro
railways
shipping)
Tourism








State-owned
companies



Defense Industries Organization (DIO)
Industrial Development and Renovation Organization (IDRO)
Iran Aviation Industries Organization (IAIO)
Iran Electronics Industries (IEI)
National Iranian Oil Company (NIOC)
National Development Fund








Places



Asaluyeh industrial corridor
Chabahar Free Trade-Industrial Zone
Kish Island Free Trade Zone
Research centers


















&#160;
Society










Demographics




Languages



Persian (Farsi)
Armenian
Azerbaijani
Kurdish
Georgian
Neo-Aramaic
Iranian languages








Peoples



Iranian citizens&#160;(abroad)
Ethnic minorities

Armenians
Assyrians
Azerbaijanis
Circassians
Georgians
Kurds
Persian Jews
Turkmen










Religion



Islam
Bahá'í&#160;(persecution)
Christianity
Zoroastrians&#160;(persecution)
minorities








Other



Corruption
Crime
Education&#160;(higher
scientists and scholars
universities)
Brain drain
Health care
International rankings
Nationality
Water supply and sanitation
Women











Culture







Architecture&#160;(Achaemenid
architects)
Art&#160;(modern&#160;/ contemporary)
Blogs
Calendars&#160;(Persian New Year (Nowruz))
Chādor (garment)
Chicago Persian antiquities crisis
Cinema
Crown jewels
Cuisine
Folklore
Intellectual movements
Iranians
Iranian studies
Islam&#160;(Islamization)
Literature
Media&#160;(news agencies&#160;(student)
newspapers)
Mythology
National symbols&#160;(Imperial Anthem)
Opium consumption
Persian gardens
Persian name
Philosophy
Public holidays
Scouting
Sport&#160;(football)








Music



Folk
Heavy metal
Pop
Rap and hip-hop
Rock and alternative
Traditional
Ey Iran











Other topics



Science and technology
Anti-Iranian sentiment
Tehrangeles

















 Category
 Portal
 WikiProject
 Commons















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=History_of_Iran&amp;oldid=691646263#Pre-Islamic_history"					
				Categories: History of IranHistory of Western AsiaHidden categories: Pages with reference errorsPages with duplicate reference namesPages using web citations with no URLPages using citations with accessdate and no URLCS1 Persian-language sources (fa)Articles with Russian-language external linksAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from November 2009Articles with unsourced statements from May 2015Articles containing video clips				
							
		
		
			