


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Hurling
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				For the Cornish sport, see Cornish hurling.  For coverage of the latest Championship season, see 2015 All-Ireland Senior Hurling Championship.

Hurling


82,000 people at the 2009 All-Ireland Senior Hurling Championship Final between Kilkenny and Tipperary at Croke Park in Dublin



Highest governing&#160;body
Gaelic Athletic Association


Nicknames
Iománaíocht, iomáint, iomáin


First played
Ireland


Characteristics


Contact
Contact


Team members
15 players per side
substitutes are permitted


Mixed gender
Camogie is the female variant


Equipment
Sliotar (ball)
Hurley/camán (stick)
Helmet


Presence


Olympic
Former






Hurley and sliotar (Irish: Camán agus sliotar)






A club hurling match in play


Hurling (Irish: Iománaíocht/Iomáint) is an outdoor team game of ancient Gaelic and Irish origin, administered by the Gaelic Athletic Association (GAA). The game has prehistoric origins, has been played for over 3,000 years,[1][2] and is considered to be the world's fastest field sport.[1][3] One of Ireland's native Gaelic games, it shares a number of features with Gaelic football, such as the field and goals, the number of players, and much terminology. There is a similar game for women called camogie (camógaíocht). It shares a common Gaelic root with the sport of shinty (camanachd), which is played predominantly in Scotland.
The objective of the game is for players to use a wooden stick called a hurley (in Irish a camán, pronounced /ˈkæmən/ or /kəˈmɔːn/) to hit a small ball called a sliotar /ˈʃlɪtər/ between the opponents' goalposts either over the crossbar for one point, or under the crossbar into a net guarded by a goalkeeper for one goal, which is equivalent to three points. The sliotar can be caught in the hand and carried for not more than four steps, struck in the air, or struck on the ground with the hurley. It can be kicked or slapped with an open hand (the hand pass) for short-range passing. A player who wants to carry the ball for more than four steps has to bounce or balance the sliotar on the end of the stick and the ball can only be handled twice while in his possession.
Provided that a player has at least one foot on the ground, a player may make a shoulder to shoulder charge on an opponent- (a) who is in possession of the ball, or (b) who is playing the ball, or (c) when both players are moving in the direction of the ball to play it. No protective padding is worn by players. A plastic protective helmet with a faceguard is mandatory for all age groups, including senior level, as of 2010. The game has been described as "a bastion of humility", with player names absent from jerseys and a player's number decided by his position on the field.[1]
Hurling is played throughout the world, and is popular among members of the Irish diaspora in North America, Europe, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa and Argentina, and South Korea. In many parts of Ireland, however, hurling is a fixture of life.[1] It has featured regularly in art forms such as film, music and literature. The final of the All-Ireland Senior Hurling Championship was listed in second place by CNN in its "10 sporting events you have to see live", after the Olympic Games and ahead of both the FIFA World Cup and UEFA European Football Championship.[4] After covering the 1959 All-Ireland Senior Hurling Championship Final between Kilkenny and Waterford for BBC Television, English commentator Kenneth Wolstenholme was moved to describe hurling as his second favourite sport in the world after his first love, football (soccer).[5] In 2007, Forbes magazine described the media attention and population multiplication of Thurles town ahead of one of the game's annual provincial hurling finals as being "the rough equivalent of 30 million Americans watching a regional lacrosse game".[1]



Contents


1 Statistics
2 Rules

2.1 Playing field
2.2 Teams
2.3 Ball
2.4 Helmets
2.5 Timekeeping
2.6 Technical fouls
2.7 Scoring
2.8 Tackling
2.9 Restarting play
2.10 Officials


3 History

3.1 Hurling at the Olympic Games


4 International

4.1 Argentina
4.2 Australia and New Zealand
4.3 Britain
4.4 South Africa
4.5 North America


5 Major hurling competitions
6 See also
7 Notes
8 References
9 External links



Statistics[edit]

A team comprises 15 players, or "hurlers".
The hurley is generally 24 to 36 inches (61 to 91&#160;cm) in length.
The ball, known as a sliotar, has a cork centre and a leather cover; it is between 69 and 72&#160;mm (2.7 and 2.8&#160;in) in diameter, and weighs between 110 and 120&#160;g (3.9 and 4.2&#160;oz).
The goalkeeper's hurley usually has a bas (the flattened, curved end) twice the size of other players' hurleys to provide some advantage against the fast moving sliotar.
A good strike with a hurley can propel the ball over 150&#160;km/h (93&#160;mph) in speed and 110 metres (361&#160;ft) in distance.[citation needed][6][7]
A ball hit over the bar is worth one point. A ball that is hit under the bar is called a goal and is worth three points.
As of 2010, all players must wear a helmet.

Rules[edit]
Playing field[edit]




A standard hurling pitch


A Hurling pitch is similar in some respects to a rugby pitch but larger. The grass pitch is rectangular, stretching 130–145 metres (140–160 yards) long and 80–90&#160;m (90–100&#160;yd) wide. There are H-shaped goalposts at each end, formed by two posts, which are usually 6–7 metres (20–23 feet) high, set 6.5&#160;m (21&#160;ft) apart, and connected 2.5&#160;m (8.2&#160;ft) above the ground by a crossbar. A net extending behind the goal is attached to the crossbar and lower goal posts. The same pitch is used for Gaelic football; the GAA, which organizes both sports, decided this to facilitate dual usage. Lines are marked at distances of 14 yards, 21 yards and 65 yards (45 yards for Gaelic Football) from each end-line. Shorter pitches and smaller goals are used by youth teams.[8]
Teams[edit]
See also: Gaelic football, hurling and camogie positions
Teams consist of fifteen players: a goalkeeper, three full backs, three half backs, two midfielders, three half forwards and three full forwards (see diagram). The panel is made up of 24–30 players and five substitutions are allowed per game. An exception can now be made in the case of a blood substitute being necessary
Ball[edit]
Main article: Sliotar
The ball consists of a cork core covered by two pieces of leather stitched together. Called a sliotar, it is a subject to strict regulations as regards its size, mass and composition.[9]
Helmets[edit]




A standard hurling helmet


From 1 January 2010, the wearing of helmets with faceguards became compulsory for hurlers at all levels. This saw senior players follow the regulations already introduced in 2009 at minor and under 21 grades. The GAA hopes to significantly reduce the number of injuries by introducing the compulsory wearing of helmets with full faceguards, both in training and matches. Hurlers of all ages, including those at nursery clubs when holding a hurley in their hand, must wear a helmet and faceguard at all times. Match officials will be obliged to stop play if any player at any level appears on the field of play without the necessary standard of equipment.[10]
Timekeeping[edit]




Standard hurling positions


Senior inter-county matches last 70 minutes (35 minutes per half). All other matches last 60 minutes (30 minutes per half). For teams Under-13 and lower, games may be shortened to 50 minutes. Timekeeping is at the discretion of the referee who adds on stoppage time at the end of each half.
If a knockout game finishes in a draw, a replay is staged. If a replay finishes in a draw, 20 minutes extra time is played (10 minutes per half). If the game is still tied, another replay is staged.[clarification needed]
In club competitions, replays are increasingly not used due to the fixture backlogs caused. Instead, extra time is played after a draw, and if the game is still level after that it will go to a replay.[clarification needed]
Technical fouls[edit]
The following are considered technical fouls ("fouling the ball"):

Picking the ball directly off the ground (instead it must be flicked up with the hurley)
Throwing the ball (instead it must be "hand-passed": slapped with the open hand)
Going more than four steps with the ball in the hand (it may be carried indefinitely on the hurley though)
Catching the ball three times in a row without it touching the ground (touching the hurley does not count)
Putting the ball from one hand to the other
Hand-passing a goal
Throwing the hurley

Scoring[edit]
Scoring is achieved by sending the sliotar (ball) between the opposition's goal posts. The posts, which are at each end of the field, are "H" posts as in rugby football but with a net under the crossbar as in soccer. The posts are 6.4 m apart and the crossbar is 2.44 m above the ground.
If the ball goes over the crossbar, a point is scored and a white flag is raised by an umpire. If the ball goes below the crossbar, a goal, worth three points, is scored, and a green flag is raised by an umpire. A goal must be scored by either a striking motion or by directly soloing the ball into the net. The goal is guarded by a goalkeeper. Scores are recorded in the format {goal total} – {point total}. For example, the 1997 All-Ireland final finished: Clare 0–20 Tipperary 2–13. Thus Clare won by "twenty points to nineteen" (20 to 19). 2–0 would be referred to as "two goals", never "two zero". 0–0 is said "no score".
Tackling[edit]
Players may be tackled but not struck by a one handed slash of the stick; exceptions are two handed jabs and strikes. Jersey-pulling, wrestling, pushing and tripping are all forbidden. There are several forms of acceptable tackling, the most popular being:

the "block", where one player attempts to smother an opposing player's strike by trapping the ball between his hurley and the opponent's swinging hurl;
the "hook", where a player approaches another player from a rear angle and attempts to catch the opponent's hurley with his own at the top of the swing; and
the "side pull", where two players running together for the sliotar will collide at the shoulders and swing together to win the tackle and "pull" (name given to swing the hurley) with extreme force.

Restarting play[edit]

The match begins with the referee throwing the sliotar in between the four midfielders on the halfway line.
After an attacker has scored or put the ball wide of the goals, the goalkeeper may take a "puckout" from the hand at the edge of the small square. All players must be beyond the 20 m line.
After a defender has put the ball wide of the goals, an attacker may take a "65" from the 65 m line level with where the ball went wide. It must be taken by lifting and striking. However, the ball must not be taken into the hand but struck whilst the ball is lifted.
After a player has put the ball over the sideline, the other team may take a 'sideline cut' at the point where the ball left the pitch. It must be taken from the ground.
After a player has committed a foul, the other team may take a 'free' at the point where the foul was committed. It must be taken by lifting and striking in the same style as the "65".
After a defender has committed a foul inside the Square (large rectangle), the other team may take a "penalty" from the ground from behind the 20 m line. Only the goalkeeper may guard the goals. It must be taken by lifting and striking and the sliotar must be stuck on or behind the 20m line (The penalty rule was amended in 2015 due to safety concerns. Before this the ball merely had to start at the 20m line but could be struck beyond it. To balance this advantage the two additional defenders previously allowed on the line have been removed).
If many players are struggling for the ball and no side is able to capitalize or gain control of the sliotar the referee may choose to throw the ball in between two opposing players. This is also known as a "Clash".

Officials[edit]
A hurling match is watched over by eight officials:

The referee
Two linesmen
Sideline official/standby linesman (inter-county games only)
Four umpires (two at each end)

The referee is responsible for starting and stopping play, recording the score, awarding frees, noting infractions, and issuing yellow (caution) and red (order off) penalty cards to players after offences.
Linesmen are responsible for indicating the direction of line balls to the referee and also for conferring with the referee. The fourth official is responsible for overseeing substitutions, and also indicating the amount of stoppage time (signalled to him by the referee) and the players substituted using an electronic board. The umpires are responsible for judging the scoring. They indicate to the referee whether a shot was: wide (spread both arms), a 65 m puck (raise one arm), a point (wave white flag), or a goal (wave green flag).
Contrary to popular belief within the association, all officials are not obliged to indicate "any misdemeanours" to the referee, but are in fact only permitted to inform the referee of violent conduct they have witnessed which has occurred without the referee's knowledge. A linesman/umpire is not permitted to inform the referee of technical fouls such as a "Third time in the hand", where a player catches the ball for a third time in succession after soloing or an illegal pick up of the ball. Such decisions can only be made at the discretion of the referee.
History[edit]




A graph demonstrating hurling scoring since 1910


Further information: History of hurling
Hurling is older than the recorded history of Ireland. It is thought to predate Christianity, having come to Ireland with the Celts.[11] It has been a distinct Irish pastime for at least 2000 years.[citation needed] The earliest written references to the sport in Brehon law date from the fifth century.[11] In the book by Seamus King "A History of Hurling" there is a reference from Irish verbal history of hurling as far back as the 1200 B.C being played in Tara co Meath. Hurling is related to the games of shinty that is played primarily in Scotland, cammag on the Isle of Man and bandy that was played formerly in England and Wales. The tale of the Táin Bó Cuailgne (drawing on earlier legends) describes the hero Cúchulainn playing hurling at Emain Macha. Similar tales are told about Fionn Mac Cumhail and the Fianna, his legendary warrior band. Recorded references to hurling appear in many places such as the fourteenth century Statutes of Kilkenny and a fifteenth-century grave slab survives in Inishowen, County Donegal.[12]
Hurling was said to be played in ancient times by teams representing neighbouring villages. Villages would play games involving hundreds of players, which would last several hours or even days.[13]




U.S. president Barack Obama accepting a hurley from Taoiseach Enda Kenny


The eighteenth century is frequently referred to as "The Golden Age of Hurling". This was when members of the Anglo-Irish landed gentry kept teams of players on their estates and challenged each other's teams to matches for the amusement of their tenants.
One of the first modern attempts to standardise the game with a formal, written set of rules came with the foundation of the Irish Hurling Union at Trinity College Dublin in 1879. It aimed "to draw up a code of rules for all clubs in the union and to foster that manly and noble game of hurling in this, its native country".[14]




Graph of hurling and gaelic football ratio of points to goals from 1910 to 2015


The founding of the Gaelic Athletic Association (GAA) in 1884 in Hayes Hotel, Thurles, Co Tipperary, turned around a trend of terminal decline by organising the game around a common set of written rules. In 1891 the first All-Ireland hurling final was played with Kerry winning the championship. However, the twentieth century saw Cork, Kilkenny[15] and Tipperary dominate hurling with each of these counties winning more than 20 All-Ireland titles each. Wexford, Waterford, Clare, Limerick, Offaly, Antrim, Dublin, and Galway were also strong hurling counties during the twentieth century.
As hurling entered the new millennium, it has remained Ireland's second most popular sport. An extended qualifier system resulted in a longer All-Ireland Senior Hurling Championship, but Cork, Tipperary and Kilkenny have come to dominate the championship and some argue that the All-Ireland has become less competitive. Pay-for-play remains controversial and the Gaelic Players Association continues to grow in strength. The inauguration of the Christy Ring Cup and Nicky Rackard Cup gave new championships and an opportunity to play in Croke Park to the weaker county teams. Further dissemination of the championship structure was completed in 2009 with the addition of the Lory Meagher Cup to make it a four tier championship.
Hurling at the Olympic Games[edit]
Hurling was an unofficial sport at the 1904 Summer Olympics in St. Louis, Missouri, in the United States. In the final, Fenian F.C. (Chicago) USA beat Innisfails (St. Louis). This was the only time hurling was in the Olympics.[16]
International[edit]
Further information: Hurling outside Ireland
Although many hurling clubs exist worldwide, only Ireland has a national team (although it includes only players from weaker counties in order to ensure matches are competitive). It and the Scotland shinty team have played for many years with modified match rules (as with International Rules Football). The match is the only such international competition. However, competition at club level has been going on around the world since the late nineteenth century thanks to emigration from Ireland, and the strength of the game has ebbed and flowed along with emigration trends. Nowadays, growth in hurling is noted in Continental Europe, Australia, and North America.
Argentina[edit]
Irish immigrants began arriving in Argentina in the nineteenth century.[17]
The earliest reference to hurling in Argentina dates from the late 1880s in Mercedes, Buenos Aires. However, the game was not actively promoted until 1900, when it came to the attention of author and newspaperman William Bulfin. Under Bulfin's patronage, the Argentine Hurling Club was formed on 15 July 1900, leading to teams being established in different neighborhoods of Buenos Aires and the surrounding farming communities.
Games of hurling were played every weekend until 1914 and received frequent coverage from Argentina's Spanish language newspapers, such as La Nación. After the outbreak of World War I, it became almost impossible to obtain hurleys from Ireland. An attempt was made to use native Argentine mountain ash, but it proved too heavy and lacking in pliability. Although the game was revived after the end of the war, the golden age of Argentine hurling had passed. World War II finally brought the era to its close.
In the aftermath of the Second World War, immigration from Ireland slowed to a trickle. In addition, native born Irish-Argentines assimilated into the local community. The last time that hurling was played in Argentina was in 1980, when the Aer Lingus Hurling Club conducted a three-week tour of the country and played matches at several locations.[18] Since 2009, with the realization of several Summers Camps and the visit of the All Stars in December, hurling returned to be a frequent activity at the Hurling Club, where many boys and young men have since been trained and taught to play. Even the Hurling Club are invited to participate Hurling Festival is organized within The Gathering events organized by Aer Lingus. This team will be present in September 2013 in the city of Galway. The team consists of 21 players from Hockey and Rugby teams. Many have contributed to the return hurling as an activity in the Club. As an example we can name Alejandro Yoyo Wade, Johnny Wade, Barbie, Cecilia and Irene Scally, David Ganly, Dickie Mac Allister, Eduardo Cabrera Punter, Hernan Magrini Scally. Several Irish have participated in many opportunities to work with the skills and education: Jonathan Lynch, Kevin O'Connors and Michael Connery, who currently works with the team's training to participate in the Aer Lingus International Hurling Festival.[19]
Australia and New Zealand[edit]
Further information: Australasia GAA
The earliest reference to hurling in Australia is related in the book "Sketches of Garryowen." On 12 July 1844, a match took place at Batman's Hill in Melbourne as a counterpoint to a march by the Orange Order. Reportedly, the hurling match attracted a crowd of five hundred Irish immigrants, while the Orange march shivered out of existence.[20]
Several hurling clubs existed in Victoria in the 1870s including Melbourne, Collingwood, Upper Yarra, Richmond and Geelong.
In 1885, a game between two Sydney based teams took place before a crowd of over ten thousand spectators. Reportedly, the contest was greatly enjoyed despite the fact that one newspaper dubbed the game "Two Degrees Safer Than War."[21]
Arden Street Oval in North Melbourne was used by Irish immigrants during the 1920s. The game in Australasia is administered by Australasia GAA.
Britain[edit]
Hurling was brought to Britain by Irish immigrants in the nineteenth century. The game is administered by British GAA. Warwickshire and Lancashire compete at inter-county level in the Lory Meagher Cup, competing against other counties in Ireland. London is the only non-Irish team to have won the All-Ireland Senior Hurling Championship (having captured the title in 1901), and after winning the 2012 Christy Ring Cup gained the right to contest the Liam McCarthy Cup in 2013.
The first ever hurling game played in the Scottish Highlands was played at Easter 2012 between CLG Micheal Breathnach and Fir Uladh, an Ulster select of Gaeiligoiri, as part of the Iomain Cholmcille festival, na Breathnaich coming out victorious.
South Africa[edit]
Soldiers who served in the Irish Brigade during the Anglo-Boer War are believed to have played the game on the veldt. Immigrants from County Wicklow who had arrived to work in the explosives factory in Umbogintwini, KwaZulu-Natal formed a team c. 1915–1916. A major burst of immigration in the 1920s led to the foundation of the Transvaal Hurling Association in Johannesburg in 1928. Games were traditionally played in a pitch on the site of the modern day Johannesburg Central Railway Station every Easter Sunday after Mass.
In 1932, a South African hurling team sailed to Ireland to compete in the Tailteann Games, where they carried a banner donated by a convent of Irish nuns in Cape Town. On their arrival, they were personally received by the Taoiseach (Prime Minister) at the time, Éamon de Valera.
South African hurling continued to prosper until the outbreak of World War II, which caused immigration from Ireland to cease and made it impossible to import equipment. Games of hurling and Gaelic football were occasionally sponsored by the Christian Brothers schools in Boksburg and Pretoria well into the 1950s. Both games have all but ceased to be played.[22]
North America[edit]
Further information: Canadian GAA, New York GAA and North American GAA
References to hurling on the North American continent date from the 1780s in modern-day Canada concerning immigrants from County Waterford and County Kilkenny,[23] and also, in New York City. After the end of the American Revolution, references to hurling cease in American newspapers until the aftermath of the Potato Famine when Irish people moved to America in huge numbers, bringing the game with them.[24]
Newspaper reports from the 1850s refer to occasional matches played in San Francisco, Hoboken, and New York City. The first game of hurling played under GAA rules outside of Ireland was played on Boston Common in June 1886.
In 1888, there was an American tour by fifty Gaelic athletes from Ireland, known as the 'American Invasion'. This created enough interest among Irish Americans to lay the groundwork for the North American GAA. By the end of 1889, almost a dozen GAA clubs existed in America, many of them in and around New York City, Philadelphia, and Chicago. Later, clubs were formed in Boston, Cleveland, and many other centers of Irish America. Concord, New Hampshire has its state's only hurling team, sponsored by The Barley House Pub.
In 1910, twenty-two hurlers, composed of an equal number from Chicago and New York, conducted a tour of Ireland, where they played against the County teams from Kilkenny, Tipperary, Limerick, Dublin, and Wexford.
Traditionally, hurling was a game played by Irish immigrants and discarded by their children. Many American hurling teams took to raising money to import players directly from Ireland. In recent years, this has changed considerably with the advent of the Internet and increased travel. The Barley House Wolves hurling team from New Hampshire was formed when U.S. soldiers returning from Iraq saw a hurling game on the television in Shannon airport as their plane refuelled.[25] Outside of the traditional North American GAA cities of New York, Boston, Chicago, and San Francisco, clubs are springing up in other places where they consist of predominantly American-born players who bring a new dimension to the game and actively seek to promote it as a mainstream sport, especially Joe Maher, a leading expert at the sport in Boston.[26] Currently, the Milwaukee Hurling Club, with 300 members, is the largest Hurling club in the world outside of Ireland, which is made of all Americans and very few Irish immigrants. The St. Louis Gaelic Athletic Club was established in 2002 and has expanded its organization to an eight team hurling league in the spring and six team Gaelic football league in the fall. They also have a 30-member camogie league. Saint Louis has won two National Championships in Jr C Hurling (2004, and 2011), as well as two National Championships in Jr D Gaelic Football (2005, and 2013). The Indianapolis Hurling Club began in 2002, then reformed in 2005. In 2008, the Indy Hurling Club won the Junior C National Championship. In 2011, Indy had 7 club teams and sent a Junior B, Junior C and Camogie team to nationals. Hurling continues to grow in popularity with teams now in Charleston, SC, Orlando, FL, Augusta, GA, Greenville, SC, Indianapolis, IN, Worcester, MA, Corvallis, OR, Concord, NH, Portland, Maine, Madison, WI, Hampton Roads, VA, Nashville, TN and Hartford, Connecticut.
The GAA have also begun to invest in American college students with university teams springing up at University of Connecticut, Stanford University, UC Berkeley, Purdue University, Indiana University, University of Montana and other schools. On 31 January 2009, the first ever US collegiate hurling match was held between UC Berkeley and Stanford University, organized by the newly formed California Collegiate Gaelic Athletic Association. UC Berkeley won the match by 1-point, as well as the most recent best-of-three College Cup, 2 matches to 1. On Memorial Day Weekend of 2011, the first ever National Collegiate GAA championship was played. The Indiana University Hurling Club won all matches of the tournament, and won by four points in the championship final to be crowned the first ever U.S. National Collegiate Champions.
Major hurling competitions[edit]




Counties contesting the All-Ireland Senior Football Championship (yellow), All-Ireland Senior Hurling Championship (blue), or both (green)


Further information: List of Gaelic games competitions

All-Ireland Senior Hurling Championship

Connacht Senior Hurling Championship
Leinster Senior Hurling Championship
Munster Senior Hurling Championship
Ulster Senior Hurling Championship


National Hurling League
Christy Ring Cup
Nicky Rackard Cup
All-Ireland Senior Club Hurling Championship

Leinster Senior Club Hurling Championship


All-Ireland Under-21 Hurling Championship

Leinster Under-21 Hurling Championship


All-Ireland Minor Hurling Championship
Poc Fada
Féile na nGael
Composite rules shinty–hurling (usually internationals between Scotland and Ireland)

See also[edit]




Gaelic games portal




Hurling records in Ireland
Shinty
Lacrosse
Hurling in popular culture

Notes[edit]


^ a b c d e Cramer, Ben. "Pitch Man". Forbes. 23 April 2007.
^ "Hurling". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved on 2015-10-12.
^ Laurence Baker, Emily (1999-07-25). "WHAT'S DOING IN; Dublin". The New York Times. Retrieved 2008-05-03.&#160;
^ Donnelly, Shawn (2 April 2012). "10 sporting events you have to see live: Because the real glory of athletic competition is being able to say, "I was there!"". CNN. Retrieved 2 April 2012.&#160;
^ Wolstenholme, Kenneth (13 September 1959). "Why Keep This Great Game Such A Big Secret?". Sunday Press. Retrieved 8 February 2007.&#160;
^ Hurleys, Heritage. "Irelands Fastest Hurler Competition". Heritage Hurleys. Retrieved 6 October 2015.&#160;
^ "Joe.ie". Joe.ie. Retrieved 6 October 2015.&#160;
^ "GAA pitch size". BBC News. 2005-10-11. Retrieved 2013-08-19.&#160;
^ "Gaelic Athletic Association Official Guide – Part 2" (PDF). Gaelic Athletic Association. 2009-06-03. p.&#160;13. Retrieved 2009-09-16.&#160;
^ "Hurling helmets to be compulsory". RTÉ Sport. 2009-10-28. Retrieved 2009-10-30.&#160;
^ a b Humphries, Tom (2003-09-14). "Sticks and thrones". The Guardian. Retrieved 2009-09-17.&#160;
^ Hutchinson, Roger (2004). Camanachd! The Story of Shinty. Birlinn Ltd. pp.&#160;27–28. ISBN&#160;978-1-84158-326-6.&#160;
^ "Traditional Celtic Sports". Kidzworld.com. Retrieved 2009-04-05.&#160;
^ "Reviving the old art, TCD step up in class". Irish Examiner. 2007-01-20. Retrieved 2009-09-17.&#160;
^ Humphries, Tom. "Kilkenny Hurling". The Irish Times.&#160;
^ "DEMONSTRATION &amp; UNOFFICIAL SPORTS".&#160;
^ King, Seamus J. (1998). The Clash of the Ash in Foreign Fields: Hurling Abroad. p.&#160;129. ISBN&#160;978-0-9533513-0-5.&#160;
^ King, Seamus J. (1998). The Clash of the Ash in Foreign Fields: Hurling Abroad. pp.&#160;129–137. ISBN&#160;978-0-9533513-0-5.&#160;
^ "The Global Irish – Buenos Aires". RTÉ Sport. 2010-03-10. Retrieved 2010-03-15.&#160;
^ King, Seamus J. (1998). The Clash of the Ash in Foreign Fields: Hurling Abroad. p.&#160;139. ISBN&#160;978-0-9533513-0-5.&#160;
^ King, Seamus J. (1998). The Clash of the Ash in Foreign Fields: Hurling Abroad. pp.&#160;139–140. ISBN&#160;978-0-9533513-0-5.&#160;
^ King, Seamus J. (1998). The Clash of the Ash in Foreign Fields: Hurling Abroad. pp.&#160;147–151. ISBN&#160;978-0-9533513-0-5.&#160;
^ King, Seamus J. (1998). The Clash of the Ash in Foreign Fields: Hurling Abroad. p.&#160;85. ISBN&#160;978-0-9533513-0-5.&#160;
^ King, Seamus J. (1998). The Clash of the Ash in Foreign Fields: Hurling Abroad. pp.&#160;97–98. ISBN&#160;978-0-9533513-0-5.&#160;
^ Du Pont, Kevin Paul. "Captivated by Irish hurling; US soldiers brought it home". www.bostonglobe.com. Retrieved 19 June 2015.&#160;
^ King, Seamus J. (1998). The Clash of the Ash in Foreign Fields: Hurling Abroad. pp.&#160;85–127. ISBN&#160;978-0-9533513-0-5.&#160;


References[edit]

King, Seamus J. (2005). A History of Hurling (second ed.). Dublin: Gill &amp; Macmillan. ISBN&#160;978-0-7171-3938-5. OCLC&#160;61477832.&#160;
King, Seamus J. (1998). The Clash of the Ash in Foreign Fields: Hurling Abroad. Boherclough, Cashel, Co. Tipperary: S. J. King. ISBN&#160;978-0-9533513-0-5. OCLC&#160;40820752.&#160;

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Hurling.



Playing Rules
Constitution and Rules of the GAA
Match Regulations 2008
Official website of the Gaelic Athletic Association
Sliotar Hurling Magazine
An Fear Rua – the GAA Unplugged
Video introduction to hurling
Continental Youth Championships
A Brief History of the Argentine Hurling Club
Hurling in Australia and New Zealand
Gaelic Football, Hurling are Irish Passions, National Geographic News
Hurling, Men's Fitness Magazine
Selection of hurling photos from Sportsfile Sports Photo Agency
KilkennyCats.com Hurling Forum
Seamus J. King, author website
What is Hurling, youtube
"Thirty Irishmen With Shillelaghs" Popular Mechanics, March 1954, pp.&#160;146–147.
In praise of … hurling: The courage and commitment of Cork and Clare were a shining example of sportsmanship - The Guardian editorial









v
t
e


Hurling







Positions






Equipment



Hurley
Sliotar
Helmet











History



History
Olympics
Outside Ireland
Popular culture
Records








Variations



Camogie (Women's)
Composite rules shinty–hurling
Shinty/Hurling International Series
Iomain








National Competitions



Liam McCarthy Cup
Senior Championship

2014


National Hurling League (2015)
Intermediate Championship
Junior Championship
Christy Ring Cup

2015


Nicky Rackard Cup

2015


Lory Meagher Cup

2015


All-Ireland Senior Club Hurling Championship

2014–15


Poc Fada
All Stars Awards
Christy Ring Cup Champion 15 Awards








Provincial Competitions



Leinster Senior Hurling Championship
Munster Senior Hurling Championship
Connacht Senior Hurling Championship
Ulster Senior Hurling Championship
Walsh Cup (hurling)








Rivalries



Kilkenny–Tipperary hurling rivalry
Cork–Tipperary hurling rivalry
Galway–Kilkenny hurling rivalry
Limerick–Tipperary hurling rivalry
Kilkenny–Waterford hurling rivalry
















v
t
e


Hurling Team of the Millennium






Goalkeeper



Tony Reddin








Full-backs



John Doyle
Nick O'Donnell
Bobby Rackard








Half-backs



Paddy Phelan
John Keane
Brian Whelahan








Midfielders



Lory Meagher
Jack Lynch








Half-forwards



Christy Ring
Mick Mackey
Jim Langton








Full-forwards



Eddie Keher
Ray Cummins
Jimmy Doyle









See also: Gaelic football, hurling and camogie positions














v
t
e


Hurling Team of the Century










&#160;
All-Ireland winners











Goalkeeper




Tony Reddin









Full-backs




Bobby Rackard
Nick O'Donnell
John Doyle









Half-backs




Jimmy Finn
John Keane
Paddy Phelan









Midfielders




Lory Meagher
Jack Lynch









Half-forwards




Christy Ring
Mick Mackey
Jim Langton









Full-forwards




Jimmy Doyle
Nicky Rackard
Eddie Keher


















&#160;
Non All-Ireland winners











Goalkeeper




Seánie Duggan









Full-backs




Jim Fives
Noel Drumgoole
John Joe 'Goggles' Doyle









Half-backs




Seán Herbert
Seán Stack
Colm Doran









Midfielders




Joe Salmon
John 'Jobber' McGrath









Half-forwards




Josie Gallagher
Martin Quigley
Kevin Armstrong









Full-forwards




Jimmy Smyth
Christy O'Brien
Mick Bermingham















See also: Gaelic football, hurling and camogie positions














v
t
e


Gaelic games









County
Stadiums and Venues








Men's



Football
Hurling
Handball
Rounders








Ladies'



Camogie
Football








Lists



Clubs

Ireland
Elsewhere


Competitions








Competitions



All-Ireland Senior Football Championship
All-Ireland Senior Hurling Championship
National Football League
National Hurling League









Glossary of terms














v
t
e


Gaelic Athletic Association









Glossary of terms








Overview



Foundation
Headquarters
Congress
President


History
Rule 21
Rule 42
125th anniversary events








Lists



Non-Gaelic games played in Croke Park
Presidents
Stadiums








Culture



Scór








Inter county



County
County colours
County nicknames
GAA Interprovincial Championship
Clubs











Camogie
Football
Handball
Hurling
Ladies' football
Rounders
















v
t
e


Interdependent team sports









Sport
Governing bodies
Sportspeople
National sport








Basket sports



Basketball

beach
deaf
3x3
water
wheelchair


Cestoball
Korfball
Netball

Fast5
indoor
wheelchair


Ringball
Slamball








Football codes







Association football

Amputee
Beach
Futsal
indoor
Jorkyball
Paralympic
powerchair
roller
street
walking


Australian rules football

Lightning football
Metro footy
Mini footy
Nine-a-side
Rec footy


Gaelic football

Ladies'


Circle rules football









Gridiron codes




American football

eight-man
flag
nine-man
six-man
sprint
touch
wheelchair


Canadian football
Indoor football

arena











Hybrid codes




Austus
Eton wall game
International rules football
Kronum
Samoa rules
Universal football
Volata









Medieval football codes




Ba game
Caid
Calcio fiorentino
Camping
Cnapan
Cornish hurling
Cuju
Harpastum
Kemari
Ki-o-rahi
La soule
Lelo burti
Marn grook
Mob football
Royal Shrovetide
Uppies and downies
Yubi lakpi









Rugby codes




Beach
Rugby league

masters
mini
mod
nines
sevens
tag
touch
wheelchair


Rugby union

American flag
mini
sevens
snow
tag
touch
tens


Wheelchair











Safe haven sports



Baseball
Brännboll
British baseball
Cricket

One Day
Test
Twenty20


Danish longball
Indoor cricket
Kickball
Lapta
Matball
Oină
Over-the-line
Pesäpallo
Rounders
Softball

Fastpitch


Stoolball
Town ball
Vigoro
Wiffle ball
Wireball








Stick and ball sports







Bando
Cammag
Composite rules shinty–hurling
Hurling

camogie


Indigenous North American stickball
Knattleikr
Knotty
Lacrosse

box/indoor
field
intercrosse
women's


Polocrosse
Shinty









Hockey sports




Ball hockey
Bandy

rink


Broomball

Moscow


Field hockey

indoor


Floor hockey
Floorball
Ice hockey

pond
power
sledge
underwater


Ringette
Ritinis
Roller hockey

in-line
quad


Rossall hockey
Street hockey
Underwater hockey
Unicycle hockey









Polo sports




Auto polo
Cowboy polo
Cycle polo
Elephant polo
Horseball
Pato
Polo

chovgan


Segway polo
Yak polo











Ball-over-net sports



Ball badminton
Biribol
Bossaball
Fistball
Footbag net
Football tennis
Footvolley
Jianzi
Jokgu
Newcomb ball
Peteca
Sepak takraw
Throwball
Volleyball

beach
paralympic










Other sports



Airsoft
Angleball
Autoball
Basque pelota

frontenis
jai alai
xare


Bo-taoshi
Boules

Bocce
Boccia
Bowls
Jeu provençal
Pétanque


Buzkashi
Curling

wheelchair


Cycle ball
Digor
Dodgeball
Flickerball
Gateball
Handball

beach
Czech
Field


Hornussen
Ice football (Eisfußball)
Ice stock sport
Jereed
Kabaddi
Kho kho
Kin-Ball
Lagori
Mesoamerican ballgame
Paintball
Pelota mixteca
Prisonball
Quidditch
Rollball
Roller derby
Socci

Socci Sport Alternative Games
Shandball


Speedball
Tamburello
Tchoukball
Tejo
TFC 5
Tug of war
Ulama
Ultimate
Underwater football
Underwater rugby
Valencian pilota
Water polo

canoe
inner tube


Waboba
Whirlyball
Yukigassen
















v
t
e


Hybrid sports and the sports that form them






Hybrid sport

Combination of






Austus



American football and Australian rules football








Composite rules shinty–hurling and Iomain



Shinty and hurling








Chess boxing



Boxing and chess








Korfball



Basketball and netball








International rules football



Australian rules football and Gaelic football








Samoa rules



Australian rules football and rugby union








Universal football



Australian rules football and rugby league








Volata



Association football and team handball








Kronum



Association football, basketball and team handball








Sepaktakraw and Footvolley



Association football and volleyball















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hurling&amp;oldid=689187671"					
				Categories: HurlingGaelic gamesSports originating in IrelandTeam sportsHurlersHidden categories: Use Irish English from June 2014All Wikipedia articles written in Irish EnglishUse dmy dates from October 2012Articles containing Irish-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from April 2013Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2015Articles with unsourced statements from October 2015Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata				
							
		
		
			