


		
		
		
			

							
						

			List of sports terms named after people
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								  (Redirected from Sports terms named after people)
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				




This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2014)


This is a list of eponyms in sports, i.e. sports terms named after people.



Contents


1 American football
2 Artistic gymnastics
3 Association football
4 Athletics
5 Baseball
6 Brazilian Jiu Jitsu
7 Boxing
8 Cricket
9 Croquet
10 Figure skating
11 Ice hockey
12 Rhythmic gymnastics
13 Rugby league
14 Skiing
15 Tennis
16 Ultimate (Frisbee)
17 Weightlifting
18 Wrestling
19 References



American football[edit]
Further information: National Football League lore § Rules named after NFL figures
Artistic gymnastics[edit]

Amanar (vault), Yurchenko on - 2½ twist off(vault), after Simona Amânar (Romania).
Belyavskiy (Parallel bars) Double front salto dismount in piked position. Named after David Belyavskiy (Russia)
Blanik, named after Leszek Blanik, a Polish artistic gymnast.
Borden - straddle pike jump from a sideways position or side split jump done on the balance beam with a ½ or ¾ turn, after Amanda Borden (USA)[1]
Bhardwaj (uneven bar)-the high bar, does a backward flip (Pak Salto), with full-twist, and catches the low bar, after Mohini Bhardwaj (USA).[2]
Bhavsar (rings)-pull through momentary, front lever press to Maltese, Bhavsar (parallel bars) Long Hang Swing forward, straddle cut backward, and regrasp with straight body at horizontal (Tippelt to long hang swing) after Raj Bhavsar (USA).
Bi - Turn (uneven bars), after Bi Wenjing (China).
Biles (floor) - double layout with 1/2 turn, after Simone Biles (USA)
Brause (uneven bars)-done from the low bar facing away from the high bar, with a cast to front salto forward and catching the high bar, after Doris Fuchs-Brause (USA)
Bryan (pommel horse) -scissors with ½ turn to handstand, ½ pirouette and straddle back down,after Casey Bryan. (USA)
Bulimar (floor) is a Johnson leap (switch leap with 1⁄4 turn to side position) with additional 1⁄1 turn, after Diana Bulimar (Romania)
Cassina (horizontal bar), laid out double back over the bar with full twist, after Igor Cassina (Italy).
Cheng - Yurchenko 1/2 on - 1½ twist off(vault), after Cheng Fei (China).
Chusovitina (floor) - Full Twisting Double Layout Salto and Chusovitina (vault) - Handspring forward on, piked salto with 1/1 twist off,after Oksana Chusovitina (Uzbekistan).
Chow/Khorkina (unven bars)-Stalder 1½ pirouette and Chow II (unven bars)-Stalder to Shaposhnikova, after Amy Chow (USA)
Comaneci salto (uneven bars)- front support on HB, cast with salto forward straddle to hang on HB, after Nadia Comăneci (Romania).
Daggett (pommel horse) - scissor backward with ½ counterturn, after Tim Daggett (USA)
Dawes (uneven bars) - back giant with 1 ½ turn in the handstand, after Dominique Dawes (USA)
Diomidov (parallel bars), swing forward with a full turn on one arm to handstand, after Sergei Diomidov (USSR).[1]
Dos Santos (floor) Double Arabian piked and Dos Santos II (floor), Double Arabian laid-out, after Daiane dos Santos (Brazil).
Drăgulescu (vault), handspring double front somersault with half turn, after Marian Drăgulescu(România).
Erceg (balance beam mount), round off tucked Arabian front onto the end of the beam, after Tina Erceg
Ferrari (floor) - a ring tour jete with ½ turn and a landing on both feet, after Vanessa Ferrari (Italy)
Fontaine (uneven bars dismount) -double somersaulting dismount is a back tuck with ½ twist into a front, after Larissa Fontaine.
Galante (beam) - 1 1/2 turn with leg held in split position, after Paola Galante (Italy)
Garrison (floor)-cat leap forward with bent legs and 1 ½ turn, Garrison (balance beam)- free shoulder roll forward to stand or tuck stand without hand support, Garrison (balance beam)-starts from an extended tuck sit, Valdez swing over backward through horizontal plane with support on one arm and Garrison (balance beam)-round-off, tucked full mount, after Kelly Garrison (USA)
Gatson (parallel bars)-a swing backward with full turn hop to handstand, after Jason Gatson (USA).
Gaylord I (horizontal bar)-front giant into a one-and-one-half front salto over the bar to regrasp – a front somersault in tuck, pike or straddled position over the bar, after Gaylord II (horizontal bar)-back giant into a layout Gienger (back salto, ½ ) over the bar to regrasp – a front somersault in tuck, pike or straddled position over the bar., after Mitch Gaylord (USA).[3]
Gienger salto (high bar, uneven bars), after Eberhard Gienger (Germany)[4]
Gómez (floor) - Quadruple spin, after Elena Gómez (Spain)
Grigoraş (beam), after Cristina Elena Grigoraş (Romania).
Hayden (horizontal bar) -a double salto backward in layout, with full twist over the bar, after Daniel Hayden (USA)
Henrich (balance beam) -a stag-split,r split leap or jump forward with ½ turn, landing on both feet or in a one-two step-out or a split jump in side position with bending of rear leg backward upward that starts from a cross stand, after Christy Henrich (USA)
Hindorff (uneven bars), cleat hip circle to immediate Tkatchev release, after Sylvia Hindorff (GDR).[1]
Huang (uneven bars), -a stalder forward in L-grip with full turn to handstand, initiated on one arm before handstand, after Huang QiuShuang (China)
Humphrey (floor) -switch split leap forward with a ¼ turn to side split leap or straddle pike position, (Beam/Floor) - 2 1/2 turn (900°) on one leg, in tuck stand, with free leg optional, after Terin Humphrey (USA)
Hypolito (floor), piked double arabian with a full twist, after Diego Hypólito (Brazil).
Jäger-salto (high bar, uneven bars), swing backward and salto forward to catch high bar again after Bernd Jäger (GDR).[1]
Janz Salto (uneven bars), after Karin Janz. (GDR)
Johnson (floor)-a switch-split leap forward with leg change and ¼ turn to side split leap or straddle pike position, after Brandy Johnson (USA)
Kasamatsu (vault), after Shigero Kasamatsu (Japan).[5]
Kim (floor), Double tuck back salto, after Nellie Kim (USSR)
Khorkina I (uneven bars) - Back uprise and straddle flight over high bar with 1⁄2 turn to hang, Khorkina II (uneven bars) - inner front support on low bar, clear hip circle through handstand with 1⁄2 turn in flight to hang on high bar, Khorkina I (balance beam) - Gainer back-handspring with full twist before hand support, Khorkina II (balance beam) - Gainer 2 1⁄2 twisting back layout dismount to side or at the end of beam, Khorkina/Chow (uneven bars) - Stalder 1 1⁄2 pirouette, Khorkina (floor) - Hop with 1.5 turns to front lying support, Khorkina I (vault) - round-off, back-handspring with 1⁄2 turn on, 1⁄2 turn into back pike off, and Khorkina II (vault) - round-off, back-handspring with 1⁄2 turn on, 1 1⁄2 twisting front tuck off, after Svetlana Khorkina (Russia).
Kolman (horizontal bar), a full-twisting Kovacs, with two back somersaults and one full twist over the bar, after Alojz Kolman.[3]
Komova (uneven bar), Clear pike circle backward through handstand with flight and ½ turn (180°) to hang on high bar (Uneven bars), and Komova II (uneven bars), clear pike circle backwards through handstand with flight to hang on high bar, after Viktoria Komova (Russia).
Kononenko (Uneven Bars) - counter straddle hecht with 1/2 turn to hang on high bar in mixed L-grip, after Natalia Kononenko (Ukraine).
Kotchetkova (balance beam)- full-twisting back handspring, after Dina Kotchetkova (RUS)
Korbut Flip (balance beam)-standing back somersault to swing down on beam, Korbut Flip (uneven bars)-standing on the high bar, does back flip, then catches the bar, after Olga Korbut (USSR).
Kovacs (horizontal bar), double backward somersault over bar, after Péter Kovács.[1]
Liukin (floor), triple back tuck somersault, Likun (horizontal bar), laid tkatchev with full twist, after Valeri Liukin (USSR)
Liukin (balance beam) - salto forward piked, take off from one leg to one foot landing to scale, hold for two seconds, after Nastia Liukin (USA)
Li Li - German Giant (uneven bar), Li Li - 1¼ turn on back (balance beam), after Li Li (China).
Li Ya - salto (uneven bar) Straddled Jaeger caught in a mixed grip, Li Ya - dismount (uneven bars) backward giant into a double front Arabian piked, after Li Ya (China).
Liu Xuan - salto (uneven bar) - Giant circle backward to handstand on one arm, after Liu Xuan (China).
Magyar walk (pommel horse), after Zoltán Magyar (Hungary).[1]
Maloney (uneven bars)-a pike sole circle backward to handstand with a 360° turn after the handstand phase to mixed-L or L grip and Maloney (uneven bars)-begins from an inner front support on the low bar and consists of a pike sole circle backward through a handstand with flight to a hang on the high bar, after Kristen Maloney (USA)
Ma dismount (uneven bar)-a hecht-front salto-full, after Ma Yanhong (China).
McCool (balance beam) -The beam mount approaches toward the end of the beam and is a flyspring forward with flight before and after the hand support on the beam and lands on both feet - approach at end of beam, after Courtney McCool (USA)
McNamara (uneven bars (mount))- a jump to hang on the high bar into a free hip circle to handstand with 1/2 turn in the handstand, after Julianne McNamara (USA)
Melissanidis (vault)-A round-off entry onto the vault table followed by a 2 ½ back somersault tucked or piked, after Melissanidis (Greece)
Memmel (floor) - Double Turn with leg held in split position (Double Y-Turn), (Beam) - front flip with half turn (Barani) in piked position, after Chellsie Memmel (USA)
Miller - (uneven bars) cast to handstand with 1½ turn after handstand to mixed-L grip after Shannon Miller (USA).
Mitchell (floor/beam) - triple turn (1080°) in tuck stand on one leg - free leg optional after Lauren Mitchell (AUS)
Mo - salto (uneven bar) Gaylord II (front tuck over high bar, starting and ending in a mixed grip), after Mo Huilan (China).[2]
Moors - (uneven bar) from underswing, with feet on bar, salto forward stretched with 1/2 turn, (floor exercise) - double twisting double layout, after Victoria Moors (Canada).
Mostepanova (floor) - Front Handspring with full twist before hand support, after Olga Mostepanova
Mukhina Salto (floor) - double salto backwards tucked or piked, with full 360 twist and Mukhina (uneven bars) - Korbut flip with 1/1 twist - named after Elena Mukhina.
Mustafina (Uneven Bars) - 1½ twisting double back tuck dismount, (Uneven Bars) - full twisting Maloney (or Seitz) caught in a mixed-grip, (Floor) - Triple Y-turn, (vault) - round off, half turn on, full twisting front off (laid-out), named after Aliya Mustafina (Russia)
Nabieva (Uneven Bars) - Toe-on reverse Hecht (Tkatchev) in the laid out position, named after Tatiana Nabieva (Russia)
Okino (uneven bars (dismount))-a free hip underswing with ½ twist to layout back salto and Okino (balance beam)- triple pirouette (triple turn), after Elizabeth (Betty) Okino
Omelianchik (balance beam) - back handspring with 3/4 turn dive to handstand, and Omelianchik (vault) - round-off half on, front pike off, after Oksana Omelianchik (USSR).
O'Neill (still rings)- a stretched double feige backward to a hang, after Paul O'Neill (USA)
Onodi (balance beam), back handspring with 1/2 turn, after Henrietta Ónodi (Hungary).[1]
Pak Salto (uneven bars)-the high bar, does a backward flip, and catches the low bar, after Gyong Sil Pak (North Korea)[2]
Patterson (balance beam) - A double Arabian dismount, after Carly Patterson (USA).
Pegan (horizontal bar) - A double front salto with half turn - 180°, after Aljaž Pegan (SLO).
Phelps (Vault) - 1/2 turn onto the vault (Tsukahara) to a laid out backflip with 1/2 turn, after Jaycie Phelps (USA).
Phillps (balance beam) – A handstand straddle split, with a 90 degree backbend, originally performed on the balance beam and press to side handstand, front walkover to side stand on both legs, after Kristie Phillps (USA)
Preziosa (balance beam) – full turn with free leg held backwards with both hands, after Elisabetta Preziosa (Italy)
Podkopayeva (vault), round-off, half twist on, front pike somersault with half turn off and Podkopayeva (floor) - double front somersault with a 1/2 twist, after Lilia Podkopayeva (Ukraine).[1]
Popa (floor) - straddle pike jump with 1/1 turn (360°), after Celestina Popa (Romania)[1]
Produnova (vault)- Handspring forward on – tucked double salto forward off, after Elena Produnova (RUS)
Ray I (uneven bars) - a stalder backward with release and counter movement forward to catch the high bar, Ray II (uneven bars) - a handstand on the high bar to a pike sole circle backward into a backward counter straddle-reverse hecht over the high bar and a recatch and Ray III (uneven bars dismount) - An double twisting double layout uneven bar dismount, after Elise Ray (USA)
The Retton Flip (uneven bars) – a transition (front flip) from low- to high-bar, resulting in the gymnast perched or "sitting" on top of the high bar, after Mary Lou Retton (USA)
Roth (pommel horse) – from a cross support, rearways, reverse Stockli, wendeswing forward to reverse Stockli to cross support forward on other end, without touching pommels, after Bill Roth (USA)
Semenova (floor) - a double spin with the leg in back attitude, and Semenova (beam) full spin with leg in back attitude, after Ksenia Semenova (Russia)
Seitz (uneven bars) -in the low bar, pike sole circle through handstand with flight to hang on the high bar with 1/1 twist during flight phase, after Elisabeth Seitz (Germany).
Shaham (high bar)- after Noam Shaham (Israel)
Shaposhnikova (uneven bars), on the low bar, free hip circle with flight to hang on high bar, after Natalia Shaposhnikova (USSR).[2]
Shewfelt (vault) Yurchenko stretched with 5/2 twists Kyle Shewfelt (Canada)
Shushunova (floor), straddle jump to lay on front support, (Uneven bars), full-twisting Tkachev, after Yelena Shushunova (Russia).
Silivaş mount (balance beam) and Silivaş (floor) - double twisting double back tucked, after Daniela Silivaş (Romania)[1]
Stalder (high bar) Free circle bwd. straddle or legs together through handstand Josef Stalder (Swiss)
Stroescu (floor) is a stretched forward salto with 2½ twists, mistakenly named after Silvia Stroescu, Romania
Strong (uneven bars) - shoot over to low bar with 1 1/2 twists, and Lori hop (balance beam), after Lori Strong
Strug (floor) – a tour jete with additional ½ turn and a landing on both feet, after Kerri Strug (USA)[1]
Talavera (balance beam) – pommel horse-like move with the circle done like a flair, after Tracee Talavera
Teza (balance beam) – Yurchenko loop is performed with a full twisting handspring, after Elvire Teza (France)[1]
Thomas flair (pommel horse, floor exercise), Thomas salto (floor) – a 1 ½ salto backward in a tucked or piked position with 1 ½ twists and, Thomas salto (floor) - 1 ½ salto backward in a layout (straight) position with 1 ½ twists, after Kurt Thomas (USA).
Tkachev (uneven bars), reverse hecht, can be performed in straddled, piked, tucked or laid-out, after Alexander Tkachyov (USSR).[2]
Tsukahara (vault), involving a quarter or half onto the vault and a back salto off, after Mitsuo Tsukahara (Japan).[3]
Tweddle (uneven bars), sole circle backward with counter straddle hecht with 1/2 turn to hang on high bar in mixed L-grip, after Beth Tweddle (Great Britain).
Urzică (parallel bars) - salto forward to 1/1 turn to upper arm hang rated, after Marius Urzică, Romania
Van Leeuwen (uneven bars) - in the low bar, pike sole circle through handstand with flight to hang on high bar with 1/2 twist diring flight phase, after Laura Van Leeuwen (Netherlands).
Wang Huiying - Front Handspring layout barani (vault), after Wang Huiying (China).
Wells (parallel bars) – a giant swing backward with in-locate forward, after Trent Wells
White (uneven bars) – a front stalder into an L-grip to handstand with ½ turn in handstand, after Morgan White
Wong (Balance Beam) - salto forward tucked with 1/2 turn mount, after Hiu Ying Angel Wong (Hong Kong).
Yang (vault) - handspring triple twist, after Yang Hak-Seon (Korea).
Yang Bo (balance beam), stag ring jump with head tilted back, losing sight of the beam, after Yang Bo (China).[1]
Yurchenko (vault) round-off, backhandspring onto the vaulting table and Yurchenko loop (balance beam)on side position, back handspring to backward hip circle, after Natalia Yurchenko (USSR).[3]
Zamolodchikova - Tsukahara stretched with 2/1 turn (720°) off (vault), flic-flac with 1/1 twist to hip circle BWD (balance beam), after Elena Zamolodchikova (RUS).
Yarotska (uneven bars) - Stalder hecht from low bar to high bar, after Irina Yarotska (Ukraine).
Zonderland (parallel bars) - 5/4 Diamadov to one bar immediate 3/4 Healy to both bars, named after Epke Zonderland (Netherlands).

Association football[edit]

Panenka penalty kick, after Antonín Panenka (Czech Republic)
Zidane Spin / The Roulette (alternative name for 360-spin), after Zinedine Zidane (France)
Cuauteminha, after Cuauhtémoc Blanco (Mexico).
Bosman ruling, after Jean-Marc Bosman (Belgium).
Cruijff Turn, after Johan Cruijff (Netherlands).
Makélélé role (alternative name for a defensive midfielder), after Claude Makélélé (France).

Athletics[edit]

Fosbury Flop, a high jump style named after Dick Fosbury
Volzing, a now illegal pole vault technique named after Dave Volz

Baseball[edit]

Mendoza Line, named after Mario Mendoza.
Pesky's pole, named after Johnny Pesky.
Tal's Hill, named after Tal Smith.
Tommy John surgery, named after Tommy John.
Ruthian, a term for a longer homer run named after Babe Ruth.
Steve Blass Disease, a term applied to talented players who seem to inexplicably lose their ability to accurately throw a baseball.

Brazilian Jiu Jitsu[edit]

Kimura Lock
De la Riva Guard
D'Arce choke

Boxing[edit]

Ali shuffle, named after Muhammad Ali
Queensberry rules, after John Sholto Douglas, 9th Marquess of Queensberry (United Kingdom).

Cricket[edit]

Bosie (alternative name for a googly), after Bernard Bosanquet (England).
Kolpak, after Maroš Kolpak, a Slovak team handball player whose victory in the European Court of Justice opened the door to numerous non-English players in English county cricket. (Term also used in both codes of rugby.)
Mankading, after Vinoo Mankad (India).
Marillier shot, after Dougie Marillier (Zimbabwe).
Dilscoop, after Tillekaratne Dilshan (Sri Lanka).
Duckworth-Lewis, after Frank Duckworth and Tony Lewis, is generally accepted to be the most accurate method of setting a target score in a limited overs cricket match interrupted by weather or other circumstances.

Croquet[edit]

Duffer tice, a tice positioned, usually a yard or so North, and a touch East, of Hoop 6, laid on the second turn of the game. Named after the Irish croquet player Duff Mathews.[6]
Peel, to send a ball other than the striker's ball through its target hoop, named after Walter Peel [7][8]
Solomon grip, the grip used by John Solomon.[6]

Figure skating[edit]

Axel jump, after Axel Paulsen (Norway).
Besti squat, after Natalia Bestemianova (Russia).
Biellmann spin, after Denise Biellmann (Switzerland).
Charlotte spiral, after Charlotte Oelschlagel (Germany).
Ina Bauer, after Ina Bauer (Germany).
Kerrigan spiral, after Nancy Kerrigan (USA).
Lutz jump, after Alois Lutz (Austria).
Salchow jump, after Ulrich Salchow (Sweden).
Loop jump, in some countries (Germany and Poland, for example) this jump is called a Rittberger, after Werner Rittberger (Germany).
'Tano lutz, after Brian Boitano (USA).
Walley jump, after Nate Walley (USA).
Kayla Catch, after Kayla Doig (Australia).
Rippon lutz, after Adam Rippon (USA).

Ice hockey[edit]

The Datsyuk, after a particular move by Pavel Datsyuk (Russia).
Gordie Howe hat trick, after Gordie Howe (Canada).
Lemieux cycle, after Mario Lemieux (Canada).
Rob Ray Rule, after Rob Ray (Canada).
Savard spin-o-rama (or Savardian spin-o-rama), originally named after Serge Savard (Canada), but made famous by Denis Savard (Canada).'
The Brodeur Rule, named after Martin Brodeur (Canada), due to his ability to play the puck outside of his crease.

Rhythmic gymnastics[edit]

The Shugurova, after Galina Shugurova (USSR) - tipping / spinning a rolling hoop with the feet during a leap.
The Timochenko, after Alexandra Timoshenko (USSR).
Backscale Pivots, after Alina Kabaeva (RUS).
The Cid Tostado, after Almudena Cid Tostado - starting on one knee, leg forward, ball held with the foot. large roll of the ball on both legs.
The Kabaeva - on floor Back split pivot with hand help, after Alina Kabaeva (RUS).
The Tchachina - Switch leap with changing legs, after Irina Tchachina (RUS).
Reverse illusion turns, after Irina Tchachina (RUS).
The Utyasheva - backsplit to backscale to backsplit pivot with help, after Laysan Utiasheva.
Ring Pivots (ring pivot spiral also known as "Kanaeva Pivot", quadruple/triple ring turn, quadruple queen pivot), after Evgenia Kanaeva (RUS).
Switch Turn, after Evgenia Kanaeva (RUS).
Pivot Turn revolutions (pivot turn with forward free leg to half free leg position), after Daria Kondakova (RUS).
Pivot connecting turns (attitude turns + ring pivot turn with help), after Daria Dmitrieva (RUS).
The Staniouta - cossack turn starting on floor + connecting penchee turn, after Melitina Staniouta (BLR).
The Kudry, after Yana Kudryavtseva - Back bend to roll over apparatus catch.

Rugby league[edit]

Sonny-Billed, means to have a really hard driving tackle performed on you, it is named after Sonny Bill Williams who consistently performed these tackles.
Hopoate, named after John Hopoate
Falcon, to get hit in the head by a football, named after Mario 'The Maltese Falcon' Fenech.

Skiing[edit]

Gundersen method, after Norwegian Nordic combined skier Gunder Gundersen, for the point time differential set up between the ski jumping and cross-country skiing portions of the event.

Tennis[edit]
Henman Hill AKA Aorangi Terrace after Tim Henman
Ultimate (Frisbee)[edit]

Callahan, after Henry Callahan.

Weightlifting[edit]

The Van Dam Lift, after Rob Van Dam (USA).

Wrestling[edit]

Karelin lift, after Alexander Karelin (USSR/Russia).
John Smith single, after John T. Smith (USA).
Lou Thesz press, after Lou Thesz (USA)

References[edit]


^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m Joel Alswang (2003). The South African Dictionary of Sport. Spearhead. pp.&#160;140–143. ISBN&#160;9780864865359.&#160;
^ a b c d e "Uneven Bars Skills Terminology". USGym.net.&#160;
^ a b c d "Gymnastics Glossary". iSport.&#160;
^ "Eberhard Gienger". International Gymnastics Hall of Fame.&#160;
^ "Shigeru Kasamatsu". International Gymnastics Hall of Fame.&#160;
^ a b "Croquet Jargon". The Croquet Association. 28 December 2013. Retrieved 28 December 2013.&#160;
^ Laws of Association Croquet, 6th Edition, amended 2008, Croquet Association.
^ Hawkins, James (2010). Complete Croquet: A Guide to Skills, Tactics, and Strategy. Crowood Press. ISBN&#160;978-1-84797-168-5.&#160;










v
t
e


Glossaries of sports









American football
Archery
Association football
Australian rules football
Baseball

derived idoms


Basketball
Bowling
Bowls
Canadian football
Chess

chess problems
computer chess


Climbing
Contract bridge
Cricket
Cue sports
Curling
Cycling

parts


Darts
Equestrian

Australian and New Zealand punting
North American horse racing


Fencing
Figure skating
Gaelic games
Golf
Gymnastics
Ice hockey
Motorsport
Poker
Professional wrestling
Rowing
Rugby league
Rugby union
Surfing
Sumo
Tennis
Trampolining
Underwater diving
Volleyball
Water polo
Wing Chun









Terms named after people













					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_sports_terms_named_after_people&amp;oldid=688804665"					
				Categories: Lists of eponymsSports terminologyHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from January 2014All articles needing additional references				
							
		
		
			