


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Physical education
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				Not to be confused with Physics education.
This article is about the educational activity.  For then 2008 movie, see Gym Teacher: The Movie.




Physical education equipment in Calhan, Colorado.


Physical education or PE, also known in many Commonwealth countries as physical training or PT,[1] is an educational course related to the physique of the human body. It is taken during primary and secondary education and encourages psychomotor learning in a play or movement exploration setting to promote health.[2]



Contents


1 Physical education in different countries

1.1 Physical education in Asia
1.2 Physical education in Australia
1.3 Physical education in North America
1.4 Physical education in Europe


2 Trends
3 See also
4 Footnotes
5 Further reading
6 External links



Physical education in different countries[edit]
Physical education in Asia[edit]
In South Korea, it is mandatory for pupils to take a total of 3 hours of physical education through primary and secondary level schools[citation needed]
In Singapore, pupils from primary school through junior colleges are required to have 2 hours of PE every week, except during examination seasons. Pupils are able to play games like football, badminton, captain's ball, and basketball during most sessions. Unorthodox sports such as touchball, fencing, and skateboarding are occasionally played. In more prestigious secondary schools and in junior colleges, sports such as golf, tennis, shooting, and squash are played. A compulsory fitness exam, NAPFA, is conducted in every school once every year to assess the physical fitness of the pupils.[citation needed] Pupils are given a series of fitness tests (Pull-ups/Inclined pull-ups for girls, standing broad jump, sit-ups, sit-and-reach and 1.6&#160;km for primary [10- to 12-year-olds]/2.4&#160;km for secondary and junior college levels [13- to 18-year-olds]). Students are graded by gold, silver, bronze or fail. NAPFA for pre-enlistees serves as an indicator for an additional 2 months in the country's compulsory national service if they attain bronze or fail.
In Malaysia, pupils from primary schools to secondary schools are expected to do 2 periods or 1 hour of PE throughout the year except a week before examination. In most secondary schools, games like badminton, sepak takraw, football, basketball and tennis are available. Pupils are allowed to bring their own sports equipment to the school with the authorization of the teacher.
In the Philippines, PE is mandatory for all years. Unless, the school gives the option for a student to do the Leaving Certificate Vocational Programme instead for fifth and sixth year. In the Philippines, some schools have integrated martial arts training into their physical education curriculum.[3][4][5][6][7]




Indonesian high school students playing the traditional game "Benteng"


In Indonesia, students ranging from Kindergarten to High School have PE integrated with their curriculum. Kindergarten until Grade 3 of Elementary students have gymnastics, starting from Grade 4 of Elementary School, students will be introduced to traditional martial arts Pencak Silat and some team games such as badminton, tennis, football, futsal, rounders, basketball, etc. Starting from Junior High School, several other games such as basketball, volleyball, cricket, tennis, badminton, kho kho, kabaddi, etc. are played. Several drills and physical training are taught.
Physical education in Australia[edit]
In Australia, physical education was first made an important part of the curriculum in Government primary and secondary schools in 1981. The policy was outlined in a Ministerial Statement to the Victorian Legislative Assembly by the Minister for Educational Services, the Fat Norman Lacy MP on 17 September.[8]
Physical education in North America[edit]
In British Columbia, Canada the government has stated in the grade one curriculum that students must participate in physical activity daily five times a week. Also the teacher is responsible for planning Daily Physical Activity (DPA) which is thirty minutes of mild to moderate physical activity a day not including curriculum physical education classes. The curriculum also requires students in grade one to be knowledgeable about healthy living. For example, students must be able to describe benefits of regular exercise, identify healthy choices that require them to be more physically active, and describe importance of choosing healthy food.[9]
Ontario, Canada has a similar procedure in place. On October 6, 2005 in Ontario, Canada the Ontario Ministry of Education (OME) implemented a Daily Physical Activity policy in Elementary Schools, Grades 1-8. This policy requires that all students in Grades 1 to 8, including students with special needs, be provided with opportunities to participate in a minimum of twenty minutes of sustained moderates to vigorous physical activity each school day during instructional time.[10]
In the United States, the goal of physical education is to "develop physically literate individuals who have the knowledge, skills and confidence to enjoy a lifetime of healthful physical activity."[11]
Physical education in Europe[edit]
In Portugal, pupils from primary school could optionally join PE as an extra-curricular activity. From middle school to secondary school, pupils must participate in PE classes 2 hours per week.[citation needed]
In Scotland, P.E. is a government supported entitlement of a minimum of 2 hours of quality P.E. in primary and 2 periods (50 mins) in secondary S1 to S4. Recent funding has ensured most local authorities have employed PE lead officers to support the entitlement. In fifth and sixth year, PE is voluntary in that personalisation and choice must be considered.[citation needed]




Some countries include Martial Arts training in school as part of Physical Education class. These Filipino children are doing karate.


In England, pupils are expected to do two hours of PE a week in Year 7, 8 and 9 and at least 1 in year 10 and 11.[12]
In Wales, pupils are expected to do only one hour of PE per fortnight.[12]
In Poland, pupils are expected to do at least three hours of PE a week during primary and secondary education.[13] Universities must also organise at least 60 hours of physical education classes at undergraduate courses.[14]
Trends[edit]





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2013)






Young Portuguese children participating in a school race


Physical education trends have developed recently[when?] to incorporate a greater variety of activities besides typical sports. Introducing students to activities like bowling, walking/hiking, or frisbee at an early age can help students develop good activity habits that will carry over into adulthood. Some teachers have even begun to incorporate stress-reduction techniques such as yoga, deep-breathing and tai chi. Tai chi, an ancient martial arts form focused on slow meditative movements is a relaxation activity with many benefits for students. Studies have shown that tai chi enhances muscular strength and endurance, cardiovascular endurance, and provides many other physical benefits.[which?] It also provides psychological benefits such as improving general mental health, concentration, awareness and positive mood.[citation needed] It can be taught to any age student with little or no equipment making it ideal for mixed ability and age classes. Tai chi can easily be incorporated into a holistic learning body and mind unit.[15] Teaching non-traditional sports to students may also provide the necessary motivation for students to increase their activity, and can help students learn about different cultures. For example, while teaching a unit about lacrosse in, for example, the Southwestern United States, students can also learn about the Native American cultures of the Northeastern United States and Eastern Canada, where lacrosse originated. Teaching non-traditional (or non-native) sports provides a great opportunity to integrate academic concepts from other subjects as well (social studies from the example above), which may now be required of many P.E. teachers. The four aspects of P.E. are physical, mental, social, and emotional.[citation needed]
Another trend is the incorporation of health and nutrition to the physical education curriculum. The Child Nutrition and WIC Reauthorization Act of 2004 required that all school districts with a federally funded school meal program develop wellness policies that address nutrition and physical activity.[16] While teaching students sports and movement skills, P.E. teachers are now incorporating short health and nutrition lessons into the curriculum. This is more prevalent at the elementary school level, where students do not have a specific Health class. Recently most elementary schools have specific health classes for students as well as physical education class. With the recent outbreaks of diseases such as swine flu, school districts are making it mandatory for students to learn about practicing good hygiene along with other health topics. Today many states require Physical Education teachers to be certified to teach Health courses. Many colleges and Universities offer both Physical Education and Health as one certification. This push towards health education is beginning in the intermediate level, including lessons on bullying, self-esteem and stress and anger management.
Research has shown that there is a positive correlation between brain development and exercising.[17]
Incorporating local indigenous knowledge into physical education can lead to many meaningful experiences and a way of learning about other cultures. For example, by incorporating traditional knowledge from varying indigenous groups from across Canada students can be exposed to a many concepts such as holistic learning and the medicine wheel. A unit could be focused on connecting to a place or feeling while outdoors, participating in traditional games, or outdoor environmental education. These types of lesson can easily be integrated into other parts of the curriculum and give Aboriginal students a chance to incorporate their culture in the local school community [18]
Studies have been done in how physical education can help improve academic achievement. In a 2007 article, researchers found a profound gain in student's English Arts standardized testing students who had 56 hours of physical education in a year compared to like students who had 28 hours of physical education a year.[19]
In Brazil, the physical education curriculum is designed to allow school pupils a full range of modern opportunities, including sports. They said they offer martial arts classes, like wrestling in the United States, and Pencak Silat in France, Indonesia, and Malaysia, are taught to teach children self-defense and to feel good about themselves. The physical education curriculum is designed to allow students to experience at least a minimum exposure to the following categories of activities: aquatics, conditioning activities, gymnastics, individual/dual sports, team sports, rhythms, and dance.
In these areas, a planned sequence of learning experiences is designed to support a progression of student development. This allows kids through 6th grade to be introduced to sports, fitness, and teamwork in order to be better prepared for the middle and high school age. In 1975, the United States House of Representatives voted to require school physical education classes include both genders.[20] Some high school and some middle school PE classes are single-sex. Requiring individuals to participate in physical education activities, such as dodge ball, flag football, and other competitive sports remains a controversial subject because of the social impact these have cases physical education programs have been cut.
Technology use in physical education New technology in Physical education is playing a big role in classes. One of the most affordable and effective is a simple video recorder. With the use of a video recorder students can see the mistakes they're making in things such as a throwing motion or swinging form.[21] Studies show that students find this more effective than having someone try to explain what they are doing wrong, and then trying to correct it.[21] Educators also found the use of other technologies such as pedometers and heart rate monitors very successful, using them to make step and heart rate goals for students.[22] Using heart rate monitors in physical education is important because it helps students understand how exercise affects their body.&lt;http://www.polar.com/us-en/b2b_products/physical_education/heart_rate_monitoring&gt;
Other technologies that can be used in a Physical Education setting would include video projectors, GPS and even gaming systems such as Kinect, Wii Fit and Dance Dance Revolution. Projectors can be used to show students things such as proper form or how to play certain games. GPS systems can be used to get students active in an outdoor setting and active exergames[clarification needed]can be used by teachers to show students a good way to stay fit in and out of the classroom setting.[23]
Another type of technology that is commonly used in Physical Education is the use of pedometers. Pedometers do not necessarily track how far a person is going, but it lets them know the number of steps they are making. It will let them know how many steps on average they are making.[24][25]
See also[edit]

Dance
Health
Sports Day
Recreation
Yogasana
Karate
Gymnastics
Speedaway
Arnis
Running

Footnotes[edit]


^ The Daily Telegraph, 25 July 2008: "Physical training in schools should be compulsory, says leading head" Linked 2014-04-09
^ Anderson, D. (1989). The Discipline and the Profession. Foundations of Canadian Physical Education, Recreation, and Sports Studies. Dubuque, IA: Wm. C. Brown Publishers.
^ [1] Archived September 30, 2008 at the Wayback Machine
^ [2] Archived May 23, 2007 at the Wayback Machine
^ "Regional Commissions and Chapters International Modern Arnis Federation Philippines Mindanao Commission". Imafp.com. Retrieved 2010-11-07.&#160;
^ [3] Archived January 15, 2009 at the Wayback Machine
^ "Sunday Inquirer Magazine: Life Lessons from Karate". Showbizandstyle.inquirer.net. 2008-12-14. Retrieved 2010-11-07.&#160;
^ "Ministerial Statement on New Directions in Physical Education". Archive.org. Retrieved 2015-08-13.&#160;
^ BC curriculum package
^ [4] Archived December 12, 2006 at the Wayback Machine
^ "Shape America Home Page". www.shapeamerica.org. Retrieved 2015-10-25.&#160;
^ a b "Create Development â€“ Accelerating learning by developing the whole child | 020 8863 0304". Createdevelopment.co.uk. 2014-06-20. Retrieved 2015-08-13.&#160;
^ "Dz.U. 2002 nr 15 poz. 142. Rozporządzenie Ministra Edukacji Narodowej i Sportu z dnia 12 lutego 2002 r. w sprawie ramowych planów nauczania w szkołach publicznych.". Internetowy System Aktów Prawnych. Retrieved 31 October 2010.&#160;
^ "Standardy kształcenia dla poszczególnych kierunków studiów i poziomów kształcenia". Biuletyn Informacj Publicznej. Retrieved 31 October 2010.&#160;
^ Lu C. (2007)
^ Pangrazi, Robert (2007) "Dynamic Physical Education for Elementary School Children" 15th ed.
^ REYNOLDS, GRETCHEN. "Phys Ed: Can Exercise Make Kids Smarter?". The New York Times. Retrieved 18 April 2013.&#160;
^ Lowen, G
^ Trembarche P. Robinson E. Graham L. (2007). "Physical Education and its Effect on Elementary Testing Results"[volume&#160;&amp;&#160;issue&#160;needed]
^ "Physical Education - Jul 18, 1975 - NBC - TV news: Vanderbilt Television News Archive". Tvnews.vanderbilt.edu. 1975-07-18. Retrieved 2015-08-13.&#160;
^ a b Wang, L., Myers, D., &amp; Yanes, M. (2010). Creating student-centered learning experience through the assistance of high-end technology in physical education. Journal of Instructional Psychology, 37(4), 352-356.
^ Woods, M., Karp, G., Goc, H., &amp; Perlman, D. (2008). Physical educators' usage. Physical Educator, 65(2), 82-99
^ Grimes, G. (2011, November 21). Interview by M Massey [Personal Interview].
^ "Using pedometers to assess physical activity participation levels". Humankinetics.com. 2010-04-01. Retrieved 2015-08-13.&#160;
^ "PEC: Pedometer Lesson Activities". Pecentral.org. Retrieved 2015-08-13.&#160;


Further reading[edit]

Martha H. Verbrugge, Active Bodies: A History of Women's Physical Education in Twentieth-Century America. New York: Oxford University Press, 2012.

External links[edit]

&#160;"Educational Athletics". Encyclopedia Americana. 1920.&#160;









v
t
e


Topics in education










General



Glossary
Index
Outline
Anthropology
Assessment
Economics
Evaluation
History
Leadership
Philosophy
Policy
Politics
Psychology
Research
Rights
Sociology
Technology
Theory
Types of institutions








By subject



Agricultural
Art
Bilingual
Business
Chemistry
Design
Economics
Engineering
Environmental
Euthenics
Health
Language
Legal
Mathematics
Medical
Military
Music
Nursing
Peace
Performing arts
Philosophy
Physical
Physics
Reading
Religious
Science
Sex
Teacher
Technology
Values
Vocational
More...








Alternative



Autodidacticism
Education reform
Gifted education
Homeschooling
Religious education
Special education
More...








Wikimedia



Books
Definitions
Images
Learning resources
News
Quotes
Texts


















v
t
e


Stages of formal education










Early childhood education
Primary education
Secondary education
Tertiary education












Preschool
→
Kindergarten
→














Primary
→
Middle
→














High school
→












Junior High School
→
Senior High School
→





















Higher education
&#160;
Vocational
Further
Continuing












Undergraduate
→
Postgraduate
&#160;



























Alternative education

Homeschooling


Adult education
 Portal
















&#160;
Education by region













v
t
e


Education in Africa






Sovereign states



Algeria
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of the Congo
Djibouti
Egypt
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gabon
The Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Ivory Coast (Côte d'Ivoire)
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
São Tomé and Príncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
South Sudan
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Tunisia
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe









States with limited
recognition




Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic
Somaliland









Dependencies and
other territories





Mayotte&#160;/ Réunion&#160;(France)
Saint Helena&#160;/ Ascension Island&#160;/ Tristan da Cunha&#160;(United Kingdom)











v
t
e


Education in Asia






Sovereign states



Afghanistan
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei
Cambodia
China
Cyprus
East Timor (Timor-Leste)
Egypt
Georgia
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
North Korea
South Korea
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Lebanon
Malaysia
Maldives
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nepal
Oman
Pakistan
Philippines
Qatar
Russia
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Syria
Tajikistan
Thailand
Turkey
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen








States with
limited recognition



Abkhazia
Nagorno-Karabakh
Northern Cyprus
Palestine
South Ossetia
Taiwan








Dependencies and
other territories



British Indian Ocean Territory
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Hong Kong
Macau










v
t
e


Education in Europe






Sovereign states



Albania
Andorra
Armenia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland

Italy
Kazakhstan
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Malta
Moldova
Monaco
Montenegro
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
San Marino
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom









States with limited
recognition



Abkhazia
Kosovo
Nagorno-Karabakh
Northern Cyprus
South Ossetia
Transnistria








Dependencies and
other territories



Åland
Faroe Islands
Gibraltar
Guernsey
Jersey
Isle of Man
Svalbard








Other entities



European Union










v
t
e


Education in North America






Sovereign states



Antigua and Barbuda
Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Canada
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Trinidad and Tobago
United States









Dependencies and
other territories




Anguilla
Aruba
Bermuda
Bonaire
British Virgin Islands
Cayman Islands
Curaçao
Greenland
Guadeloupe
Martinique
Montserrat
Puerto Rico
Saint Barthélemy
Saint Martin
Saint Pierre and Miquelon
Saba
Sint Eustatius
Sint Maarten
Turks and Caicos Islands
United States Virgin Islands










v
t
e


Education in Oceania






Sovereign states



Australia
Federated States of Micronesia
Fiji
Indonesia
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Nauru
New Zealand
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu








Associated states
of New Zealand



Cook Islands
Niue








Dependencies
and other territories



American Samoa
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Easter Island
French Polynesia
Guam
Hawaii
New Caledonia
Norfolk Island
Northern Mariana Islands
Pitcairn Islands
Tokelau
Wallis and Futuna










v
t
e


Education in South America






Sovereign states



Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Ecuador
Guyana
Paraguay
Peru
Suriname
Uruguay
Venezuela









Dependencies and
other territories




Falkland Islands
French Guiana
South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands

















 Category
 Portal
 WikiProject













Authority control



NDL: 00572522















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Physical_education&amp;oldid=691305878"					
				Categories: Physical educationPhysical exerciseSports scienceEducation by subjectHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from March 2013Articles with unsourced statements from November 2012Articles with unsourced statements from April 2010Articles needing additional references from March 2013All articles needing additional referencesVague or ambiguous time from March 2014All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from December 2013Articles with unsourced statements from December 2013Wikipedia articles needing clarification from October 2014Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the Encyclopedia Americana with a Wikisource reference				
							
		
		
			