


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Racing
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				For other uses, see Racing (disambiguation).





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2010)






Air racing: Hungarian aerobatics pilot Peter Besenyei at speed in his Extra 300 at an air race in England






Kambala, a buffalo race at Vandar village, Udupi dist., India


In sport, racing is a competition of speed, against an objective criterion, usually a clock or to a specific point. The competitors in a race try to complete a given task in the shortest amount of time. Typically this involves traversing some distance, but it can be any other task involving speed to reach a specific goal.
A race may be run continuously from start to finish or may be made of several segments called heats, stages or legs. A heat is usually run over the same course at different times. A stage is a shorter section of a much longer course or a time trial.
Early records of races are evident on pottery from ancient Greece, which depicted running men vying for first place. A chariot race is described in Homer's Iliad.



Contents


1 Forms of racing
2 Etymology
3 Sprint finishes
4 See also
5 References
6 External links



Forms of racing[edit]
Further information: List of forms of racing




Bullock cart-racing in Tamil Nadu, India.


Running a distance is the most basic form of racing, but races may be conducted in vehicles, such as boats, cars, cycles and aircraft; or with animals such as horses or dogs. Other forms of racing are by skis, kicksled, skates or wheelchair. In a relay race members of a team take turns in racing parts of a circuit or performing a certain racing form.
A race can also involve any other type of goal like eating. A common race involving eating is a hot dog eating race, where contestants try to eat more hot dogs than the other racers.
Racing can also be done in more humoristic and entertaining ways such as the Sausage Race and the Red Bull Trolley Grand Prix. Racing can be entertained from around the world.
Etymology[edit]
The word race comes from a Norse word.[1] This Norse word arrived in France during the invading of Normandy and gave the word raz which means "swift water" in Brittany, as in a mill race; it can be found in "Pointe du Raz" (the most western point of France, in Brittany), and "raz-de-marée" (tsunami). The word race to mean a "contest of speed" was first recorded in the 1510s.[2]
A race and its name are often associated with the place of origin, the means of transport and the distance of the race. As a couple of examples, see the Dakar Rally or the Athens Marathon.
Sprint finishes[edit]




Two men engaging in a sprint finish at the end of a 5-kilometre road running competition.


A sprint finish is a racing tactic where a competitor accelerates towards top speed in the final stages of a race. This tactic is mostly associated with long-distance forms of running and cycling, which often feature large groups of competitors racing at a slower pace for much of the race – this slower aerobic racing allows for the subsequent anaerobic activity required for sprinting.[3] The tactic relies upon keeping greater energy reserves than your opponent until the last part of the race in order to be able to reach the finish point first. It is the opposing tactic to keeping a steady optimal pace throughout a race to maximise your energy efficiency (see running economy).[4]
In track and field, distances from 1500 metres upwards often feature sprint finishes. They can also be found in cross country and road running events, even up to the marathon distance. A runner's ability to sprint at the end of a race is also known as their finishing kick.[5] Multisport races, such as the triathlon, often have running as the final section and sprint finish tactics are applied as they are in running-only events.[6]




Two women in a tight sprint finish at the end of the Australia World Cup cycling race


In cycling, sprint finishes are an integral part of the sport and are used in both track cyclings and road cycling. Cycling sprints are often highly tactical, with cyclists occasionally coming to a near halt at points before reaching a high speed finish.[7] The longer track races such as, scratch races, often feature sprint finishes as maintaining a steady pace within the peloton allows opponents to conserve energy through drafting.[8] Road races are similar in this respect, in both short criterium races and long-distance races. Sprint tactics also form a major part of points classifications in road events, where cycling sprinters specialise in reaching an intermediate point first, thus gaining extra points and resulting prizes.[9][10]
Sprint finish tactics are also used in speedskating, cross-country skiing, long-distance swimming,[11] horse racing and other animal racing sports.[12][13] The finishes of races which are outright sprinting events in themselves, such as the 100 metres track race, are not normally referred to as sprint finishes, as all competitors are already sprinting by default (thus it is not a racing tactic).
See also[edit]

Pace race
Sport
Gambling
Totalisator
Pacemaker
Nuclear arms race
Space Race
Racing game

References[edit]


^ "Online Etymology Dictionary". Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved 28 June 2010.&#160;
^ "Race". Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved July 13, 2012.&#160;
^ Ronald J Maughan, &amp; Michael Gleeson (20 May 2010). "Energy Supply". The Biochemical Basis of Sports Performance (pg. 129). Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780199208289
^ Stevenson, Roy. Developing a fast finish for your road races. Multi Briefs. Retrieved on 2014-04-17.
^ Fitzgerald, Matt (2013-11-18). Kick Your Way To Better Race Times. Competitor. Retrieved on 2014-04-17.
^ Stevenson, Roy (2013-07-13). Developing a fast finish. Triathlon &amp; Multisport Magazine. Retrieved on 2014-04-17.
^ The individual sprint . BBC Sport. Retrieved on 2014-04-17.
^ Scratch Race. Cycling Calendar. Retrieved on 2014-04-17.
^ Gitz, Jarred (20014-04-05). The Points Classification . Jareds Cycling. Retrieved on 2014-04-17.
^ Smith, Mark (2008-05-01). Technique: Sprint finishing. Bike Radar. Retrieved on 2014-04-17.
^ Open Water Swimming. Masters Swimming. Retrieved on 2014-04-17.
^ Minella best in sprint finish. British Horse Racing Authority. Retrieved on 2014-04-17.
^ James, Dave (2014-02-24). Matt breaks record as doping hits Sochi. China Post/Agence France Presse. Retrieved on 2014-04-17.


External links[edit]



Look up racing in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



Racing teams









v
t
e


Racing










&#160;
Running











Track running




Sprinting
Middle-distance running
Long-distance track event
Relay race
Hurdling
Steeplechase












Road running




Half marathon
Marathon
Ultramarathon
Ekiden









Off-road running




Adventure running
Cross country running
Fell running
Trail running









Other




Tower running
Racewalking


















&#160;
Orienteering









Foot orienteering
Mountain bike orienteering
Ski orienteering
Trail orienteering
Radio orienteering
Canoe orienteering
Rogaining
Mountain marathon
Car orienteering















&#160;
Bicycle racing









Road bicycle racing
Cyclo-cross
Mountain bike racing
Track cycling
BMX racing
Cycle speedway
Keirin















&#160;
Animal racing









Camel racing
Greyhound racing
Horse racing
Pigeon racing
Sled dog racing















&#160;
Swimming









Open water swimming
Marathon swimming
Paralympic swimming















&#160;
Motorsport











Auto racing




Formula racing
Sports car racing
Touring car racing
Stock car racing
Rallying
Drag racing
Off-road racing













Motorboat racing




Drag boat racing
Hydroplane racing
Jet sprint boat racing
Offshore powerboat racing
F1 powerboat









Other




Kart racing
Air racing
Radio-controlled car racing
Slot car racing


















&#160;
Multi-sport racing









Duathlon
Triathlon












List of forms of racing











Authority control



NDL: 00567285















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Racing&amp;oldid=690494360"					
				Categories: RacingSports by typeHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from January 2010All articles needing additional references				
							
		
		
			