


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Sports science
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				







This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page.








This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2010)







This article includes a list of references, related reading or external links, but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations. Please improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (September 2014)








Sports science is a discipline that studies how the healthy human body works during exercise, and how sport and physical activity promote health from cellular to whole body perspectives. The study of sport science traditionally incorporates areas of physiology (exercise physiology), psychology (sport psychology), anatomy, biomechanics , biochemistry and biokinetics. Sport scientists and performance consultants are growing in demand and employment numbers, with the ever-increasing focus within the sporting world on achieving the best results possible. Through the study of science and sport, researchers have developed a greater understanding on how the human body reacts to exercise, training, different environments and many other stimuli.



Contents


1 Origins of Exercise Physiology
2 Study of Sport Science
3 Academic journals in Sport Science
4 See also
5 References
6 External links



Origins of Exercise Physiology[edit]
Main article: Exercise physiology
Sport Science can trace its origins to ancient Greece. The noted ancient Greek physician Galen (131–201) wrote 87 detailed essays about improving health (proper nutrition), aerobic fitness, and strengthening muscles. Assyrian Hunayn ibn Ishaq translated Galen's work, along with that of Hippocrates, into Arabic which lead to the spread of Greek physiology throughout the Middle East and Europe. Between 776&#160;BC to 393&#160;AD, the ancient Greek physicians planned the training regimens and diets of the Olympic competitors.
New ideas upon the working and functioning of the human body emerged during the renaissance as anatomists and physicians challenged the previously known theories. These spread with the implementation of the printed word, the result of Gutenberg's printing press in the 15th century. Allied with this was a large increase in academia in general, universities were forming all around the world. Importantly these new scholars went beyond the simplistic notions of the early Greek physicians, and shed light upon the complexities of the circulatory, and digestive systems. Furthermore, by the middle of the 19th century early medical schools (such as the Harvard Medical School, formed 1782) began appearing in the United States, whose graduates went on to assume positions of importance in academia and allied medical research.
Medical journal publications increased significantly in number during this period. In 1898, three articles on physical activity appeared in the first volume of the American Journal of Physiology. Other articles and reviews subsequently appeared in prestigious journals. The German applied physiology publication, Internationale Zeitschrift fur Physiologie einschliesslich Arbeitphysiologie (1929–1940; now known as the European Journal of Applied Physiology and Occupational Physiology), became a significant journal in the field of research.
A number of key figures have made significant contributions to the discipline, including the following:

Austin Flint, Jr., (1836–1915) One of the first American pioneer physicians, studied physiological responses to exercise in his influential medical textbooks.
Edward Hitchcock, Jr., (1828–1911) Amherst College Professor of hygiene and physical education, devoted his academic career to the scientific study of physical exercise, training and the body. Coauthored 1860 text on exercise physiology.
George Wells Fitz, M.D. (1860–1934) Created the first departmental major in Anatomy, Physiology, and Physical Training at Harvard University in 1891.
August Krogh (1874–1949) Won the 1920 Nobel prize in physiology for discovering the mechanism that controlled capillary blood flow in resting or active muscle.
Per-Olof Astrand (1922–) Professor at the Department of physiology, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm. Wrote seminal paper which evaluated the physical working capacity of men and women aged 4–33 years.

Study of Sport Science[edit]
Higher-education degrees in Sports Science or Human Physiology are also becoming increasingly popular with many universities now offering both undergraduate, postgraduate and distance learning degrees in the discipline. Opportunities for graduates in these fields employment as a Physical Education teacher, Dietician or Nutritionist, Performance Analyst, Sports coach, Sports therapist, Fitness centre manager, Sports administrator, Strength and Conditioning specialist or retail manager of a Sports store. Graduates may also be well positioned to undertake further training to become an accredited Physiotherapist, Exercise Physiologist, Research Scientist and Sports Medical Doctor.
There are many noted institutions in the United Kingdom which run courses in Sport Science. Some of the better known are University of Brighton, St Mary's University, Twickenham University of Kent – School of Sport &amp; Exercise Sciences, Nottingham Trent University, Durham, University of Derby (fastest rising in the league tables at this time 2014 Guardian League table) Leeds, Loughborough, Exeter, Oxford Brookes University, Bath, Bangor, Birmingham, University of Chichester, Edinburgh, Liverpool John Moores, University of Portsmouth, Manchester Metropolitan University.
In the United States, institutions offering related degrees include Jackson State University, University of Connecticut, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Ohio State University, University of Florida, University of Missouri.
Academic journals in Sport Science[edit]

Journal of Applied Biomechanics
International Journal of Computer Science in Sport
Journal of Strength &amp; Conditioning Research
Journal of Swimming Research

See also[edit]

Kinesiology
Kinanthropometry
Sports biomechanics
Sports medicine
Computer science in sport

References[edit]

External links[edit]

British Association of Sport and Exercise Sciences
American College of Sports Medicine
European College of Sport Science
Exercise &amp; Sports Science Australia
National Strength &amp; Conditioning Association









v
t
e


Sport









History
Clubs
Equipment
Law
Medicine
Regulation
Science
Sociology


Outline of sports











 Portal
 Category
 Commons













Authority control



GND: 4056442-3















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sports_science&amp;oldid=689779722"					
				Categories: Sports scienceHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from December 2010All articles needing additional referencesArticles lacking in-text citations from September 2014All articles lacking in-text citationsWikipedia articles with GND identifiers				
							
		
		
			