


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Association for Computing Machinery
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				
Association for Computing Machinery




Formation
1947


Type
501(c)(3) not-for-profit membership corporation


Headquarters
New York City



Membership

100,000



President

Alexander L. Wolf[1]


Website
www.acm.org


The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) is an international learned society for computing. It was founded in 1947 and is the world's largest[2] scientific and educational computing society. It is a not-for-profit professional membership group.[3] Its membership is more than 100,000 as of 2011. Its headquarters are in New York City.
The ACM and the IEEE Computer Society are the umbrella organizations for US academic and scholarly interests in computing. Unlike the IEEE, the ACM is solely dedicated to computing.



Contents


1 Activities
2 Services

2.1 Publications


3 Portal and Digital Library
4 Competition
5 Membership grades

5.1 Fellows
5.2 Distinguished Members
5.3 Senior Members


6 Chapters

6.1 Special Interest Groups


7 Conferences
8 Awards
9 Leadership
10 Infrastructure
11 ACM Council on Women in Computing

11.1 Athena Lectures


12 See also
13 References
14 External links



Activities[edit]




Two Penn Plaza site of the ACM headquarters in New York City


ACM is organized into over 171 local chapters and 37 Special Interest Groups (SIGs), through which it conducts most of its activities. Additionally, there are over 500 college and university chapters. The first student chapter was founded in 1961 at the University of Louisiana at Lafayette.
Many of the SIGs, like SIGGRAPH, SIGPLAN, SIGCSE and SIGCOMM, sponsor regular conferences which have become famous as the dominant venue for presenting innovations in certain fields. The groups also publish a large number of specialized journals, magazines, and newsletters.
ACM also sponsors other computer science related events such as the worldwide ACM International Collegiate Programming Contest (ICPC), and has sponsored some other events such as the chess match between Garry Kasparov and the IBM Deep Blue computer.
Services[edit]
Publications[edit]
Main category: Association for Computing Machinery publications
ACM publishes several journals and magazines with ACM Communications and ACM Queue as mouthpieces.[4]
ACM publishes a prestigious[citation needed] academic journal, Journal of the ACM, and general magazines for computer professionals, Communications of the ACM (also known as Communications or CACM) and Queue. Other publications of the ACM include:

ACM XRDS, formerly "Crossroads", was designed in 2010 and is the most popular student computing magazine in the US.
ACM Interactions, an interdisciplinary HCI publication focused on the connections between experiences, people and technology, and the third largest ACM publication.[5]
ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR)
ACM Computers in Entertainment (CIE)
A number of journals, specific to subfields of computer science, titled ACM Transactions. Some of the more notable transactions include:

ACM Transactions on Computer Systems (TOCS)
IEEE/ACM Transactions on Computational Biology and Bioinformatics (TCBB)
ACM Transactions on Computational Logic (TOCL)
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI)
ACM Transactions on Database Systems (TODS)
ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG)
ACM Transactions on Mathematical Software (TOMS)
ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications, and Applications (TOMM)
IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking (TON)
ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems (TOPLAS)



Although Communications no longer publishes primary research, and is not considered a prestigious venue, many of the great debates and results in computing history have been published in its pages.
ACM has made almost all of its publications available to paid subscribers online at its Digital Library and also has a Guide to Computing Literature. Individual members additionally have access to Safari Books Online and Books24x7. ACM also offers insurance, online courses, and other services to its members.
In 1997, ACM Press published Wizards and Their Wonders: Portraits in Computing (ISBN 0897919602), written by Christopher Morgan, with new photographs by Louis Fabian Bachrach. The book is a collection of historic and current portrait photographs of figures from the computer industry.
Portal and Digital Library[edit]
The ACM Portal is an online service of the ACM.[6] Its core are two main sections: ACM Digital Library and the ACM Guide to Computing Literature.[7]
The ACM Digital Library is the full-text collection of all articles published by the ACM in its articles, magazines and conference proceedings. The Guide is a bibliography in computing with over one million entries.[6] The ACM Digital Library contains a comprehensive archive starting in the 1950s of the organization's journals, magazines, newsletters and conference proceedings. Online services include a forum called Ubiquity and Tech News digest. There is an extensive underlying bibliographic database containing key works of all genres from all major publishers of computing literature. This secondary database is a rich discovery service known as The ACM Guide to Computing Literature.
ACM adopted a hybrid Open Access (OA) publishing model in 2013. Authors who do not choose to pay the OA fee must grant ACM publishing rights by either a copyright transfer agreement or a publishing license agreement.[8]
ACM was a "green" publisher before the term was invented. Authors may post documents on their own websites and in their institutional repositories with a link back to the ACM Digital Library's permanently maintained Version of Record.
All metadata in the Digital Library is open to the world, including abstracts, linked references and citing works, citation and usage statistics, as well as all functionality and services. Other than the free articles, the full-texts are accessed by subscription.
Competition[edit]
ACM's primary historical competitor has been the IEEE Computer Society, which is the largest subgroup of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers. The IEEE focuses more on hardware and standardization issues than theoretical computer science, but there is considerable overlap with ACM's agenda. They occasionally cooperate on projects like developing computing curricula.[9] Some of the major awards in Computer science are given jointly by ACM and the IEEE–CS.[10]
There is also a mounting challenge to the ACM's publication practices coming from the open access movement. Some authors see a centralized peer–review process as less relevant and publish on their home pages or on unreviewed sites like arXiv. Other organizations have sprung up which do their peer review entirely free and online, such as Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research (JAIR), Journal of Machine Learning Research (JMLR) and the Journal of Research and Practice in Information Technology.
Membership grades[edit]
In addition to student and regular members, ACM has several advanced membership grades to recognize those with multiple years of membership and "demonstrated performance that sets them apart from their peers".[11]
Fellows[edit]
See also: Category:Fellows of the Association for Computing Machinery
The ACM Fellows Program was established by Council of the Association for Computing Machinery in 1993 "to recognize and honor outstanding ACM members for their achievements in computer science and information technology and for their significant contributions to the mission of the ACM."
There are presently about 958 Fellows[12] out of about 75,000 professional members.[when?]
Distinguished Members[edit]
In 2006 ACM began recognizing two additional membership grades, one which was called Distinguished Members. Distinguished Members (Distinguished Engineers, Distinguished Scientists, and Distinguished Educators) have at least 15 years of professional experience and 5 years of continuous ACM membership and "have made a significant impact on the computing field". Note that in 2006 when the Distinguished Members first came out, one of the three levels was called "Distinguished Member" and was changed about two years later to "Distinguished Educator". Those who already had the Distinguished Member title had their titles changed to one of the other three titles.
Senior Members[edit]
Also in 2006, ACM began recognizing Senior Members. Senior Members have ten or more years of professional experience and 5 years of continuous ACM membership.
Chapters[edit]
ACM has three kinds of chapters: Special Interest Groups,[13] Professional Chapters, and Student Chapters.[14]
As of 2011, ACM has professional &amp; SIG Chapters in 56 countries.[15]
As of 2014, there exist ACM student chapters in 41 different countries.[16]
Special Interest Groups[edit]
Main category: Association for Computing Machinery Special Interest Groups


SIGACCESS: Accessible Computing
SIGACT: Algorithms and Computation Theory
SIGAda: Ada Programming Language
SIGAI: Artificial Intelligence
SIGAPP: Applied Computing
SIGARCH: Computer Architecture
SIGBED: Embedded Systems
SIGBio: Bioinformatics
SIGCAS: Computers and Society
SIGCHI: Computer–Human Interaction
SIGCOMM: Data Communication
SIGCSE: Computer Science Education
SIGDA: Design Automation
SIGDOC: Design of Communication
SIGecom: Electronic Commerce
SIGEVO: Genetic and Evolutionary Computation
SIGGRAPH: Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques
SIGHPC: High Performance Computing
SIGIR: Information Retrieval
SIGITE: Information Technology Education
SIGKDD: Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining
SIGLOG: Logic and Computation[17]
SIGMETRICS: Measurement and Evaluation
SIGMICRO: Microarchitecture
SIGMIS: Management Information Systems
SIGMM: Multimedia
SIGMOBILE: Mobility of Systems, Users, Data and Computing
SIGMOD: Management of Data
SIGOPS: Operating Systems
SIGPLAN: Programming Languages
SIGSAC: Security, Audit, and Control
SIGSAM: Symbolic and Algebraic Manipulation
SIGSIM: Simulation and Modeling
SIGSOFT: Software Engineering
SIGSPATIAL: Spatial Information
SIGUCCS: University and College Computing Services
SIGWEB: Hypertext, Hypermedia, and Web


Conferences[edit]
Main category: Association for Computing Machinery conferences
ACM sponsors numerous conferences listed below. Most of the special interest groups also have an annual conference. ACM conferences are often very popular publishing venues and are therefore very competitive. For example, the 2007 SIGGRAPH conference attracted about 30000 visitors, and CIKM only accepted 15% of the long papers that were submitted in 2005.


ASPLOS: International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems
CHI: Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
SIGCSE: SIGCSE Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education
CIKM: Conference on Information and Knowledge Management[18]
DAC: Design Automation Conference
DEBS: Distributed Event Based Systems[19]
FCRC: Federated Computing Research Conference
GECCO: Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference[20]
SC: Supercomputing Conference
SIGGRAPH: International Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques
Hypertext: Conference on Hypertext and Hypermedia[21]
JCDL: Joint Conference on Digital Libraries[22]
TAPIA: Richard Tapia Celebration of Diversity in Computing Conference
SIGCOMM: ACM SIGCOMM Conference


The ACM is a co–presenter and founding partner of the Grace Hopper Celebration of Women in Computing (GHC) with the Anita Borg Institute for Women and Technology.[23]
There are some conferences hosted by ACM student branches; this includes Reflections Projections, which is hosted by UIUC ACM.[citation needed] . In addition, ACM sponsors regional conferences. Regional conferences facilitate increased opportunities for collaboration between nearby institutions and they are well attended.
Awards[edit]
The ACM presents or co–presents a number of awards for outstanding technical and professional achievements and contributions in computer science and information technology.[24]


A. M. Turing Award
ACM - AAAI Allen Newell Award
ACM Eugene L. Lawler Award
ACM – IEEE CS Ken Kennedy Award
ACM - Infosys Foundation Award in the Computing Sciences
ACM–W Athena Lecturer Award
ACM Presidential Award
ACM Programming Systems and Languages Paper Award
Distinguished Service Award
Doctoral Dissertation Award
Eckert–Mauchly Award
Gordon Bell Prize
Grace Murray Hopper Award
Paris Kanellakis Theory and Practice Award
Karl V. Karlstrom Outstanding Educator Award
Outstanding Contribution to ACM Award
Software System Award
SIAM/ACM Prize in Computational Science and Engineering


Leadership[edit]
The President of the ACM for 2014–2016 is Alexander L. Wolf of Imperial College London, UK. He is the successor of Vint Cerf (2012–2014), an American computer scientist who is recognized as one of "the fathers of the Internet"; Alain Chesnais (2010–2012), a French citizen living in Toronto, Canada, where he runs his company named Visual Transitions; and Dame Wendy Hall of the University of Southampton, UK (2008-2010).[25]
ACM is led by a Council consisting of the President, Vice–President, Treasurer, Past President, SIG Governing Board Chair, Publications Board Chair, three representatives of the SIG Governing Board, and seven Members–At–Large. This institution is often referred to simply as "Council" in Communications of the ACM.
Infrastructure[edit]
ACM has five “Boards” that make up various committees and subgroups, to help Headquarters staff maintain quality services and products. These boards are as follows:

Publications Board
SIG Governing Board
Education Board
Membership Services Board
Practitioners Board

ACM Council on Women in Computing[edit]
ACM–W,[26] the ACM council on women in computing, supports, celebrates, and advocates internationally for the full engagement of women in computing. ACM–W's main programs are regional celebrations of women in computing, ACM-W chapters, and scholarships for women CS students to attend research conferences. In India and Europe these activities are overseen by ACM-W India and ACM-W Europe respectively. ACM-W collaborates with organizations such as the Anita Borg Institute, the National Center for Women and IT, CRA-W.
Athena Lectures[edit]
The ACM-W gives an annual Athena Lecturer Award to honor outstanding women researchers who have made fundamental contributions to computer science. This program began in 2006. Speakers are nominated by SIG officers.[27]

2006–2007: Professor Deborah Estrin of UCLA
2007–2008: Professor Karen Spärck Jones of Cambridge University
2008–2009: Professor Shafi Goldwasser of MIT and the Weitzmann Institute of Science
2009–2010: Susan Eggers of the University of Washington
2010–2011: Mary Jane Irwin of the Pennsylvania State University
2011–2012: Judith S. Olson of the University of California, Irvine
2012–2013: Nancy Lynch of MIT
2013–2014: Katherine Yelick of LBNL[28]
2014–2015: Susan Dumais of Microsoft Research

See also[edit]




Computer Science portal



Computing portal





ACM Classification Scheme
Association of Information Technology Professionals
Computer science
Computing
Grace Murray Hopper Award, awarded by the ACM
Ken Kennedy Award, awarded by ACM and the IEEE Computer Society
Presidents of the Association for Computing Machinery
Timeline of computing 2400 BC–1949
Turing Award
Franz Alt, former president
Edmund Berkeley, co–founder
Bernard Galler, former president


References[edit]


^ "New ACM Officers Elected to Lead amid Digital Changes Facing Computing Community". acm.org. Retrieved 2014-10-12.&#160;
^ "Indiana University Media Relations". indiana.edu. Retrieved October 10, 2012.&#160;
^ "ACM 501(c)3 Status as a group". irs.gov. Retrieved October 1, 2012.&#160;
^ "Journals &amp; Magazines". acm.org.&#160;
^ Wakkary, R.; Stolterman, E. (2011). "WELCOME: Our first interactions". Interactions 18: 5. doi:10.1145/1897239.1897240.&#160;
^ a b "ACM Digital Library". acm.org.&#160;
^ The University of Georgia Guide to Online Resources
^ "ACM Author Rights". Acm.org.&#160;
^ Joint Task Force on Computing Curricula; Association for Computing Machinery (ACM); IEEE Computer Society. "Computer Science Curricula 2013: Curriculum Guidelines for Undergraduate Degree Programs in Computer Science" (PDF).&#160;
^ See, e.g., Ken Kennedy Award
^ "ACM Senior Members–An Overview". Acm.org.&#160;
^ "List of ACM Fellows". Awards.acm.org. Retrieved March 3, 2015.&#160;
^ "ACM Special Interest Groups". Archived from the original on July 27, 2010. Retrieved August 7, 2010.&#160;
^ "ACM Chapters". Retrieved August 7, 2010.&#160;
^ "Worldwide Professional Chapters". Association for Computing Machinery (ACM). Retrieved 2012-12-27.&#160;
^ "Chapters Listing by Geographic Region — Association for Computing Machinery". Campus.acm.org. Retrieved 2013-10-02.&#160;
^ "ACM Special Interest Group on Logic and Computation". acm.org. Retrieved 2015-01-28.&#160;
^ "Conference on Information and Knowledge Management (CIKM)". Cikmconference.org.&#160;
^ "Home - DEBS.org". debs.org.&#160;
^ "GECCO – 2009". Sigevo.org.&#160;
^ "Hypertext 2009". Ht2009.org.&#160;
^ "Joint Conference on Digital Library (JCDL)–Home". JCDL.&#160;
^ "Grace Hopper Celebration of Women in Computing, Largest Gathering of Women in Computing, Attracts Researchers, Industry". Retrieved June 27, 2011.&#160;
^ "ACM Awards". Retrieved April 26, 2012.&#160;
^ "ACM Past Presidents". acm.org. Retrieved 2014-10-12.&#160;
^ "Home". acm.org.&#160;
^ "ACM-W Athena Lecturers Award Winners". ACM. Retrieved 2013-12-01.&#160;
^ "Berkeley Lab’s Yelick Named “Athena Lecturer” for Contributions to Parallel Programming Languages that Improve Programmer Productivity" (PDF) (Press release). ACM. 2013-03-21. Retrieved 2013-12-01.&#160;


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Association for Computing Machinery.



Official website
ACM portal for publications
ACM Digital Library
Association for Computing Machinery Records, 1947-2009, Charles Babbage Institute, University of Minnesota.






Authority control



WorldCat
VIAF: 133611413
LCCN: n78096869
ISNI: 0000 0001 2153 4974
GND: 1222-1
SUDOC: 029253195
BNF: cb120919241 (data)
NLA: 35754645
NDL: 00275766
NKC: nlk20050161926















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Association_for_Computing_Machinery&amp;oldid=688527196"					
				Categories: Association for Computing MachineryProfessional associations based in the United StatesComputer science organizationsComputer-related organizationsInternational nongovernmental organizationsLearned societiesOrganizations established in 1947Computer science-related professional associations1947 establishments in the United StatesHidden categories: Use mdy dates from June 2012All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from November 2012Vague or ambiguous time from June 2014Articles with unsourced statements from October 2012Commons category with local link same as on WikidataWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiers				
							
		
		
			Navigation menu

			
									
						Personal tools
						
							Create accountLog in						
					
									
										
						Namespaces
						
															Article
															Talk
													
					
										
												
							Variants
						

						
							
															
						
					
									
				
										
						Views
						
															Read
															Edit
															View history
													
					
										
						More

						
							
															
						
					
										
						
							Search
						

						
							
														
						
					
									
			
			
				
						
			Navigation

			
									
						Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store					
							
		
			
			Interaction

			
									
						HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page					
							
		
			
			Tools

			
									
						What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page					
							
		
			
			Print/export

			
									
						Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version					
							
		
			
			Languages

			
									
						العربيةAzərbaycancaবাংলাDanskDeutschΕλληνικάEspañolفارسیFrançais한국어HrvatskiBahasa IndonesiaItalianoעבריתҚазақшаNederlands日本語Norsk bokmålPiemontèisPolskiPortuguêsRomânăРусскийSlovenčinaSuomiSvenskaதமிழ்ไทยTürkçeУкраїнськаTiếng Việt粵語中文					
				Edit links			
		
				
		
		
							
											 This page was last modified on 1 November 2015, at 14:30.
											Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
									
							
											Privacy policy
											About Wikipedia
											Disclaimers
											Contact Wikipedia
											Developers
											