


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Cathode ray tube
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				



Cutaway rendering of a color CRT:
1.&#160;Three electron guns (for red, green, and blue phosphor dots)
2.&#160;Electron beams
3.&#160;Focusing coils
4.&#160;Deflection coils
5.&#160;Anode connection
6.&#160;Mask for separating beams for red, green, and blue part of displayed image
7.&#160;Phosphor layer with red, green, and blue zones
8.&#160;Close-up of the phosphor-coated inner side of the screen


The cathode ray tube (CRT) is a vacuum tube containing one or more electron guns, and a phosphorescent screen used to view images.[1] It has a means to accelerate and deflect the electron beam(s) onto the screen to create the images. The images may represent electrical waveforms (oscilloscope), pictures (television, computer monitor), radar targets or others. CRTs have also been used as memory devices, in which case the visible light emitted from the fluorescent material (if any) is not intended to have significant meaning to a visual observer (though the visible pattern on the tube face may cryptically represent the stored data).
The CRT uses an evacuated glass envelope which is large, deep (i.e. long from front screen face to rear end), fairly heavy, and relatively fragile. As a matter of safety, the face is typically made of thick lead glass so as to be highly shatter-resistant and to block most X-ray emissions, particularly if the CRT is used in a consumer product.
Since the mid 2000s, CRTs have largely been superseded by newer display technologies such as LCD, plasma display, and OLED, which have lower manufacturing costs, power consumption, weight and bulk.
The vacuum level inside the tube is high vacuum on the order of 0.01 Pa[2] to 133 nPa.[3]
In television sets and computer monitors, the entire front area of the tube is scanned repetitively and systematically in a fixed pattern called a raster. An image is produced by controlling the intensity of each of the three electron beams, one for each additive primary color (red, green, and blue) with a video signal as a reference.[4] In all modern CRT monitors and televisions, the beams are bent by magnetic deflection, a varying magnetic field generated by coils and driven by electronic circuits around the neck of the tube, although electrostatic deflection is commonly used in oscilloscopes, a type of diagnostic instrument.[4]




A 14 inch cathode ray tube showing its deflection coils and electron guns






Typical 1950s United States television set






A flat CRT assembly inside a 1984 Sinclair FTV1 pocket TV






Electron gun





Contents


1 History
2 Oscilloscope CRTs

2.1 Phosphor persistence
2.2 Microchannel plate
2.3 Graticules
2.4 Image storage tubes
2.5 Data storage tubes


3 Color CRTs

3.1 Convergence and purity in color CRTs
3.2 Degaussing


4 Vector monitors
5 CRT resolution
6 Gamma
7 Other types of CRTs

7.1 Cat's eye
7.2 Charactrons
7.3 Nimo
7.4 Williams tube
7.5 Flood beam CRT
7.6 Zeus thin CRT display


8 The future of CRT technology

8.1 Demise
8.2 Causes
8.3 Slimmer CRT
8.4 Resurgence in specialized markets


9 Health concerns

9.1 Ionizing radiation
9.2 Toxicity
9.3 Flicker
9.4 High-frequency audible noise
9.5 Implosion


10 Security concerns
11 Recycling
12 Advantages and disadvantages
13 See also
14 References
15 Selected patents
16 External links



History[edit]




Braun's original cold-cathode CRT, 1897


Cathode rays were discovered by Johann Hittorf in 1869 in primitive Crookes tubes. He observed that some unknown rays were emitted from the cathode (negative electrode) which could cast shadows on the glowing wall of the tube, indicating the rays were traveling in straight lines. In 1890, Arthur Schuster demonstrated cathode rays could be deflected by electric fields, and William Crookes showed they could be deflected by magnetic fields. In 1897, J. J. Thomson succeeded in measuring the mass of cathode rays, showing that they consisted of negatively charged particles smaller than atoms, the first "subatomic particles", which were later named electrons. The earliest version of the CRT was known as the "Braun tube", invented by the German physicist Ferdinand Braun in 1897.[5][6] It was a cold-cathode diode, a modification of the Crookes tube with a phosphor-coated screen.
In 1907, Russian scientist Boris Rosing used a CRT in the receiving end of an experimental video signal to form a picture. He managed to display simple geometric shapes onto the screen, which marked the first time that CRT technology was used for what is now known as television.[1]
The first cathode ray tube to use a hot cathode was developed by John B. Johnson (who gave his name to the term Johnson noise) and Harry Weiner Weinhart of Western Electric, and became a commercial product in 1922.[citation needed]
It was named by inventor Vladimir K. Zworykin in 1929.[7] RCA was granted a trademark for the term (for its cathode ray tube) in 1932; it voluntarily released the term to the public domain in 1950.[8]
The first commercially made electronic television sets with cathode ray tubes were manufactured by Telefunken in Germany in 1934.[9][10]
Oscilloscope CRTs[edit]







In oscilloscope CRTs, electrostatic deflection is used, rather than the magnetic deflection commonly used with television and other large CRTs. The beam is deflected horizontally by applying an electric field between a pair of plates to its left and right, and vertically by applying an electric field to plates above and below. Televisions use magnetic rather than electrostatic deflection because the deflection plates obstruct the beam when the deflection angle is as large as is required for tubes that are relatively short for their size.
Phosphor persistence[edit]
Various phosphors are available depending upon the needs of the measurement or display application. The brightness, color, and persistence of the illumination depends upon the type of phosphor used on the CRT screen. Phosphors are available with persistences ranging from less than one microsecond to several seconds.[11] For visual observation of brief transient events, a long persistence phosphor may be desirable. For events which are fast and repetitive, or high frequency, a short-persistence phosphor is generally preferable.[12]
Microchannel plate[edit]
When displaying fast one-shot events, the electron beam must deflect very quickly, with few electrons impinging on the screen, leading to a faint or invisible image on the display. Oscilloscope CRTs designed for very fast signals can give a brighter display by passing the electron beam through a micro-channel plate just before it reaches the screen. Through the phenomenon of secondary emission, this plate multiplies the number of electrons reaching the phosphor screen, giving a significant improvement in writing rate (brightness) and improved sensitivity and spot size as well.[13][14]
Graticules[edit]
Most oscilloscopes have a graticule as part of the visual display, to facilitate measurements. The graticule may be permanently marked inside the face of the CRT, or it may be a transparent external plate made of glass or acrylic plastic. An internal graticule eliminates parallax error, but cannot be changed to accommodate different types of measurements.[15] Oscilloscopes commonly provide a means for the graticule to be illuminated from the side, which improves its visibility.[16]
Image storage tubes[edit]




The Model 564 First Mass Produced Analog Phosphor Storage Oscilloscope


These are found in analog phosphor storage oscilloscopes. These are distinct from digital storage oscilloscopes which rely on solid state digital memory to store the image.
Where a single brief event is monitored by an oscilloscope, such an event will be displayed by a conventional tube only while it actually occurs. The use of a long persistence phosphor may allow the image to be observed after the event, but only for a few seconds at best. This limitation can be overcome by the use of a direct view storage cathode ray tube (storage tube). A storage tube will continue to display the event after it has occurred until such time as it is erased. A storage tube is similar to a conventional tube except that it is equipped with a metal grid coated with a dielectric layer located immediately behind the phosphor screen. An externally applied voltage to the mesh initially ensures that the whole mesh is at a constant potential. This mesh is constantly exposed to a low velocity electron beam from a 'flood gun' which operates independently of the main gun. This flood gun is not deflected like the main gun but constantly 'illuminates' the whole of the storage mesh. The initial charge on the storage mesh is such as to repel the electrons from the flood gun which are prevented from striking the phosphor screen.
When the main electron gun writes an image to the screen, the energy in the main beam is sufficient to create a 'potential relief' on the storage mesh. The areas where this relief is created no longer repel the electrons from the flood gun which now pass through the mesh and illuminate the phosphor screen. Consequently, the image that was briefly traced out by the main gun continues to be displayed after it has occurred. The image can be 'erased' by resupplying the external voltage to the mesh restoring its constant potential. The time for which the image can be displayed was limited because, in practice, the flood gun slowly neutralises the charge on the storage mesh. One way of allowing the image to be retained for longer is temporarily to turn off the flood gun. It is then possible for the image to be retained for several days. The majority of storage tubes allow for a lower voltage to be applied to the storage mesh which slowly restores the initial charge state. By varying this voltage a variable persistence is obtained. Turning off the flood gun and the voltage supply to the storage mesh allows such a tube to operate as a conventional oscilloscope tube.[17]
Data storage tubes[edit]
For more details on this topic, see williams tube.
Color CRTs[edit]




Magnified view of a delta-gun shadow mask color CRT






Magnified view of a Trinitron color CRT






Spectra of constituent blue, green and red phosphors in a common CRT


Color tubes use three different phosphors which emit red, green, and blue light respectively. They are packed together in stripes (as in aperture grille designs) or clusters called "triads" (as in shadow mask CRTs).[18] Color CRTs have three electron guns, one for each primary color, arranged either in a straight line or in an equilateral triangular configuration (the guns are usually constructed as a single unit). (The triangular configuration is often called "delta-gun", based on its relation to the shape of the Greek letter delta.) A grille or mask absorbs the electrons that would otherwise hit the wrong phosphor.[19] A shadow mask tube uses a metal plate with tiny holes, placed so that the electron beam only illuminates the correct phosphors on the face of the tube;[18] the holes are tapered so that the electrons that strike the inside of any hole will be reflected back, if they are not absorbed (e.g. due to local charge accumulation), instead of bouncing through the hole to strike a random (wrong) spot on the screen. Another type of color CRT uses an aperture grille of tensioned vertical wires to achieve the same result.[19]
Convergence and purity in color CRTs[edit]
Due to limitations in the dimensional precision with which CRTs can be manufactured economically, it has not been practically possible to build color CRTs in which three electron beams could be aligned to hit phosphors of respective color in acceptable coordination, solely on the basis of the geometric configuration of the electron gun axes and gun aperture positions, shadow mask apertures, etc. The shadow mask ensures that one beam will only hit spots of certain colors of phosphors, but minute variations in physical alignment of the internal parts among individual CRTs will cause variations in the exact alignment of the beams through the shadow mask, allowing some electrons from, for example, the red beam to hit, say, blue phosphors, unless some individual compensation is made for the variance among individual tubes.
Color convergence and color purity are two aspects of this single problem. Firstly, for correct color rendering it is necessary that regardless of where the beams are deflected on the screen, all three hit the same spot (and nominally pass through the same hole or slot) on the shadow mask. This is called convergence.[20] More specifically, the convergence at the center of the screen (with no deflection field applied by the yoke) is called static convergence, and the convergence over the rest of the screen area is called dynamic convergence. The beams may converge at the center of the screen and yet stray from each other as they are deflected toward the edges; such a CRT would be said to have good static convergence but poor dynamic convergence. Secondly, each beam must only strike the phosphors of the color it is intended to strike and no others. This is called purity. Like convergence, there is static purity and dynamic purity, with the same meanings of "static" and "dynamic" as for convergence. Convergence and purity are distinct parameters; a CRT could have good purity but poor convergence, or vice versa. Poor convergence causes color "shadows" or "ghosts" along displayed edges and contours, as if the image on the screen were intaglio printed with poor registration. Poor purity causes objects on the screen to appear off-color while their edges remain sharp. Purity and convergence problems can occur at the same time, in the same or different areas of the screen or both over the whole screen, and either uniformly or to greater or lesser degrees over different parts of the screen.
The solution to the static convergence and purity problems is a set of color alignment magnets installed around the neck of the CRT. These movable weak permanent magnets are usually mounted on the back end of the deflection yoke assembly and are set at the factory to compensate for any static purity and convergence errors that are intrinsic to the unadjusted tube. Typically there are two or three pairs of two magnets in the form of rings made of plastic impregnated with a magnetic material, with their magnetic fields parallel to the planes of the magnets, which are perpendicular to the electron gun axes. Each pair of magnetic rings forms a single effective magnet whose field vector can be fully and freely adjusted (in both direction and magnitude). By rotating a pair of magnets relative to each other, their relative field alignment can be varied, adjusting the effective field strength of the pair. (As they rotate relative to each other, each magnet's field can be considered to have two opposing components at right angles, and these four components [two each for two magnets] form two pairs, one pair reinforcing each other and the other pair opposing and canceling each other. Rotating away from alignment, the magnets' mutually reinforcing field components decrease as they are traded for increasing opposed, mutually cancelling components.) By rotating a pair of magnets together, preserving the relative angle between them, the direction of their collective magnetic field can be varied. Overall, adjusting all of the convergence/purity magnets allows a finely tuned slight electron beam deflection and/or lateral offset to be applied, which compensates for minor static convergence and purity errors intrinsic to the uncalibrated tube. Once set, these magnets are usually glued in place, but normally they can be freed and readjusted in the field (e.g. by a TV repair shop) if necessary.
On some CRTs, additional fixed adjustable magnets are added for dynamic convergence and/or dynamic purity at specific points on the screen, typically near the corners or edges. Further adjustment of dynamic convergence and purity typically cannot be done passively, but requires active compensation circuits.
Dynamic color convergence and purity are one of the main reasons why until late in their history, CRTs were long-necked (deep) and had biaxially curved faces; these geometric design characteristics are necessary for intrinsic passive dynamic color convergence and purity. Only starting around the 1990s did sophisticated active dynamic convergence compensation circuits become available that made short-necked and flat-faced CRTs workable. These active compensation circuits use the deflection yoke to finely adjust beam deflection according to the beam target location. The same techniques (and major circuit components) also make possible the adjustment of display image rotation, skew, and other complex raster geometry parameters through electronics under user control.
Degaussing[edit]
If the shadow mask becomes magnetized, its magnetic field deflects the electron beams passing through it, causing color purity distortion as the beams bend through the mask holes and hit some phosphors of a color other than that which they are intended to strike; e.g. some electrons from the red beam may hit blue phosphors, giving pure red parts of the image a magenta tint. (Magenta is the additive combination of red and blue.) This effect is localized to a specific area of the screen if the magnetization of the shadow mask is localized. Therefore, it is important that the shadow mask is unmagnetized. (A magnetized aperture grille has a similar effect, and everything stated in this subsection about shadow masks applies as well to aperture grilles.)
Most color CRT displays, i.e. television sets and computer monitors, each have a built-in degaussing (demagnetizing) circuit, the primary component of which is a degaussing coil which is mounted around the perimeter of the CRT face inside the bezel. Upon power-up of the CRT display, the degaussing circuit produces a brief, alternating current through the degaussing coil which smoothly decays in strength (fades out) to zero over a period of a few seconds, producing a decaying alternating magnetic field from the coil. This degaussing field is strong enough to remove shadow mask magnetization in most cases.[21] In unusual cases of strong magnetization where the internal degaussing field is not sufficient, the shadow mask may be degaussed externally with a stronger portable degausser or demagnetizer. However, an excessively strong magnetic field, whether alternating or constant, may mechanically deform (bend) the shadow mask, causing a permanent color distortion on the display which looks very similar to a magnetization effect.
The degaussing circuit is often built of a thermo-electric (not electronic) device containing a small ceramic heating element and a positive thermal coefficient (PTC) resistor, connected directly to the switched AC power line with the resistor in series with the degaussing coil. When the power is switched on, the heating element heats the PTC resistor, increasing its resistance to a point where degaussing current is minimal, but not actually zero. In older CRT displays, this low-level current (which produces no significant degaussing field) is sustained along with the action of the heating element as long as the display remains switched on. To repeat a degaussing cycle, the CRT display must be switched off and left off for at least several seconds to reset the degaussing circuit by allowing the PTC resistor to cool to the ambient temperature; switching the display off and immediately back on will result in a weak degaussing cycle or effectively no degaussing cycle.
This simple design is effective and cheap to build, but it wastes some power continuously. Later models, especially Energy Star rated ones, use a relay to switch the entire degaussing circuit on and off, so that the degaussing circuit uses energy only when it is functionally active and needed. The relay design also enables degaussing on user demand through the unit's front panel controls, without switching the unit off and on again. This relay can often be heard clicking off at the end of the degaussing cycle a few seconds after the monitor is turned on, and on and off during a manually initiated degaussing cycle.
Vector monitors[edit]
Main article: Vector monitor
Vector monitors were used in early computer aided design systems and in some late-1970s to mid-1980s arcade games such as Asteroids.[22] They draw graphics point-to-point, rather than scanning a raster. Either monochrome or color CRTs can be used in vector displays, and the essential principles of CRT design and operation are the same for either type of display; the main difference is in the beam deflection patterns and circuits.
CRT resolution[edit]
Dot pitch defines the maximum resolution of the display, assuming delta-gun CRTs. In these, as the scanned resolution approaches the dot pitch resolution, moiré appears, as the detail being displayed is finer than what the shadow mask can render.[23] Aperture grille monitors do not suffer from vertical moiré; however, because their phosphor stripes have no vertical detail. In smaller CRTs, these strips maintain position by themselves, but larger aperture grille CRTs require one or two crosswise (horizontal) support strips.[24]
Gamma[edit]
CRTs have a pronounced triode characteristic, which results in significant gamma (a nonlinear relationship in an electron gun between applied video voltage and beam intensity).[25]
Other types of CRTs[edit]
Cat's eye[edit]
Main article: Magic eye tube
In better quality tube radio sets a tuning guide consisting of a phosphor tube was used to aid the tuning adjustment. This was also known as a "Magic Eye" or "Tuning Eye". Tuning would be adjusted until the width of a radial shadow was minimized. This was used instead of a more expensive electromechanical meter, which later came to be used on higher-end tuners when transistor sets lacked the high voltage required to drive the device.[26] The same type of device was used with tape recorders as a recording level meter.
Charactrons[edit]
Some displays for early computers (those that needed to display more text than was practical using vectors, or that required high speed for photographic output) used Charactron CRTs. These incorporate a perforated metal character mask (stencil), which shapes a wide electron beam to form a character on the screen. The system selects a character on the mask using one set of deflection circuits, but that causes the extruded beam to be aimed off-axis, so a second set of deflection plates has to re-aim the beam so it is headed toward the center of the screen. A third set of plates places the character wherever required. The beam is unblanked (turned on) briefly to draw the character at that position. Graphics could be drawn by selecting the position on the mask corresponding to the code for a space (in practice, they were simply not drawn), which had a small round hole in the center; this effectively disabled the character mask, and the system reverted to regular vector behavior. Charactrons had exceptionally long necks, because of the need for three deflection systems.[27][28]
Nimo[edit]
Main article: Nimo tube




Nimo tube BA0000-P31


Nimo was the trademark of a family of small specialised CRTs manufactured by Industrial Electronics Engineers. These had 10 electron guns which produced electron beams in the form of digits in a manner similar to that of the charactron. The tubes were either simple single-digit displays or more complex 4- or 6- digit displays produced by means of a suitable magnetic deflection system. Having little of the complexities of a standard CRT, the tube required a relatively simple driving circuit, and as the image was projected on the glass face, it provided a much wider viewing angle than competitive types (e.g., nixie tubes).[29]
Williams tube[edit]
Main article: Williams tube
The Williams tube or Williams-Kilburn tube was a cathode ray tube used to electronically store binary data. It was used in computers of the 1940s as a random-access digital storage device. In contrast to other CRTs in this article, the Williams tube was not a display device, and in fact could not be viewed since a metal plate covered its screen.
Flood beam CRT[edit]
Flood beam CRT's are small tubes that are arranged as pixels for large screens like Jumbotrons. The first screen using this technology was introduced by Mitsubishi Electric for the 1980 Major League Baseball All-Star Game. It differs from a normal CRT in that the electron gun within does not produce a focused controllable beam. Instead, electrons are sprayed in a wide cone across the entire front of the phosphor screen, basically making each unit act as a single light bulb.[30] Each one is coated with a red, green or blue phosphor, to make up the color sub-pixels. This technology has largely been replaced with light emitting diode displays. A similar device has been proposed by one manufacturer as a lamp.
Zeus thin CRT display[edit]
In the late 1990s and early 2000s Philips Research Laboratories experimented with a type of thin CRT known as the Zeus display which contained CRT-like functionality in a flat panel display.[31][32][33][34][35] The devices were demonstrated but never marketed.
The future of CRT technology[edit]
Demise[edit]
Although a mainstay of display technology for decades, CRT-based computer monitors and televisions constitute a dead technology. The demand for CRT screens has dropped precipitously since 2000, and this falloff had accelerated in the latter half of that decade. The rapid advances and falling prices of LCD flat panel technology, first for computer monitors and then for televisions, has been the key factor in the demise of competing display technologies such as CRT, rear-projection, and plasma display.[36]
The end of most high-end CRT production by around 2010[37] (including high-end Sony and Mitsubishi product lines) means an erosion of the CRT's capability.[38][39] In Canada and the United States, the sale and production of high-end CRT TVs (30-inch screens) in these markets had all but ended by 2007; just a couple of years later, inexpensive combo CRT TVs (20-inch screens with an integrated VHS or DVD player) have disappeared from discount stores. It has been common to replace CRT-based televisions and monitors in as little as 5–6 years, although they generally are capable of satisfactory performance for a much longer time.
Companies are responding to this trend. Electronics retailers such as Best Buy have been steadily reducing store spaces for CRTs. In 2005, Sony announced that they would stop the production of CRT computer displays. Samsung did not introduce any CRT models for the 2008 model year at the 2008 Consumer Electronics Show and on 4 February 2008 Samsung removed their 30" wide screen CRTs from their North American website and has not replaced them with new models.[40]
The demise of CRT, however, has been happening more slowly in the developing world. According to iSupply, production in units of CRTs was not surpassed by LCDs production until 4Q 2007, owing largely to CRT production at factories in China.
In the United Kingdom, DSG (Dixons), the largest retailer of domestic electronic equipment, reported that CRT models made up 80–90% of the volume of televisions sold at Christmas 2004 and 15–20% a year later, and that they were expected to be less than 5% at the end of 2006. Dixons ceased selling CRT televisions in 2007.[41]
Causes[edit]
CRTs, despite recent advances, have remained relatively heavy and bulky and take up a lot of space in comparison to other display technologies. CRT screens have much deeper cabinets compared to flat panels and rear-projection displays for a given screen size, and so it becomes impractical to have CRTs larger than 40 inches (102&#160;cm). The CRT disadvantages became especially significant in light of rapid technological advancements in LCD and plasma flat-panels which allow them to easily surpass 40 inches (102&#160;cm) as well as being thin and wall-mountable, two key features that were increasingly being demanded by consumers.
By 2006, although the price points of CRTs were generally much lower than LCD and plasma flat panels, large screen CRTs (30-inches or more) were as expensive as a similar-sized LCD.[42]
Slimmer CRT[edit]
Some CRT manufacturers, both LG Display and Samsung Display, have innovated CRT technology by creating a slimmer tube. Slimmer CRT has a trade name Superslim and Ultraslim. A 21-inch flat CRT has 447.2 millimeter depth. The depth of Superslim is 352 millimeters and Ultraslim is 295.7 millimeters.




A comparison between 21 inch Superslim and Ultraslim CRT


Resurgence in specialized markets[edit]
In the first quarter of 2008, CRTs retook the #2 technology position in North America from plasma, due to the decline and consolidation of plasma display manufacturers. DisplaySearch has reported that although in the 4Q of 2007 LCDs surpassed CRTs in worldwide sales, CRTs then outsold LCDs in the 1Q of 2008.[43][44]
CRTs are useful for displaying photos with high pixels per unit area and correct color balance. LCDs, as currently the most common flatscreen technology, have generally inferior color rendition (despite having greater overall brightness) due to the fluorescent lights commonly used as a backlight.[45]
CRTs are still popular in the printing and broadcasting industries as well as in the professional video, photography, and graphics fields due to their greater color fidelity, contrast, and better viewing from off-axis (wider viewing angle). CRTs also still find adherents in vintage video gaming because of their higher resolution per initial cost, lowest possible input lag, fast response time, and multiple native resolutions such as 576p. Many retro gamers also prefer to use older CRTs with lower resolutions and scan rates due to the distinct scan line effect created when displaying the 240p analog signal generated by most retro consoles.[citation needed]
CRT monitors are still widely used in the study of the brain's visual processing (e.g. in psychophysics). The speed and fidelity of their response, combined with the simplicity of their design, makes them well-suited for experiments where scientists need to have very fine control over stimuli which are presented to an observer.[46]
Health concerns[edit]
Ionizing radiation[edit]
CRTs can emit a small amount of X-ray radiation as a result of the electron beam's bombardment of the shadow mask/aperture grille and phosphors. The amount of radiation escaping the front of the monitor is widely considered not to be harmful. The Food and Drug Administration regulations in 21 C.F.R. 1020.10 are used to strictly limit, for instance, television receivers to 0.5 milliroentgens per hour (mR/h) (0.13&#160;µC/(kg·h) or 36&#160;pA/kg) at a distance of 5&#160;cm (2&#160;in) from any external surface; since 2007, most CRTs have emissions that fall well below this limit.[47]
Toxicity[edit]
Older color and monochrome CRTs may contain toxic substances, such as cadmium, in the phosphors.[48][49][50] The rear glass tube of modern CRTs may be made from leaded glass, which represent an environmental hazard if disposed of improperly.[51] By the time personal computers were produced, glass in the front panel (the viewable portion of the CRT) used barium rather than lead,[citation needed] though the rear of the CRT was still produced from leaded glass. Monochrome CRTs typically do not contain enough leaded glass to fail EPA TCLP tests. While the TCLP process grinds the glass into fine particles in order to expose them to weak acids to test for leachate, intact CRT glass does not leache (The lead is vitrified, contained inside the glass itself, similar to leaded glass crystalware).
In October 2001, the United States Environmental Protection Agency created rules stating that CRTs must be brought to special recycling facilities. In November 2002, the EPA began fining companies that disposed of CRTs through landfills or incineration. Regulatory agencies, local and statewide, monitor the disposal of CRTs and other computer equipment.[52]
In Europe, disposal of CRT televisions and monitors is covered by the WEEE Directive.[53]
Flicker[edit]
Main article: Flicker (screen)
At low refresh rates (60&#160;Hz and below), the periodic scanning of the display may produce a flicker that some people perceive more easily than others, especially when viewed with peripheral vision. Flicker is commonly associated with CRT as most televisions run at 50&#160;Hz (PAL) or 60&#160;Hz (NTSC), although there are some 100&#160;Hz PAL televisions that are flicker-free. Typically only low-end monitors run at such low frequencies, with most computer monitors supporting at least 75&#160;Hz and high-end monitors capable of 100&#160;Hz or more to eliminate any perception of flicker.[54] Non-computer CRTs or CRT for sonar or radar may have long persistence phosphor and are thus flicker free. If the persistence is too long on a video display, moving images will be blurred.
High-frequency audible noise[edit]
50&#160;Hz/60&#160;Hz CRTs used for television operate with horizontal scanning frequencies of 15,734&#160;Hz (for NTSC systems) or 15,625&#160;Hz (for PAL systems).[55] These frequencies are at the upper range of human hearing and are inaudible to many people; however, some people (especially children) will perceive a high-pitched tone near an operating television CRT.[56] The sound is due to magnetostriction in the magnetic core and periodic movement of windings of the flyback transformer. This problem does not occur on 100/120&#160;Hz TVs and on non-CGA computer displays, because they are working on much higher frequencies (22&#160;kHz to &gt;100&#160;kHz) compared to the low-frequency noise (50&#160;Hz or 60&#160;Hz) of mains hum.
Implosion[edit]
High vacuum inside glass-walled cathode ray tubes permits electron beams to fly freely—without colliding into molecules of air or other gas. If the glass is damaged, atmospheric pressure can collapse the vacuum tube into dangerous fragments which accelerate inward and then spray at high speed in all directions. The implosion energy is proportional to the evacuated volume of the CRT. Although modern cathode ray tubes used in televisions and computer displays have epoxy-bonded face-plates or other measures to prevent shattering of the envelope, CRTs must be handled carefully to avoid personal injury.[57]
Security concerns[edit]
Under some circumstances, the signal radiated from the electron guns, scanning circuitry, and associated wiring of a CRT can be captured remotely and used to reconstruct what is shown on the CRT using a process called Van Eck phreaking.[58] Special TEMPEST shielding can mitigate this effect. Such radiation of a potentially exploitable signal, however, occurs also with other display technologies[59] and with electronics in general.[citation needed]
Recycling[edit]
As electronic waste, CRTs are considered one of the hardest types to recycle.[60] CRTs have relatively high concentration of lead and phosphors (not phosphorus), both of which are necessary for the display. There are several companies in the United States that charge a small fee to collect CRTs, then subsidize their labour by selling the harvested copper, wire, and printed circuit boards. The United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) includes discarded CRT monitors in its category of "hazardous household waste"[61] but considers CRTs that have been set aside for testing to be commodities if they are not discarded, speculatively accumulated, or left unprotected from weather and other damage.
Leaded CRT glass is sold to be remelted into other CRTs, or even broken down and used in road construction.[62]
Advantages and disadvantages[edit]





This article contains a pro and con list, which is sometimes inappropriate. Please help improve it by integrating both sides into a more neutral presentation, or remove this template if you feel that such a list is appropriate for this article. (November 2012)


Further information: Comparison CRT, LCD, Plasma

Pros


High contrast ratio (over 15,000:1),[63] excellent color, fairly wide color gamut and low black level.
No native resolution; the only current display technology capable of true multisyncing (displaying many different resolutions and refresh rates without the need for scaling).
No input lag.
No ghosting and smearing artifacts during fast motion due to sub-millisecond response time, and impulse-based operation.
Near zero color, saturation, contrast, or brightness distortion.
Excellent viewing angle.
Allows the use of light guns/pens.
Can be used or stored in both extreme hot and cold temperature conditions without harm to the system.[64]


Cons


Large size and weight, especially for bigger screens (a 20-inch (51&#160;cm) unit weighs about 50&#160;lb (23&#160;kg)).
Geometric distortion caused by variable beam travel distances.
High power consumption. On average, a CRT monitor consumes 2–10× the power that an identically sized LCD monitor would consume, depending on the type of backlight used in the LCD screen, and its brightness setting.[65]
A lot of heat can be emitted during operation due to relatively high power consumption, which can mean a short product lifespan.
Can suffer screen burn-in, though not as quickly as Plasma displays.[citation needed]
Produces noticeable flicker at refresh rates lower than 85&#160;Hz.
Hazardous to repair/service without proper training and precautions taken.
Maximum size for direct-view displays is limited to about 40 inches due to practical and manufacturing restrictions (a CRT display of this size can weigh about 300 pounds), though the sizing can be increased with an array of separate displays, such as the original Jumbotron used at sports arenas.
The glass envelopes contains toxic lead and barium as X-ray radiation shielding. The phosphors can also contain toxic elements such as cadmium. Many countries treat CRTs as toxic waste and prohibit their disposal in landfills or by incineration.
Purity and convergence in color tubes, affected by the Earth's magnetic field, usually roughly factory preset (biased) for operation in either the northern hemisphere, the southern hemisphere, or the equatorial area, but may require trimming at final location. Adjustment at final location requires a high degree of technical skill, as well as safety precautions associated with opening the display housing.[66]
Sensitive to magnetic interference, which can cause the image to shimmer (e.g. if a transformer or other electro-magnetic source is too close to the screen) or the colors to shift (e.g. if an unshielded speaker is too close to the screen).
Image edges are slightly diffuse (blurred), compared to the razor sharp stationary image an LCD, PDP, or other screen with fixed predefined pixels can produce. For text displays, computer-generated diagrams and line drawing, and other images composed mostly of sharp edges, razor sharp pixel definition is often preferred. However, this may be seen as an advantage for continuous-tone images such as photographic television, as it yields more natural images with no pixellation and it introduces a natural anti-aliasing effect to image information that is pixelated by its origin.
A “halo” may appear around bright objects on a mostly dark screen.
They have been phased out in favor of plasmas, LCDs and OLEDs.

See also[edit]




Electronics portal





Computer monitor
Comparison of CRT, LCD, Plasma, and OLED
Comparison of display technology
Crookes tube
CRT projector
History of display technology
Direct-view bistable storage tube
Flat panel display
Image dissector
LCD television / LED-backlit LCD display
Monitor filter
Monoscope
Overscan in Television
Penetron
Photosensitive epilepsy
Surface-conduction electron-emitter display
TCO Certification
Trinitron


References[edit]


^ a b "History of the Cathode Ray Tube". About.com. Retrieved 4 October 2009.&#160;
^ Topic 7 | The Cathode-Ray Tube. aw.com. 2003-08-01
^ repairfaq.org – Sam's Laser FAQ – Vacuum Technology for Home-Built Gas Lasers. repairfaq.org. 2012-08-02
^ a b "'How Computer Monitors Work'". Retrieved 4 October 2009.&#160;
^ Ferdinand Braun (1897) "Ueber ein Verfahren zur Demonstration und zum Studium des zeitlichen Verlaufs variabler Ströme" (On a process for the display and study of the course in time of variable currents), Annalen der Physik und Chemie, 3rd series, 60&#160;: 552-559.
^ "Cathode Ray Tube". Medical Discoveries. Advameg, Inc. 2007. Retrieved 27 April 2008.&#160;
^ Albert Abramson, Zworykin, Pioneer of Television, University of Illinois Press, 1995, p. 84. ISBN 0-252-02104-5.
^ "RCA Surrenders Rights to Four Trade-Marks," Radio Age, October 1950, p. 21.
^ Telefunken, Early Electronic TV Gallery, Early Television Foundation.
^ 1934–35 Telefunken, Television History: The First 75 Years.
^ Doebelin, Ernest (2003). Measurement Systems. McGraw Hill Professional. p.&#160;972. ISBN&#160;978-0-07-292201-1.&#160;
^ Shionoya, Shigeo (1999). Phosphor handbook. CRC Press. p.&#160;499. ISBN&#160;978-0-8493-7560-6.&#160;
^ Williams, Jim (1991). Analog circuit design: art, science, and personalities. Newnes. pp.&#160;115–116. ISBN&#160;978-0-7506-9640-1.&#160;
^ Yen, William M.; Shionoya, Shigeo and Yamamoto, Hajime (2006). Practical Applications of Phosphors. CRC Press. p.&#160;211. ISBN&#160;978-1-4200-4369-3.&#160;
^ Bakshi, U.A. and Godse, A.P. (2008). Electronic Devices And Circuits. Technical Publications. p.&#160;38. ISBN&#160;978-81-8431-332-1.&#160;
^ Hickman, Ian (2001). Oscilloscopes: how to use them, how they work. Newnes. p.&#160;47. ISBN&#160;978-0-7506-4757-1.&#160;
^ The Great Soviet Encyclopedia, 3rd Edition (1970–1979)
^ a b "How CRT and LCD monitors work". bit-tech.net. Retrieved 4 October 2009.&#160;
^ a b "The Shadow Mask and Aperture Grill". PC Guide.&#160;
^ Norton, Thomas J. (March 2005). "Picture This". UltimateAVmag.com. Archived from the original on 2009-11-26.&#160;
^ "Magnetization and Degaussing". Retrieved 4 October 2009.&#160;
^ Van Burnham (2001). Supercade: A Visual History of the Videogame Age, 1971–1984. MIT Press. ISBN&#160;0-262-52420-1.&#160;
^ "Moiré Interference Patterns". DisplayMate Technologies website. Retrieved 4 October 2009.&#160;
^ "What causes the faint horizontal lines on my monitor?". HowStuffWorks. Retrieved 4 October 2009.&#160;
^ Robin, Michael (1 January 2005). "Gamma correction". BroadcastEngineering. Archived from the original on 31 May 2009. Retrieved 4 October 2009.&#160;
^ "Tuning-Eye Tubes". vacuumtube.com. Archived from the original on 23 April 2009. Retrieved 1 December 2009.&#160;
^ "CATHODE RAY APPARATUS". Retrieved 4 October 2009.&#160;
^ "INPUT". Retrieved 4 October 2009.&#160;
^ "IEE Nimo CRT 10-gun readout tube datasheet" (PDF). tube-tester.com. Retrieved 1 December 2009.&#160;
^ "Futaba TL-3508XA 'Jumbotron' Display". The Vintage Technology Association: Military Industrial Electronics Research Preservation. The Vintage Technology Association. 2010-03-11. Retrieved 2014-12-19.&#160;
^ Beeteson, John Stuart (21 November 1998). "US Patent 6246165 – Magnetic channel cathode". Archived from the original on 9 January 2015.&#160;
^ Van Hal, Henricus A. M.; et al. (18 May 1990). "US Patent 5905336 – Method of manufacturing a glass substrate coated with a metal oxide".&#160;
^ Van Gorkom, G.G.P. (1996). "Introduction to Zeus displays". Philips Journal of Research 50 (3–4): 269. doi:10.1016/S0165-5817(97)84675-X.&#160;
^ Lambert, N.; Montie, E.A.; Baller, T.S.; Van Gorkom, G.G.P.; Hendriks, B.H.W.; Trompenaars, P.H.F.; De Zwart, S.T. (1996). "Transport and extraction in Zeus displays". Philips Journal of Research 50 (3–4): 295. doi:10.1016/S0165-5817(97)84677-3.&#160;
^ Doyle, T.; Van Asma, C.; McCormack, J.; De Greef, D.; Haighton, V.; Heijnen, P.; Looymans, M.; Van Velzen, J. (1996). "The application and system aspects of the Zeus display". Philips Journal of Research 50 (3–4): 501. doi:10.1016/S0165-5817(97)84688-8.&#160;
^ Wong, May (22 October 2006). "Flat Panels Drive Old TVs From Market". AP via USA Today. Retrieved 8 October 2008.&#160;
^ "The Standard TV" (PDF). Veritas et Visus. Retrieved 12 June 2008.&#160;
^ "End of an era". The San Diego Union-Tribune. 20 January 2006. Retrieved 12 June 2008.&#160;
^ "Matsushita says good-bye to CRTs". engadgetHD. 1 December 2005. Retrieved 12 June 2008.&#160;[dead link]
^ "SlimFit HDTV". Samsung. Archived from the original on 10 January 2008. Retrieved 12 June 2008.&#160;
^ "The future is flat as Dixons withdraws sale of 'big box' televisions". London Evening Standard. 26 November 2006. Retrieved 3 December 2006.&#160;
^ Wong, May (22 October 2006). "Flat panels drive old TVs from market". USA Today.&#160;
^ "Worldwide LCD TV shipments surpass CRTs for first time ever". engadgetHD. 19 February 2008. Retrieved 12 June 2008.&#160;[dead link]
^ "LCD outsells plasma 8-to-1 in Q1 2008". engadgetHD. 22 May 2008. Retrieved 12 June 2008.&#160;[dead link]
^ "X-bit's Guide: Contemporary LCD Monitor Parameters and Characteristics (page 11)". Retrieved 4 October 2009.&#160;
^ LRZ: Der URL ist umgezogen[dead link]. Lrz.de. Retrieved on 26 August 2013. Archived October 8, 2013 at the Wayback Machine[dead link]
^ "SUBCHAPTER J—RADIOLOGICAL HEALTH (21CFR1020.10)". U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 1 April 2006. Retrieved 13 August 2007.&#160;
^ "Toxic TVs". Electronics TakeBack Coalition. Archived from the original on 27 February 2009. Retrieved 13 April 2010.&#160;
^ Peters-Michaud, Neil; Katers, John and Barry, Jim. "Occupational Risks Associated with Electronics Demanufacturing and CRT Glass Processing Operations and the Impact of Mitigation Activities on Employee Safety and Health" (PDF). Cascade Asset Management, LLC. Basel Action Network. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 July 2011. Retrieved 20 January 2011.&#160;
^ "Cadmium". American Elements. Retrieved 13 April 2010.&#160;
^ "CHARACTERIZATION OF LEAD LEACHABILITY FROM CATHODE RAY TUBES USING THE TOXICITY CHARACTERISTIC LEACHING PROCEDURE (TCLP)" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 September 2013. Retrieved 4 October 2009.&#160;
^ "Final Rules on Cathode Ray Tubes and Discarded Mercury-Containing Equipment". Retrieved 4 October 2009.&#160;
^ "WEEE and CRT Processing". Retrieved 4 October 2009.&#160;
^ "CRT Monitor Flickering?". Retrieved 4 October 2009.&#160;
^ Netravali, Arun N.; Haskell, Barry G. (1995). Digital pictures: representation, compression, and standards. Plenum Publishing Corporation. p.&#160;100. ISBN&#160;978-0-306-44917-8.&#160;
^ "The monitor is producing a high-pitched whine". Retrieved 4 October 2009.&#160;
^ Bali, S.P. (1994). Colour Television: Theory and Practice. Tata McGraw–Hill. p.&#160;129. ISBN&#160;978-0-07-460024-5.&#160;
^ "Electromagnetic Radiation from Video Display Units: An Eavesdropping Risk?" (PDF). Retrieved 4 October 2009.&#160;
^ Kuhn, M.G. (2004). "Electromagnetic Eavesdropping Risks of Flat-Panel Displays" (PDF). 4th Workshop on Privacy Enhancing Technologies: 23–25.&#160;
^ WEEE: CRT and Monitor Recycling. Executiveblueprints.com (2 August 2009). Retrieved on 26 August 2013.
^ Morgan, Russell (21 August 2006). "Tips and Tricks for Recycling Old Computers". SmartBiz. Retrieved 17 March 2009.&#160;
^ Weitzman, David. The CRT Dilemma: Cathode Ray Tube Or Cruel Rude Trash. RRT Design &amp; Construction
^ Soneira, Raymond M. Display "Technology Shoot-Out: Comparing CRT, LCD, Plasma and DLP Displays", DisplayMate Technologies.
^ No CRT data sheet bothers to mention min or max temperature because any temperature limit usually comes from other parts of the assembly. For example: "Typical high end Oscilloscope tube"
^ Tom's Hardware: Power Consumption Benchmark Results for CRT versus TFT LCD "Benchmark Results: Different Brightness Testing"
^ "Monitors: Earth's Magnetic Field Affects Performance". Apple Support Knowledgebase. Apple. Retrieved 21 June 2012.&#160;


Selected patents[edit]

U.S. Patent 1,691,324: Zworykin Television System

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Cathode ray tube.



Electromagnetic Deflection in a Cathode Ray Tube, Part 1 Interactive tutorial from the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory
Electromagnetic Deflection in a Cathode Ray Tube, Part 2 Interactive tutorial from the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory
The Cathode Ray Tube site
PCTechGuide: Cathode Ray Tubes
CRTs at the Virtual Valve Museum
Samuel M. Goldwasser TV and Monitor CRT (Picture Tube) Information









v
t
e


Display technology






Video displays





Current generation




Eidophor
Electroluminescent display (ELD)
Electronic paper

E Ink
Gyricon


Light emitting diode display (LED)
Cathode ray tube (CRT) (Monoscope)
Liquid-crystal display (LCD)

TFT
TN
LED
Blue Phase
IPS


Plasma display panel (PDP)

ALiS


Digital Light Processing (DLP)
Liquid crystal on silicon (LCoS)









Next generation




Organic light-emitting diode (OLED)

AMOLED


Organic light-emitting transistor (OLET)
Surface-conduction electron-emitter display (SED)
Field emission display (FED)
Laser TV

Quantum dot
Liquid crystal


MEMS display

IMoD
TMOS
DMS


Quantum dot display (QD-LED)
Ferro liquid display (FLD)
Thick-film dielectric electroluminescent technology (TDEL)
Telescopic pixel display (TPD)
Laser-powered phosphor display (LPD)











Non-video



Electromechanical

Flip-dot
Split-flap
Vane


Electronic paper
Eggcrate
Nixie tube
Vacuum fluorescent display (VFD)
Light-emitting electrochemical cell (LEC)
Lightguide display
Dot-matrix display
Seven-segment display (SSD)
Fourteen-segment display (FSD)
Sixteen-segment display (SISD)








3D display



Stereoscopic
Autostereoscopic
Multiscopic
Hologram

Holographic display
Computer-generated holography


Volumetric
Multi-layer
Musion Eyeliner
Fog display








Static media



Movie projector
Neon sign
Destination sign
Slide projector
Transparency
Laser beam








Related articles



History of display technology
Large-screen television technology
Optimum HDTV viewing distance
High-dynamic-range imaging (HDRI)
Color Light Output
Flexible display









Comparison of display technology














v
t
e


Electronic components






Semiconductor devices



Avalanche diode
Bipolar junction transistor (BJT)
Darlington transistor
DIAC
Diode
Field-effect transistor (FET)
Heterostructure barrier varactor
Insulated-gate bipolar transistor (IGBT)
Integrated circuit (IC)
JFET
Light-emitting diode (LED)
Memistor
Memristor
MOSFET
Photodetector
Photodiode
PIN diode
Schottky diode
Silicon-controlled rectifier (SCR)
Thyristor
Transistor
TRIAC
Unijunction transistor (UJT)
Varicap
Zener diode








Voltage regulators



Linear regulator
Low-dropout regulator
Switching regulator
Buck
Boost
Buck-boost
Split-pi
Ćuk
SEPIC
Charge pump
Switched capacitor








Vacuum tubes



Audion
Beam tetrode
Barretter
Compactron
Diode
Fleming valve
Heptode
Hexode
Nonode
Nuvistor
Octode
Pentagrid
Pentode
Photomultiplier
Selectron tube
Tetrode
Triode
Williams tube








Vacuum tubes (RF)



Backward-wave oscillator (BWO)
Cavity magnetron
Crossed-field amplifier (CFA)
Gyrotron
Inductive output tube (IOT)
Klystron
Maser
Phototube
Traveling-wave tube (TWT)








Cathode ray tubes



Beam deflection tube
Charactron
Iconoscope
Magic eye tube
Monoscope
Storage tube
Video camera tube








Gas-filled tubes



Cold cathode
Crossatron
Dekatron
Geiger–Müller tube
Ignitron
Krytron
Mercury-arc valve
Neon lamp
Nixie tube
Thyratron
Trigatron
Voltage-regulator tube








Adjustable



Potentiometer
Variable capacitor








Passive



Connector

Audio and video
Electrical power
RF


Electrolytic detector
Ferrite
Fuse

resettable


Resistor
Thermistor
Transformer
Varistor
Wollaston wire








Reactive



Capacitor (types)
Ceramic resonator
Crystal oscillator
Inductor
Relay Switches (Reed relay, Mercury switch)
















v
t
e


Thermionic valves






Theoretical principles



Thermionic emission
Work function
Hot cathode
Space charge
Control grid
Suppressor grid
Anode
Glowing anode
Getter








Types



Diode
Audion
Triode
Acorn tube
Nuvistor
Tetrode
Beam tetrode
Pentode
Pentagrid (Hexode, Heptode, Octode)
Nonode
Cathode ray tube
Beam deflection tube
Charactron
Compactron
Eidophor
Iconoscope
Kinescope
Klystron
Magic eye tube
Magnetron
Monoscope
Phototube
Photomultiplier
Selectron tube
Storage tube
Talaria projector
Traveling-wave tube
Trochotron
Video camera tube
Williams tube
Fleming valve








Numbering systems



RMA
RETMA
Marconi-Osram
Mullard–Philips
JIS
Russian








Examples



List of vacuum tubes
List of tube sockets













Authority control



GND: 4151899-8
NDL: 00560921















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cathode_ray_tube&amp;oldid=690704870"					
				Categories: Cathode ray tubeTelevision technologyVacuum tube displaysDisplay technology1897 introductionsHidden categories: All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from October 2015Use dmy dates from August 2013All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from January 2011Articles with unsourced statements from June 2015Articles with unsourced statements from February 2014Articles with unsourced statements from September 2010Wikipedia articles needing style editing from November 2012Articles containing pro and con listsArticles with unsourced statements from March 2013Commons category with local link same as on WikidataWikipedia articles with GND identifiers				
							
		
		
			Navigation menu

			
									
						Personal tools
						
							Create accountLog in						
					
									
										
						Namespaces
						
															Article
															Talk
													
					
										
												
							Variants
						

						
							
															
						
					
									
				
										
						Views
						
															Read
															Edit
															View history
													
					
										
						More

						
							
															
						
					
										
						
							Search
						

						
							
														
						
					
									
			
			
				
						
			Navigation

			
									
						Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store					
							
		
			
			Interaction

			
									
						HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page					
							
		
			
			Tools

			
									
						What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page					
							
		
			
			Print/export

			
									
						Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version					
							
		
			
			Languages

			
									
						AlemannischالعربيةবাংলাБеларускаяБеларуская (тарашкевіца)‎БългарскиBosanskiBrezhonegCatalàČeštinaDanskDeutschEestiΕλληνικάEspañolEsperantoفارسیFrançaisGaeilgeGalego한국어Հայերենहिन्दीHrvatskiBahasa IndonesiaÍslenskaItalianoעבריתKreyòl ayisyenKurdîLatviešuLietuviųMagyarമലയാളംBahasa MelayuNederlands日本語Norsk bokmålPolskiPortuguêsRomânăРусскийSimple EnglishSlovenčinaSlovenščinaСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSuomiSvenskaதமிழ்ไทยУкраїнськаTiếng Việt中文					
				Edit links			
		
				
		
		
							
											 This page was last modified on 15 November 2015, at 03:06.
											Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
									
							
											Privacy policy
											About Wikipedia
											Disclaimers
											Contact Wikipedia
											Developers
											