


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Computer vision
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				







This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page.








This article includes a list of references, but its sources remain unclear because it has insufficient inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (July 2014)







This article possibly contains original research. Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations. Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. (July 2014)








Computer vision is a field that includes methods for acquiring, processing, analyzing, and understanding images and, in general, high-dimensional data from the real world in order to produce numerical or symbolic information, e.g., in the forms of decisions.[1][2][3][4] A theme in the development of this field has been to duplicate the abilities of human vision by electronically perceiving and understanding an image.[5] Understanding in this context means the transformation of visual images (the input of retina) into descriptions of world that can interface with other thought processes and elicit appropriate action. This image understanding can be seen as the disentangling of symbolic information from image data using models constructed with the aid of geometry, physics, statistics, and learning theory.[6] Computer vision has also been described as the enterprise of automating and integrating a wide range of processes and representations for vision perception.[7]
As a scientific discipline, computer vision is concerned with the theory behind artificial systems that extract information from images. The image data can take many forms, such as video sequences, views from multiple cameras, or multi-dimensional data from a medical scanner. As a technological discipline, computer vision seeks to apply its theories and models to the construction of computer vision systems.
Sub-domains of computer vision include scene reconstruction, event detection, video tracking, object recognition, object pose estimation, learning, indexing, motion estimation, and image restoration.



Contents


1 Related fields
2 Applications for computer vision
3 Representational and control requirements
4 Typical tasks of computer vision

4.1 Recognition
4.2 Motion analysis
4.3 Scene reconstruction
4.4 Image restoration


5 Computer vision system methods
6 Computer vision hardware
7 See also
8 References
9 Further reading
10 External links



Related fields[edit]




Relation between computer vision and various other fields[original research?]


Areas of artificial intelligence deal with autonomous planning or deliberation for robotical systems to navigate through an environment. A detailed understanding of these environments is required to navigate through them. Information about the environment could be provided by a computer vision system, acting as a vision sensor and providing high-level information about the environment and the robot.
Artificial intelligence and computer vision share other topics such as pattern recognition and learning techniques. Consequently, computer vision is sometimes seen as a part of the artificial intelligence field or the computer science field in general.
Solid-state physics is another field that is closely related to computer vision. Most computer vision systems rely on image sensors, which detect electromagnetic radiation which is typically in the form of either visible or infra-red light. The sensors are designed using quantum physics. The process by which light interacts with surfaces is explained using physics. Physics explains the behavior of optics which are a core part of most imaging systems. Sophisticated image sensors even require quantum mechanics to provide a complete understanding of the image formation process. Also, various measurement problems in physics can be addressed using computer vision, for example motion in fluids.
A third field which plays an important role is neurobiology, specifically the study of the biological vision system. Over the last century, there has been an extensive study of eyes, neurons, and the brain structures devoted to processing of visual stimuli in both humans and various animals. This has led to a coarse, yet complicated, description of how "real" vision systems operate in order to solve certain vision related tasks. These results have led to a subfield within computer vision where artificial systems are designed to mimic the processing and behavior of biological systems, at different levels of complexity. Also, some of the learning-based methods developed within computer vision (e.g. neural net and deep learning based image and feature analysis and classification) have their background in biology.
Some strands of computer vision research are closely related to the study of biological vision – indeed, just as many strands of AI research are closely tied with research into human consciousness, and the use of stored knowledge to interpret, integrate and utilize visual information. The field of biological vision studies and models the physiological processes behind visual perception in humans and other animals. Computer vision, on the other hand, studies and describes the processes implemented in software and hardware behind artificial vision systems. Interdisciplinary exchange between biological and computer vision has proven fruitful for both fields.
Yet another field related to computer vision is signal processing. Many methods for processing of one-variable signals, typically temporal signals, can be extended in a natural way to processing of two-variable signals or multi-variable signals in computer vision. However, because of the specific nature of images there are many methods developed within computer vision which have no counterpart in processing of one-variable signals. Together with the multi-dimensionality of the signal, this defines a subfield in signal processing as a part of computer vision.
Beside the above-mentioned views on computer vision, many of the related research topics can also be studied from a purely mathematical point of view. For example, many methods in computer vision are based on statistics, optimization or geometry. Finally, a significant part of the field is devoted to the implementation aspect of computer vision; how existing methods can be realized in various combinations of software and hardware, or how these methods can be modified in order to gain processing speed without losing too much performance.
The fields most closely related to computer vision are image processing, image analysis and machine vision. There is a significant overlap in the range of techniques and applications that these cover. This implies that the basic techniques that are used and developed in these fields are more or less identical, something which can be interpreted as there is only one field with different names. On the other hand, it appears to be necessary for research groups, scientific journals, conferences and companies to present or market themselves as belonging specifically to one of these fields and, hence, various characterizations which distinguish each of the fields from the others have been presented.
Computer vision is, in some ways, the inverse of computer graphics. While computer graphics produces image data from 3D models, computer vision often produces 3D models from image data. There is also a trend towards a combination of the two disciplines, e.g., as explored in augmented reality.
The following characterizations appear relevant but should not be taken as universally accepted:

Image processing and image analysis tend to focus on 2D images, how to transform one image to another, e.g., by pixel-wise operations such as contrast enhancement, local operations such as edge extraction or noise removal, or geometrical transformations such as rotating the image. This characterization implies that image processing/analysis neither require assumptions nor produce interpretations about the image content.
Computer vision includes 3D analysis from 2D images. This analyzes the 3D scene projected onto one or several images, e.g., how to reconstruct structure or other information about the 3D scene from one or several images. Computer vision often relies on more or less complex assumptions about the scene depicted in an image.
Machine vision is the process of applying a range of technologies &amp; methods to provide imaging-based automatic inspection, process control and robot guidance[8] in industrial applications.[9] Machine vision tends to focus on applications, mainly in manufacturing, e.g., vision based autonomous robots and systems for vision based inspection or measurement. This implies that image sensor technologies and control theory often are integrated with the processing of image data to control a robot and that real-time processing is emphasised by means of efficient implementations in hardware and software. It also implies that the external conditions such as lighting can be and are often more controlled in machine vision than they are in general computer vision, which can enable the use of different algorithms.
There is also a field called imaging which primarily focus on the process of producing images, but sometimes also deals with processing and analysis of images. For example, medical imaging includes substantial work on the analysis of image data in medical applications.
Finally, pattern recognition is a field which uses various methods to extract information from signals in general, mainly based on statistical approaches and artificial neural networks. A significant part of this field is devoted to applying these methods to image data.

Photogrammetry also overlaps with computer vision, e.g., stereophotogrammetry vs. stereo computer vision.
Applications for computer vision[edit]
Applications range from tasks such as industrial machine vision systems which, say, inspect bottles speeding by on a production line, to research into artificial intelligence and computers or robots that can comprehend the world around them. The computer vision and machine vision fields have significant overlap. Computer vision covers the core technology of automated image analysis which is used in many fields. Machine vision usually refers to a process of combining automated image analysis with other methods and technologies to provide automated inspection and robot guidance in industrial applications. In many computer vision applications, the computers are pre-programmed to solve a particular task, but methods based on learning are now becoming increasingly common. Examples of applications of computer vision include systems for:

Controlling processes, e.g., an industrial robot;
Navigation, e.g., by an autonomous vehicle or mobile robot;
Detecting events, e.g., for visual surveillance or people counting;
Organizing information, e.g., for indexing databases of images and image sequences;
Modeling objects or environments, e.g., medical image analysis or topographical modeling;
Interaction, e.g., as the input to a device for computer-human interaction, and
Automatic inspection, e.g., in manufacturing applications.



Play media


DARPA's Visual Media Reasoning concept video


One of the most prominent application fields is medical computer vision or medical image processing. This area is characterized by the extraction of information from image data for the purpose of making a medical diagnosis of a patient. Generally, image data is in the form of microscopy images, X-ray images, angiography images, ultrasonic images, and tomography images. An example of information which can be extracted from such image data is detection of tumours, arteriosclerosis or other malign changes. It can also be measurements of organ dimensions, blood flow, etc. This application area also supports medical research by providing new information, e.g., about the structure of the brain, or about the quality of medical treatments. Applications of computer vision in the medical area also includes enhancement of images that are interpreted by humans, for example ultrasonic images or X-ray images, to reduce the influence of noise.
A second application area in computer vision is in industry, sometimes called machine vision, where information is extracted for the purpose of supporting a manufacturing process. One example is quality control where details or final products are being automatically inspected in order to find defects. Another example is measurement of position and orientation of details to be picked up by a robot arm. Machine vision is also heavily used in agricultural process to remove undesirable food stuff from bulk material, a process called optical sorting.
Military applications are probably one of the largest areas for computer vision. The obvious examples are detection of enemy soldiers or vehicles and missile guidance. More advanced systems for missile guidance send the missile to an area rather than a specific target, and target selection is made when the missile reaches the area based on locally acquired image data. Modern military concepts, such as "battlefield awareness", imply that various sensors, including image sensors, provide a rich set of information about a combat scene which can be used to support strategic decisions. In this case, automatic processing of the data is used to reduce complexity and to fuse information from multiple sensors to increase reliability.




Artist's Concept of Rover on Mars, an example of an unmanned land-based vehicle. Notice the stereo cameras mounted on top of the Rover.


One of the newer application areas is autonomous vehicles, which include submersibles, land-based vehicles (small robots with wheels, cars or trucks), aerial vehicles, and unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV). The level of autonomy ranges from fully autonomous (unmanned) vehicles to vehicles where computer vision based systems support a driver or a pilot in various situations. Fully autonomous vehicles typically use computer vision for navigation, i.e. for knowing where it is, or for producing a map of its environment (SLAM) and for detecting obstacles. It can also be used for detecting certain task specific events, e.g., a UAV looking for forest fires. Examples of supporting systems are obstacle warning systems in cars, and systems for autonomous landing of aircraft. Several car manufacturers have demonstrated systems for autonomous driving of cars, but this technology has still not reached a level where it can be put on the market. There are ample examples of military autonomous vehicles ranging from advanced missiles, to UAVs for recon missions or missile guidance. Space exploration is already being made with autonomous vehicles using computer vision, e.g., NASA's Mars Exploration Rover and ESA's ExoMars Rover.
Other application areas include:

Support of visual effects creation for cinema and broadcast, e.g., camera tracking (matchmoving).
Surveillance.

Representational and control requirements[edit]
Image-understanding systems include three levels of abstraction as follows: Low level includes image primitives such as edges, texture elements, or regions; intermediate level includes boundaries, surfaces and volumes; and high level includes objects, scenes, or events. Many of these requirements are really topics for further research.
The representational requirements in the designing of IUS for these levels are: representation of prototypical concepts, concept organization, spatial knowledge, temporal knowledge, scaling, and description by comparison and differentiation.
While inference refers to the process of deriving new, not explicitly represented facts from currently known facts, control refers to the process that selects which of the many inference, search, and matching techniques should be applied at a particular stage of processing. Inference and control requirements for IUS are: search and hypothesis activation, matching and hypothesis testing, generation and use of expectations, change and focus of attention, certainty and strength of belief, inference and goal satisfaction.[10]
Typical tasks of computer vision[edit]
Each of the application areas described above employ a range of computer vision tasks; more or less well-defined measurement problems or processing problems, which can be solved using a variety of methods. Some examples of typical computer vision tasks are presented below.
Recognition[edit]
The classical problem in computer vision, image processing, and machine vision is that of determining whether or not the image data contains some specific object, feature, or activity. Different varieties of the recognition problem are described in the literature:

Object recognition (also called object classification)&#160;– one or several pre-specified or learned objects or object classes can be recognized, usually together with their 2D positions in the image or 3D poses in the scene. Google Goggles or LikeThat provide a stand-alone programs that illustrate this function.
Identification&#160;– an individual instance of an object is recognized. Examples include identification of a specific person's face or fingerprint, identification of handwritten digits, or identification of a specific vehicle.
Detection&#160;– the image data are scanned for a specific condition. Examples include detection of possible abnormal cells or tissues in medical images or detection of a vehicle in an automatic road toll system. Detection based on relatively simple and fast computations is sometimes used for finding smaller regions of interesting image data which can be further analyzed by more computationally demanding techniques to produce a correct interpretation.

Currently, the best algorithms for such tasks are based on convolutional neural networks. An illustration of their capabilities is given by the ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge; this is a benchmark in object classification and detection, with millions of images and hundreds of object classes. Performance of convolutional neural networks, on the ImageNet tests, is now close to that of humans.[11] The best algorithms still struggle with objects that are small or thin, such as a small ant on a stem of a flower or a person holding a quill in their hand. They also have trouble with images that have been distorted with filters (an increasingly common phenomenon with modern digital cameras). By contrast, those kinds of images rarely trouble humans. Humans, however, tend to have trouble with other issues. For example, they are not good at classifying objects into fine-grained classes, such as the particular breed of dog or species of bird, whereas convolutional neural networks handle this with ease.
Several specialized tasks based on recognition exist, such as:

Content-based image retrieval&#160;– finding all images in a larger set of images which have a specific content. The content can be specified in different ways, for example in terms of similarity relative a target image (give me all images similar to image X), or in terms of high-level search criteria given as text input (give me all images which contains many houses, are taken during winter, and have no cars in them).





Computer vision for people counter purposes in public places, malls, shopping centres



Pose estimation&#160;– estimating the position or orientation of a specific object relative to the camera. An example application for this technique would be assisting a robot arm in retrieving objects from a conveyor belt in an assembly line situation or picking parts from a bin.
Optical character recognition (OCR)&#160;– identifying characters in images of printed or handwritten text, usually with a view to encoding the text in a format more amenable to editing or indexing (e.g. ASCII).
2D Code reading Reading of 2D codes such as data matrix and QR codes.
Facial recognition
Shape Recognition Technology (SRT) in people counter systems differentiating human beings (head and shoulder patterns) from objects

Motion analysis[edit]
Several tasks relate to motion estimation where an image sequence is processed to produce an estimate of the velocity either at each points in the image or in the 3D scene, or even of the camera that produces the images . Examples of such tasks are:

Egomotion&#160;– determining the 3D rigid motion (rotation and translation) of the camera from an image sequence produced by the camera.
Tracking&#160;– following the movements of a (usually) smaller set of interest points or objects (e.g., vehicles or humans) in the image sequence.
Optical flow&#160;– to determine, for each point in the image, how that point is moving relative to the image plane, i.e., its apparent motion. This motion is a result both of how the corresponding 3D point is moving in the scene and how the camera is moving relative to the scene.

Scene reconstruction[edit]
Given one or (typically) more images of a scene, or a video, scene reconstruction aims at computing a 3D model of the scene. In the simplest case the model can be a set of 3D points. More sophisticated methods produce a complete 3D surface model. The advent of 3D imaging not requiring motion or scanning, and related processing algorithms is enabling rapid advances in this field. Grid-based 3D sensing can be used to acquire 3D images from multiple angles. Algorithms are now available to stitch multiple 3D images together into point clouds and 3D models.
Image restoration[edit]
The aim of image restoration is the removal of noise (sensor noise, motion blur, etc.) from images. The simplest possible approach for noise removal is various types of filters such as low-pass filters or median filters. More sophisticated methods assume a model of how the local image structures look like, a model which distinguishes them from the noise. By first analysing the image data in terms of the local image structures, such as lines or edges, and then controlling the filtering based on local information from the analysis step, a better level of noise removal is usually obtained compared to the simpler approaches.
An example in this field is inpainting.
Computer vision system methods[edit]
The organization of a computer vision system is highly application dependent. Some systems are stand-alone applications which solve a specific measurement or detection problem, while others constitute a sub-system of a larger design which, for example, also contains sub-systems for control of mechanical actuators, planning, information databases, man-machine interfaces, etc. The specific implementation of a computer vision system also depends on if its functionality is pre-specified or if some part of it can be learned or modified during operation. Many functions are unique to the application. There are, however, typical functions which are found in many computer vision systems.

Image acquisition&#160;– A digital image is produced by one or several image sensors, which, besides various types of light-sensitive cameras, include range sensors, tomography devices, radar, ultra-sonic cameras, etc. Depending on the type of sensor, the resulting image data is an ordinary 2D image, a 3D volume, or an image sequence. The pixel values typically correspond to light intensity in one or several spectral bands (gray images or colour images), but can also be related to various physical measures, such as depth, absorption or reflectance of sonic or electromagnetic waves, or nuclear magnetic resonance.[12]
Pre-processing&#160;– Before a computer vision method can be applied to image data in order to extract some specific piece of information, it is usually necessary to process the data in order to assure that it satisfies certain assumptions implied by the method. Examples are

Re-sampling in order to assure that the image coordinate system is correct.
Noise reduction in order to assure that sensor noise does not introduce false information.
Contrast enhancement to assure that relevant information can be detected.
Scale space representation to enhance image structures at locally appropriate scales.


Feature extraction&#160;– Image features at various levels of complexity are extracted from the image data.[12] Typical examples of such features are

Lines, edges and ridges.
Localized interest points such as corners, blobs or points.




More complex features may be related to texture, shape or motion.


Detection/segmentation&#160;– At some point in the processing a decision is made about which image points or regions of the image are relevant for further processing.[12] Examples are

Selection of a specific set of interest points
Segmentation of one or multiple image regions which contain a specific object of interest.


High-level processing&#160;– At this step the input is typically a small set of data, for example a set of points or an image region which is assumed to contain a specific object.[12] The remaining processing deals with, for example:

Verification that the data satisfy model-based and application specific assumptions.
Estimation of application specific parameters, such as object pose or object size.
Image recognition&#160;– classifying a detected object into different categories.
Image registration&#160;– comparing and combining two different views of the same object.


Decision making Making the final decision required for the application,[12] for example:

Pass/fail on automatic inspection applications
Match / no-match in recognition applications
Flag for further human review in medical, military, security and recognition applications



Computer vision hardware[edit]
There are many kinds of computer vision systems, nevertheless all of them contain these basic elements: a power source, at least one image acquisition device (i.e. camera, ccd, etc.), a processor as well as control and communication cables or some kind of wireless interconnection mechanism. In addition, a practical vision system contains software, as well as a display in order to monitor the system. Vision systems for inner spaces, as most industrial ones, contain an illumination system and may be placed in a controlled environment. Furthermore, a completed system includes many accessories like camera supports, cables and connectors.
See also[edit]

AI effect
Applications of artificial intelligence
Machine vision glossary
Artificial neural networks
Convolutional neural network
Deep Learning


Lists


List of computer vision topics
List of emerging technologies
Outline of artificial intelligence

References[edit]


^ Reinhard Klette (2014). Concise Computer Vision. Springer. ISBN&#160;978-1-4471-6320-6.&#160;
^ Linda G. Shapiro and George C. Stockman (2001). Computer Vision. Prentice Hall. ISBN&#160;0-13-030796-3.&#160;
^ Tim Morris (2004). Computer Vision and Image Processing. Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN&#160;0-333-99451-5.&#160;
^ Bernd Jähne and Horst Haußecker (2000). Computer Vision and Applications, A Guide for Students and Practitioners. Academic Press. ISBN&#160;0-13-085198-1.&#160;
^ Milan Sonka, Vaclav Hlavac and Roger Boyle (2008). Image Processing, Analysis, and Machine Vision. Thomson. ISBN&#160;0-495-08252-X.&#160;
^ David A. Forsyth and Jean Ponce (2003). Computer Vision, A Modern Approach. Prentice Hall. ISBN&#160;0-13-085198-1.&#160;
^ Dana H. Ballard and Christopher M. Brown (1982). Computer Vision. Prentice Hall. ISBN&#160;0-13-165316-4.&#160;
^ Turek, Fred (June 2011). "Machine Vision Fundamentals, How to Make Robots See". NASA Tech Briefs magazine 35 (6).&#160; pages 60–62
^ Steger, Carsten, Markus Ulrich, and Christian Wiedemann (2008). Machine Vision Algorithms and Applications. Weinheim: Wiley-VCH. p.&#160;1. ISBN&#160;978-3-527-40734-7. Retrieved 2010-11-05.&#160;
^ Shapiro, Stuart C. (1992). Encyclopedia of Artificial Intelligence, Volume 1. New York: John WIley &amp; Sons, Inc. pp.&#160;643–646. ISBN&#160;0-471-50306-1.&#160;
^ O. Russakovsky et al., "ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge", 2014.
^ a b c d e E. Roy Davies (2005). Machine Vision: Theory, Algorithms, Practicalities. Morgan Kaufmann. ISBN&#160;0-12-206093-8.&#160;


Further reading[edit]

David Marr (1982). Vision. W. H. Freeman and Company. ISBN&#160;0-7167-1284-9.&#160;
Azriel Rosenfeld and Avinash Kak (1982). Digital Picture Processing. Academic Press. ISBN&#160;0-12-597301-2.&#160;
Barghout, Lauren, and Lawrence W. Lee (2003). Perceptual information processing system. U.S. Patent Application 10/618,543. ISBN&#160;0-262-08159-8.&#160;
Berthold Klaus Paul Horn (1986). Robot Vision. MIT Press. ISBN&#160;0-262-08159-8.&#160;
Olivier Faugeras (1993). Three-Dimensional Computer Vision, A Geometric Viewpoint. MIT Press. ISBN&#160;0-262-06158-9.&#160;
Tony Lindeberg (1994). Scale-Space Theory in Computer Vision. Springer. ISBN&#160;0-7923-9418-6.&#160;
James L. Crowley and Henrik I. Christensen (Eds.) (1995). Vision as Process. Springer-Verlag. ISBN&#160;3-540-58143-X.&#160;
Gösta H. Granlund and Hans Knutsson (1995). Signal Processing for Computer Vision. Kluwer Academic Publisher. ISBN&#160;0-7923-9530-1.&#160;
Reinhard Klette, Karsten Schluens and Andreas Koschan (1998). Computer Vision – Three-Dimensional Data from Images. Springer, Singapore. ISBN&#160;981-3083-71-9.&#160;
Emanuele Trucco and Alessandro Verri (1998). Introductory Techniques for 3-D Computer Vision. Prentice Hall. ISBN&#160;0-13-261108-2.&#160;
Bernd Jähne (2002). Digital Image Processing. Springer. ISBN&#160;3-540-67754-2.&#160;
Richard Hartley and Andrew Zisserman (2003). Multiple View Geometry in Computer Vision. Cambridge University Press. ISBN&#160;0-521-54051-8.&#160;
Gérard Medioni and Sing Bing Kang (2004). Emerging Topics in Computer Vision. Prentice Hall. ISBN&#160;0-13-101366-1.&#160;
R. Fisher, K Dawson-Howe, A. Fitzgibbon, C. Robertson, E. Trucco (2005). Dictionary of Computer Vision and Image Processing. John Wiley. ISBN&#160;0-470-01526-8.&#160;
Nikos Paragios and Yunmei Chen and Olivier Faugeras (2005). Handbook of Mathematical Models in Computer Vision. Springer. ISBN&#160;0-387-26371-3.&#160;
Wilhelm Burger and Mark J. Burge (2007). Digital Image Processing: An Algorithmic Approach Using Java. Springer. ISBN&#160;1-84628-379-5.&#160;
Pedram Azad, Tilo Gockel, Rüdiger Dillmann (2008). Computer Vision – Principles and Practice. Elektor International Media BV. ISBN&#160;0-905705-71-8.&#160;
Richard Szeliski (2010). Computer Vision: Algorithms and Applications. Springer-Verlag. ISBN&#160;978-1848829343.&#160;
J. R. Parker (2011). Algorithms for Image Processing and Computer Vision (2nd ed.). Wiley. ISBN&#160;978-0470643853.&#160;
Michael C.Fairhurst (1988). Computer Vision for robotic systems. Prentice Hall. ISBN&#160;0-13-166919-2.&#160;

External links[edit]

USC Iris computer vision conference list
Computer vision papers on the web A complete list of papers of the most relevant computer vision conferences.
Computer Vision Online News, source code, datasets and job offers related to computer vision.
Keith Price's Annotated Computer Vision Bibliography
CVonline Bob Fisher's Compendium of Computer Vision.
British Machine Vision Association Supporting computer vision research within the UK via the BMVC and MIUA conferences, Annals of the BMVA (open-source journal), BMVA Summer School and one-day meetings









v
t
e


Computer vision






Categories



Datasets
Digital geometry
Commercial systems
Feature detection
Geometry
Image sensor technology
Learning
Morphology
Motion analysis
Noise reduction techniques
Recognition and categorization
Research infrastructure
Researchers
Segmentation
Software








Technologies



Computer stereo vision








Applications



Autonomous vehicles
Face recognition
Image search
Optical character recognition
Remote sensing
Robots









Main category














v
t
e


Virtual reality · Mixed reality · Reality






Concepts



Virtuality
Virtual cinematography
Augmented reality
Augmented virtuality
Real life
Projection augmented model
Reality–virtuality continuum
Artificial reality
Simulated reality
Ubiquitous computing
Virtual world (Persistent world)
Multimodal interaction
Telepresence
Immersion








Technology



Compositing
Camera resectioning
Haptic suit
Head-mounted display (Optical head-mounted display)
Head-up display
Image-based modeling and rendering
Real-time computer graphics
Virtual retinal display
Wearable computer
Stereoscopy (Computer stereo vision, Computer vision)
Chroma key
Visual hull
Free viewpoint television
Omnidirectional treadmill
Hidden surface determination








Tracking



Motion capture
Tracking system
Types

Optical
Inertial
Magnetic


Devices

Wired glove
Gametrak
HoloLens
PlayStation Move
Leap Motion
Kinect
Sixense TrueMotion










Immersive devices



Personal

Google Cardboard
HTC Vive
Oculus Rift
Samsung Gear VR
PlayStation VR
Razer OSVR


Rooms

AlloSphere
Cave
TreadPort


History

Sensorama
Virtual Boy
Famicom 3D System
Sword of Damocles
Sega VR
Virtuality










Applications



Pervasive game
ARToolKit
Interactive art (Virtual graffiti)








See also



Simulated reality in fiction
















v
t
e


Sub-disciplines of computing









Hardware
Software
Firmware








Information system



Information security
Multimedia database
Intelligent database
Big data
Knowledge-based systems
Recommender System
Geographic information systems
Decision support system
Data engineering
Knowledge engineering
Fuzzy logic
Data analysis
System analysis and design
Project management
Knowledge management
Data integration
High-performance computing
Semantic web








Computer science



Database management system
Communications system
Computational geometry
Machine learning
Data mining
Parallel programming
Coding theory
Theory of computation
Constraint programming
Computational biology (Bioinformatics)
Design and analysis of algorithms
Information retrieval
Computational science
Symbolic computation
Distributed computing
Evolutionary computation
Natural computation
Combinatorial optimization
Parallel processing








Computer engineering



Multimedia
Satellite navigation (GNSS)
Embedded systems
Real-time computing
Computer architecture
Pair programming
System programming
Neural networks
Speech recognition
Signal analysis
Computer vision (Visual computing)
IC Design
Voice over IP
Speech synthesis
Human-Computer Interaction
Microprocessor
Image processing
Natural language processing
Speech processing
Digital signal processing








Software engineering



Software maintenance
Formal methods
Software quality
Software quality assurance
Measurement Software
Fault-tolerant software
Software testing
Enterprise architecture
Software architecture
Software engineering economics
Agile software development
Software design pattern
Software modelling
Systems analyst
Object-oriented analysis and design (UML)
Requirements analysis
Software development
Software configuration management
Software project management
Software engineering management
Software development process (Software release life cycle)
Software design
Software deployment
Software enhancement








Computer network



Network security
Secure electronic transaction
Network Performance Evaluation (QoS)
Cloud computing
Routing
Distributed systems (Distributed database)
Information theory
Wireless network
Next-generation network
Cellular network
Optical transport network (Optical networking)
Cryptography
Network simulation
Pattern recognition
Network administrators
Network equipment
Network design
Ubiquitous and Mobile computing
Data center
Mobile communications
Digital communication
Communications satellite
Telecommunication (Telecommunications network)








Business informatics



ITIL
ITSM
Enterprise resource planning
Electronic business
Business intelligence
Human Resources Development
Security management
Configuration management
Technology management
Power management
Service management
Project management
Systems management
Network management
Content management
Customer relationship management
Incident management
Asset management
Integrated management
Communications management
System administrator















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Computer_vision&amp;oldid=689168707"					
				Categories: Artificial intelligenceImage processingComputer visionPackaging machineryHidden categories: Articles lacking in-text citations from July 2014All articles lacking in-text citationsArticles that may contain original research from July 2014All articles that may contain original researchArticles that may contain original research from September 2011Articles containing video clips				
							
		
		
			Navigation menu

			
									
						Personal tools
						
							Create accountLog in						
					
									
										
						Namespaces
						
															Article
															Talk
													
					
										
												
							Variants
						

						
							
															
						
					
									
				
										
						Views
						
															Read
															Edit
															View history
													
					
										
						More

						
							
															
						
					
										
						
							Search
						

						
							
														
						
					
									
			
			
				
						
			Navigation

			
									
						Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store					
							
		
			
			Interaction

			
									
						HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page					
							
		
			
			Tools

			
									
						What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page					
							
		
			
			Print/export

			
									
						Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version					
							
		
			
			Languages

			
									
						العربيةБългарскиBosanskiCatalàČeštinaΕλληνικάEspañolفارسیFrançais한국어HrvatskiItalianoעברית日本語PolskiPortuguêsРусскийShqipSimple EnglishSlovenščinaSvenskaไทยУкраїнськаاردوTiếng Việt中文					
				Edit links			
		
				
		
		
							
											 This page was last modified on 5 November 2015, at 10:31.
											Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
									
							
											Privacy policy
											About Wikipedia
											Disclaimers
											Contact Wikipedia
											Developers
											