


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Imaging science
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				Imaging science is a multidisciplinary field concerned with the generation, collection, duplication, analysis, modification, and visualization of images,[1] including imaging things that the human eye cannot detect. As an evolving field it includes research and researchers from physics, mathematics, electrical engineering, computer vision, computer science, and perceptual psychology.



Contents


1 Imaging chain
2 See also
3 Notes and references
4 External links



Imaging chain[edit]
The foundation of imaging science as a discipline is the "imaging chain" – a conceptual model describing all of the factors which must be considered when developing a system for creating visual renderings (images). In general, the links of the imaging chain include:
1. The human visual system. Designers must also consider the psychophysical processes which take place in human beings as they make sense of information received through the visual system.
2. The subject of the image. When developing an imaging system, designers must consider the observables associated with the subjects which will be imaged. These observables generally take the form of emitted or reflected energy, such as electromagnetic energy or mechanical energy.
3. The capture device. Once the observables associated with the subject are characterized, designers can then identify and integrate the technologies needed to capture those observables. For example, in the case of consumer digital cameras, those technologies include optics for collecting energy in the visible portion of the electromagnetic spectrum, and electronic detectors for converting the electromagnetic energy into an electronic signal.
4. The processor. For all digital imaging systems, the electronic signals produced by the capture device must be manipulated by an algorithm which formats the signals so they can be displayed as an image. In practice, there are often multiple processors involved in the creation of a digital image.
5. The display. The display takes the electronic signals which have been manipulated by the processor and renders them on some visual medium. Examples include paper (for printed, or "hard copy" images), television, computer monitor, or projector.
Note that some imaging scientists will include additional "links" in their description of the imaging chain. For example some will include the "source" of the energy which "illuminates" or interacts with the subject of the image. Others will include storage and/or transmission systems.
Subfields within imaging science include: image processing, 3D computer graphics, animations, atmospheric optics, astronomical imaging, digital image restoration, digital imaging, color science, digital photography, holography, magnetic resonance imaging, medical imaging, microdensitometry, optics, photography, remote sensing, radar imaging, radiometry, silver halide, ultrasound imaging, photoacoustic imaging, thermal imaging, visual perception, and various printing technologies.
See also[edit]

Society for Imaging Science and Technology

Notes and references[edit]


^ Joseph P. Hornak, Encyclopedia of Imaging Science and Technology (John Wiley &amp; Sons, 2002) ISBN 9780471332763



Harrison H. Barrett and Kyle J. Myers, Foundations of Image Science (John Wiley &amp; Sons, 2004) ISBN 0471153001
Ronald N. Bracewell, Fourier Analysis and Imaging (Kluwer Academic, 2003) ISBN 0306481871
Roger L. Easton Jr., Fourier Methods in Imaging (John Wiley &amp; Sons, 2010) ISBN 9780470689837 DOI 10.1002/9780470660102

External links[edit]

Carlson Center for Imaging Science at RIT Research center that offers B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in Imaging Science.
The University of Arizona College of Optical Sciences offers an image science track for the M.S and Ph.D. degree in optical sciences.
Science de l'image et des médias numériques Bachelor of image science and digital media unique in Canada.
Image Sciences Institute, Utrecht, Netherlands Utrecht University Institute for Image Sciences - focuses on fundamental and applied research in specifically medical image processing and acquisition.
Vanderbilt University Institute of Imaging Science - dedicated to using imaging to improve health-care and for advancing knowledge in the biological sciences.









v
t
e


Visualization of technical information






Fields



Biological data visualization
Chemical imaging
Crime mapping
Data visualization
Educational visualization
Flow visualization
Geovisualization
Information visualization
Mathematical visualization
Medical imaging
Molecular graphics
Product visualization
Scientific visualization
Software visualization
Technical drawing
User interface design
Visual culture
Volume visualization








Image types



Chart
Diagram
Engineering drawing
Graph of a function
Ideogram
Map
Photograph
Pictogram
Plot
Schematic
Statistical graphics
Table
Technical drawings
Technical illustration
User interface








People



Jacques Bertin
Stuart Card
Thomas A. DeFanti
Michael Friendly
George Furnas
Nigel Holmes
Alan MacEachren
Jock D. Mackinlay
Michael Maltz
Bruce H. McCormick
Charles Joseph Minard
Gaspard Monge
Otto Neurath
Florence Nightingale
Clifford A. Pickover
William Playfair
Adolphe Quetelet
George G. Robertson
Arthur H. Robinson
Lawrence J. Rosenblum
Ben Shneiderman
Edward Tufte
Fernanda Viégas
Howard Wainer








Related topics



Cartography
Chartjunk
Computer graphics

in computer science


Graph drawing
Graphic design
Graphic organizer
Imaging science
Information graphics
Information science
Mental visualisation
Misleading graph
Neuroimaging
Patent drawing
Scientific modelling
Spatial analysis
Tools for Ideas
Visual analytics
Visual perception















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Imaging_science&amp;oldid=687981521"					
				Categories: Optics				
							
		
		
			Navigation menu

			
									
						Personal tools
						
							Create accountLog in						
					
									
										
						Namespaces
						
															Article
															Talk
													
					
										
												
							Variants
						

						
							
															
						
					
									
				
										
						Views
						
															Read
															Edit
															View history
													
					
										
						More

						
							
															
						
					
										
						
							Search
						

						
							
														
						
					
									
			
			
				
						
			Navigation

			
									
						Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store					
							
		
			
			Interaction

			
									
						HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page					
							
		
			
			Tools

			
									
						What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page					
							
		
			
			Print/export

			
									
						Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version					
							
		
			
			Languages

			
									
						日本語					
				Edit links			
		
				
		
		
							
											 This page was last modified on 28 October 2015, at 21:39.
											Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
									
							
											Privacy policy
											About Wikipedia
											Disclaimers
											Contact Wikipedia
											Developers
											