


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Network performance
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								  (Redirected from Network Performance Evaluation)
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				Network performance refers to measures of service quality of a network as seen by the customer.
There are many different ways to measure the performance of a network, as each network is different in nature and design. Performance can also be modeled and simulated instead of measured; one example of this is using state transition diagrams to model queuing performance or to use a Network Simulator



Contents


1 Performance measures

1.1 Bandwidth
1.2 Throughput
1.3 Latency
1.4 Jitter
1.5 Error rate
1.6 Interplay of factors


2 Algorithms and protocols
3 Examples of latency or throughput dominated systems

3.1 Satellite telephony
3.2 Deep space communication
3.3 Even deeper space communication
3.4 Offline data transport


4 See also
5 Notes
6 References
7 External links



Performance measures[edit]
The following measures are often considered important:

Bandwidth commonly measured in bits/second is the maximum rate that information can be transferred
Throughput is the actual rate that information is transferred
Latency the delay between the sender and the receiver decoding it, this is mainly a function of the signals travel time, and processing time at any nodes the information traverses
Jitter variation in packet delay at the receiver of the information
Error rate the number of corrupted bits expressed as a percentage or fraction of the total sent

Bandwidth[edit]
Main article: Bandwidth (computing)
The available channel bandwidth and achievable signal-to-noise ratio determine the maximum possible throughput. It is not generally possible to send more data than dictated by the Shannon-Hartley Theorem.
Throughput[edit]
Main article: throughput
Throughput is the number of messages successfully delivered per unit time. Throughput is controlled by available bandwidth, as well as the available signal-to-noise ratio and hardware limitations. Throughput for the purpose of this article will be understood to be measured from the arrival of the first bit of data at the receiver, to decouple the concept of throughput from the concept of latency. For discussions of this type the terms 'throughput' and 'bandwidth' are often used interchangeably.
The Time Window is the period over which the throughput is measured. Choice of an appropriate time window will often dominate calculations of throughput, and whether latency is taken into account or not will determine whether the latency affects the throughput or not.
Latency[edit]
Main article: Latency (engineering)
The speed of light imposes a minimum propagation time on all electromagnetic signals. It is not possible to reduce the latency below



where s is the distance and cm is the speed of light in the medium
Other delays also occur in intermediate nodes. In packet switched networks delays can occur due to queueing.
Jitter[edit]
Main article: Jitter
Jitter is the undesired deviation from true periodicity of an assumed periodic signal in electronics and telecommunications, often in relation to a reference clock source. Jitter may be observed in characteristics such as the frequency of successive pulses, the signal amplitude, or phase of periodic signals. Jitter is a significant, and usually undesired, factor in the design of almost all communications links (e.g., USB, PCI-e, SATA, OC-48). In clock recovery applications it is called timing jitter.[1]
Error rate[edit]
Main article: Bit error rate
In digital transmission, the number of bit errors is the number of received bits of a data stream over a communication channel that have been altered due to noise, interference, distortion or bit synchronization errors.
The bit error rate or bit error ratio (BER) is the number of bit errors divided by the total number of transferred bits during a studied time interval. BER is a unitless performance measure, often expressed as a percentage.
The bit error probability pe is the expectation value of the BER. The BER can be considered as an approximate estimate of the bit error probability. This estimate is accurate for a long time interval and a high number of bit errors.
Interplay of factors[edit]
All of the factors above, coupled with user requirements and user perceptions, play a role in determining the perceived 'fastness' or utility, of a network connection. The relationship between throughput, latency, and user experience is most aptly understood in the context of a shared network medium, and as a scheduling problem. For systems that are heavily dominated by either latency or throughput considerations.
Algorithms and protocols[edit]
For some systems, latency and throughput are coupled entities. In TCP/IP, latency can also directly affect throughput. In TCP connections, the large bandwidth-delay product of high latency connections, combined with relatively small TCP window sizes on many devices, effectively causes the throughput of a high latency connection to drop sharply with latency. This can be remedied with various techniques, such as increasing the TCP congestion window size, or more drastic solutions, such as packet coalescing, TCP acceleration, and forward error correction, all of which are commonly used for high latency satellite links.
TCP acceleration converts the TCP packets into a stream that is similar to UDP. Because of this, the TCP acceleration software must provide its own mechanisms to ensure the reliability of the link, taking the latency and bandwidth of the link into account, and both ends of the high latency link must support the method used.
In Media access control (MAC) layer, performance issues such as throughput and end-to-end delay are also addressed.
Examples of latency or throughput dominated systems[edit]
Many systems can be characterized as dominated either by throughput limitations or by latency limitations in terms of end-user utility or experience. In some cases, hard limits such as the speed of light present unique problems to such systems and nothing can be done to correct this. Other systems allow for significant balancing and optimization for best user experience.
Satellite telephony[edit]
A telecom satellite in geosynchronous orbit imposes a path length of at least 71000&#160;km between transmitter and receiver.[2] which means a minimum delay between message request and message receipt, or latency of 473 ms. This delay can be very noticeable and affects satellite phone service regardless of available throughput capacity.
Deep space communication[edit]
These long path length considerations are exacerbated when communicating with space probes and other long-range targets beyond Earth's atmosphere. The Deep Space Network implemented by NASA is one such system that must cope with these problems. Largely latency driven, the GAO has criticized the current architecture.[3] Several different methods have been proposed to handle the intermittent connectivity and long delays between packets, such as delay-tolerant networking.[4]
Even deeper space communication[edit]
At interstellar distances, the difficulties in designing radio systems that can achieve any throughput at all are massive. In these cases, maintaining communication is a bigger issue than how long that communication takes.
Offline data transport[edit]
Transportation is concerned almost entirely with throughput, which is why physical deliveries of backup tape archives are still largely done by vehicle.
See also[edit]

Bitrate
Measuring network throughput
Network traffic measurement
Response time

Notes[edit]


^ Wolaver, 1991, p.211
^ Roddy, 2001, 67 - 90
^ U.S. Government Accounting Office (GAO), 2006
^ Kevin Fall, 2003


References[edit]

Rappaport, Theodore S. (2002). Wireless communications&#160;: principles and practice (2 ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall PTR. ISBN&#160;0-13-042232-0.&#160;
Roddy, Dennis (2001). Satellite communications (3. ed.). New York [u.a.]: McGraw-Hill. ISBN&#160;0-07-137176-1.&#160;
Fall, Kevin, "A Delay-Tolerant Network Architecture for Challenged Internets", Intel Corporation, February, 2003, Doc No: IRB-TR-03-003
Government Accountability Office (GAO) report 06-445, NASA'S DEEP SPACE NETWORK: Current Management Structure is Not Conducive to Effectively Matching Resources with Future Requirements, April 27, 2006

External links[edit]

NASA's Deep Space Network Website
It's the Latency, Stupid









v
t
e


Sub-disciplines of computing









Hardware
Software
Firmware








Information system



Information security
Multimedia database
Intelligent database
Big data
Knowledge-based systems
Recommender System
Geographic information systems
Decision support system
Data engineering
Knowledge engineering
Fuzzy logic
Data analysis
System analysis and design
Project management
Knowledge management
Data integration
High-performance computing
Semantic web








Computer science



Database management system
Communications system
Computational geometry
Machine learning
Data mining
Parallel programming
Coding theory
Theory of computation
Constraint programming
Computational biology (Bioinformatics)
Design and analysis of algorithms
Information retrieval
Computational science
Symbolic computation
Distributed computing
Evolutionary computation
Natural computation
Combinatorial optimization
Parallel processing








Computer engineering



Multimedia
Satellite navigation (GNSS)
Embedded systems
Real-time computing
Computer architecture
Pair programming
System programming
Neural networks
Speech recognition
Signal analysis
Computer vision (Visual computing)
IC Design
Voice over IP
Speech synthesis
Human-Computer Interaction
Microprocessor
Image processing
Natural language processing
Speech processing
Digital signal processing








Software engineering



Software maintenance
Formal methods
Software quality
Software quality assurance
Measurement Software
Fault-tolerant software
Software testing
Enterprise architecture
Software architecture
Software engineering economics
Agile software development
Software design pattern
Software modelling
Systems analyst
Object-oriented analysis and design (UML)
Requirements analysis
Software development
Software configuration management
Software project management
Software engineering management
Software development process (Software release life cycle)
Software design
Software deployment
Software enhancement








Computer network



Network security
Secure electronic transaction
Network Performance Evaluation (QoS)
Cloud computing
Routing
Distributed systems (Distributed database)
Information theory
Wireless network
Next-generation network
Cellular network
Optical transport network (Optical networking)
Cryptography
Network simulation
Pattern recognition
Network administrators
Network equipment
Network design
Ubiquitous and Mobile computing
Data center
Mobile communications
Digital communication
Communications satellite
Telecommunication (Telecommunications network)








Business informatics



ITIL
ITSM
Enterprise resource planning
Electronic business
Business intelligence
Human Resources Development
Security management
Configuration management
Technology management
Power management
Service management
Project management
Systems management
Network management
Content management
Customer relationship management
Incident management
Asset management
Integrated management
Communications management
System administrator















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Network_performance&amp;oldid=682063211"					
				Categories: Network performanceComputing comparisonsInformation theory				
							
		
		
			Navigation menu

			
									
						Personal tools
						
							Create accountLog in						
					
									
										
						Namespaces
						
															Article
															Talk
													
					
										
												
							Variants
						

						
							
															
						
					
									
				
										
						Views
						
															Read
															Edit
															View history
													
					
										
						More

						
							
															
						
					
										
						
							Search
						

						
							
														
						
					
									
			
			
				
						
			Navigation

			
									
						Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store					
							
		
			
			Interaction

			
									
						HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page					
							
		
			
			Tools

			
									
						What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page					
							
		
			
			Print/export

			
									
						Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version					
							
		
			
			Languages

			
									
						Español日本語					
				Edit links			
		
				
		
		
							
											 This page was last modified on 21 September 2015, at 08:59.
											Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
									
							
											Privacy policy
											About Wikipedia
											Disclaimers
											Contact Wikipedia
											Developers
											