


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Systems analysis
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				This article is about the interdisciplinary field.  For the analysis of systems in electrical engineering, see system analysis.





This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. The specific problem is: the article has formatting issues. Please help improve this article if you can. (July 2014)


"Systems analysis is a problem solving technique that decomposes a system into its component pieces for the purpose of the studying how well those component parts work and interact to accomplish their purpose".[1] According to the Merriam-Webster dictionary, systems analysis is "the process of studying a procedure or business in order to identify its goals and purposes and create systems and procedures that will achieve them in an efficient way". Analysis and synthesis, as scientific methods, always go hand in hand; they complement one another. Every synthesis is built upon the results of a preceding analysis, and every analysis requires a subsequent synthesis in order to verify and correct its results.
This field is closely related to requirements analysis or operations research. It is also "an explicit formal inquiry carried out to help someone (referred to as the decision maker) identify a better course of action and make a better decision than she might otherwise have made."[2]



Contents


1 Overview
2 Information technology
3 Practitioners
4 See also
5 References
6 Selected publications
7 External links



Overview[edit]
The terms analysis and synthesis stem from Greek, meaning "to take apart" and "to put together," respectfully. These terms are used in many scientific disciplines, from mathematics and logic to economics and psychology, to denote similar investigative procedures. Analysis is defined as "the procedure by which we break down an intellectual or substantial whole into parts," while synthesis means "the procedure by which we combine separate elements or components in order to form a coherent whole." [3] Systems analysis researchers apply methodology to the systems involved, forming an overall picture. System analysis is used in every field where something is developed. Analysis can also be a series of components that perform organic functions together, such as system engineering. Systems engineering is an interdisciplinary field of engineering that focuses on how complex engineering projects should be designed and managed.
Information technology[edit]
The development of a computer-based information system includes a systems analysis phase. This helps produce the data model, a precursor to creating or enhancing a database (see Christopher J. Date "An Introduction to Database Systems"). There are a number of different approaches to system analysis. When a computer-based information system is developed, systems analysis (according to the Waterfall model) would constitute the following steps:

The development of a feasibility study: determining whether a project is economically, socially, technologically and organizationally feasible
Fact-finding measures, designed to ascertain the requirements of the system's end-users (typically involving interviews, questionnaires, or visual observations of work on the existing system)
Gauging how the end-users would operate the system (in terms of general experience in using computer hardware or software), what the system would be used for and so on

Another view outlines a phased approach to the process. This approach breaks systems analysis into 5 phases:

Scope Definition: denoting an instrument for observing, viewing, or examining
Problem analysis: analyzing the problem that arises
Requirements analysis: determining the conditions that need to be met
Logical design: looking at the logical relationship among the objects
Decision analysis: making a final decision

Use cases are widely used systems analysis modeling tools for identifying and expressing the functional requirements of a system. Each use case is a business scenario or event for which the system must provide a defined response. Use cases evolved from object-oriented analysis.
Practitioners[edit]
Practitioners of systems analysis are often called up to dissect systems that have grown haphazardly to determine the current components of the system. This was shown during the year 2000 re-engineering effort as business and manufacturing processes were examined as part of the Y2K automation upgrades.[4] Employment utilizing systems analysis include systems analyst, business analyst, manufacturing engineer, systems architect, enterprise architect, software architect, etc.
While practitioners of systems analysis can be called upon to create new systems, they often modify, expand or document existing systems (processes, procedures and methods). Researchers and practitioners rely on system analysis. Activity system analysis has been already applied to various research and practice studies including business management, educational reform, educational technology, etc.
A set of components interact with each other to accomplish some specific purpose. Systems are all around us. Our body is itself a system. A business is also a system. People, money, machine, market and material are the components of business system that work together that achieve the common goal of the organization
See also[edit]






Related topics


Systems thinking
System architecture
Software architecture
Enterprise architecture
Systems analyst
Systems design
Policy analysis
Program designer
Cybernetics
Systems theory






Types of Systems analysis


Accident Analysis
Business analysis
Logico-linguistic modeling
Morphological analysis
Soft systems methodology
Software prototyping
Spiral model
Waterfall model






Systems thinkers


Russell L. Ackoff
Howard T. Odum
Henry Paynter
Jay Forrester
Donella Meadows
Gregory Bateson
Stewart Brand
Buckminster Fuller
Robert S. McNamara
Stafford Beer
Gordon Pask
Ludwig von Bertalanffy






References[edit]

^ Systems Analysis and Design for the Global Enterprise by Lonnie D. Bentley p.160 7th edition
^ SYSTEMS ANALYSIS
^ Tom Ritchey, Analysis and .
^ Géza HUSI: Mechatronics Control Systems

Selected publications[edit]

Bentley, Lonnie D., Kevin C. Dittman, and Jeffrey L. Whitten. Systems analysis and design methods. (1986, 1997, 2004).
Hawryszkiewycz, Igor T. Introduction to systems analysis and design. Prentice Hall PTR, 1994.
Whitten, Jeffery L., Lonnie D. Bentley, and Kevin C. Dittman. Fundamentals of systems analysis and design methods. (2004).

External links[edit]



Look up systems analysis in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



Introduction to Social Macrodynamics
A useful set of guides and a case study about the practical application of business and systems analysis methods
A comprehensive description of the discipline of systems analysis from Simmons College, Boston, MA, USA (Archive of original from www.simmons.edu)
Systems Analysis and Design introductory level lessons









v
t
e


Systems engineering






Subfields



Aerospace engineering
Biological systems engineering
Configuration management
Earth systems engineering and management
Electrical engineering
Enterprise systems engineering
Performance engineering
Reliability engineering
Safety engineering








Processes



Requirements engineering
Functional specification
System integration
Verification and validation
Design review








Concepts



Business process
System
System lifecycle
V-Model
Systems development life cycle








Tools



Decision-making
Function modelling
IDEF
Optimization
Planning
Statistical analysis
System dynamics
Systems Modeling Language
Systems analysis
Systems modeling
Work breakdown structure








People



James S. Albus
Wernher von Braun
Harold Chestnut
Arthur David Hall III
Derek Hitchins
Robert E. Machol
Simon Ramo
Joseph Francis Shea
John N. Warfield








Related fields



Control engineering
Computer engineering
Industrial engineering
Operations research
Project management
Quality management
Risk management
Software engineering











 Category
 Commons
















v
t
e


Sub-disciplines of computing









Hardware
Software
Firmware








Information system



Information security
Multimedia database
Intelligent database
Big data
Knowledge-based systems
Recommender System
Geographic information systems
Decision support system
Data engineering
Knowledge engineering
Fuzzy logic
Data analysis
System analysis and design
Project management
Knowledge management
Data integration
High-performance computing
Semantic web








Computer science



Database management system
Communications system
Computational geometry
Machine learning
Data mining
Parallel programming
Coding theory
Theory of computation
Constraint programming
Computational biology (Bioinformatics)
Design and analysis of algorithms
Information retrieval
Computational science
Symbolic computation
Distributed computing
Evolutionary computation
Natural computation
Combinatorial optimization
Parallel processing








Computer engineering



Multimedia
Satellite navigation (GNSS)
Embedded systems
Real-time computing
Computer architecture
Pair programming
System programming
Neural networks
Speech recognition
Signal analysis
Computer vision (Visual computing)
IC Design
Voice over IP
Speech synthesis
Human-Computer Interaction
Microprocessor
Image processing
Natural language processing
Speech processing
Digital signal processing








Software engineering



Software maintenance
Formal methods
Software quality
Software quality assurance
Measurement Software
Fault-tolerant software
Software testing
Enterprise architecture
Software architecture
Software engineering economics
Agile software development
Software design pattern
Software modelling
Systems analyst
Object-oriented analysis and design (UML)
Requirements analysis
Software development
Software configuration management
Software project management
Software engineering management
Software development process (Software release life cycle)
Software design
Software deployment
Software enhancement








Computer network



Network security
Secure electronic transaction
Network Performance Evaluation (QoS)
Cloud computing
Routing
Distributed systems (Distributed database)
Information theory
Wireless network
Next-generation network
Cellular network
Optical transport network (Optical networking)
Cryptography
Network simulation
Pattern recognition
Network administrators
Network equipment
Network design
Ubiquitous and Mobile computing
Data center
Mobile communications
Digital communication
Communications satellite
Telecommunication (Telecommunications network)








Business informatics



ITIL
ITSM
Enterprise resource planning
Electronic business
Business intelligence
Human Resources Development
Security management
Configuration management
Technology management
Power management
Service management
Project management
Systems management
Network management
Content management
Customer relationship management
Incident management
Asset management
Integrated management
Communications management
System administrator















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Systems_analysis&amp;oldid=684290033"					
				Categories: FuturologyFinancial analystsManagementSystems analysisSystems engineeringSystems theoryTechnology assessmentHidden categories: Articles needing cleanup from July 2014All articles needing cleanupCleanup tagged articles with a reason field from July 2014Wikipedia pages needing cleanup from July 2014				
							
		
		
			Navigation menu

			
									
						Personal tools
						
							Create accountLog in						
					
									
										
						Namespaces
						
															Article
															Talk
													
					
										
												
							Variants
						

						
							
															
						
					
									
				
										
						Views
						
															Read
															Edit
															View history
													
					
										
						More

						
							
															
						
					
										
						
							Search
						

						
							
														
						
					
									
			
			
				
						
			Navigation

			
									
						Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store					
							
		
			
			Interaction

			
									
						HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page					
							
		
			
			Tools

			
									
						What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page					
							
		
			
			Print/export

			
									
						Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version					
							
		
			
			Languages

			
									
						العربيةAzərbaycancaБеларускаяCatalàDeutschEestiEspañolفارسیFrançaisGaeilge한국어ՀայերենעבריתҚазақшаNederlands日本語ਪੰਜਾਬੀPolskiPortuguêsRomânăРусскийShqipSlovenčinaSvenskaไทยTürkçeУкраїнськаWinaray中文					
				Edit links			
		
				
		
		
							
											 This page was last modified on 5 October 2015, at 18:57.
											Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
									
							
											Privacy policy
											About Wikipedia
											Disclaimers
											Contact Wikipedia
											Developers
											