


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Ubiquitous computing
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				




This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2015)


Ubiquitous computing (ubicomp) is a concept in software engineering and computer science where computing is made to appear anytime and everywhere. In contrast to desktop computing, ubiquitous computing can occur using any device, in any location, and in any format. A user interacts with the computer, which can exist in many different forms, including laptop computers, tablets and terminals in everyday objects such as a fridge or a pair of glasses. The underlying technologies to support ubiquitous computing include Internet, advanced middleware, operating system, mobile code, sensors, microprocessors, new I/O and user interfaces, networks, mobile protocols, location and positioning and new materials.
This paradigm is also described as pervasive computing,[1] ambient intelligence,[2] ambient media[3] or 'everyware'.[4] Each term emphasizes slightly different aspects. When primarily concerning the objects involved, it is also known as physical computing, the Internet of Things, haptic computing,[5] and 'things that think'. Rather than propose a single definition for ubiquitous computing and for these related terms, a taxonomy of properties for ubiquitous computing has been proposed, from which different kinds or flavors of ubiquitous systems and applications can be described.[6]
Ubiquitous computing touches on a wide range of research topics, including distributed computing, mobile computing, location computing, mobile networking, context-aware computing, sensor networks, human-computer interaction, and artificial intelligence.



Contents


1 Core concepts
2 History
3 Examples
4 Issues
5 See also
6 References
7 Further reading
8 External links



Core concepts[edit]
At their core, all models of ubiquitous computing share a vision of small, inexpensive, robust networked processing devices, distributed at all scales throughout everyday life and generally turned to distinctly common-place ends. For example, a domestic ubiquitous computing environment might interconnect lighting and environmental controls with personal biometric monitors woven into clothing so that illumination and heating conditions in a room might be modulated, continuously and imperceptibly. Another common scenario posits refrigerators "aware" of their suitably tagged contents, able to both plan a variety of menus from the food actually on hand, and warn users of stale or spoiled food.
Ubiquitous computing presents challenges across computer science: in systems design and engineering, in systems modelling, and in user interface design. Contemporary human-computer interaction models, whether command-line, menu-driven, or GUI-based, are inappropriate and inadequate to the ubiquitous case. This suggests that the "natural" interaction paradigm appropriate to a fully robust ubiquitous computing has yet to emerge - although there is also recognition in the field that in many ways we are already living in a ubicomp world (see also the main article on Natural User Interface). Contemporary devices that lend some support to this latter idea include mobile phones, digital audio players, radio-frequency identification tags, GPS, and interactive whiteboards.
Mark Weiser proposed three basic forms for ubiquitous system devices (see also smart device): tabs, pads and boards.

Tabs: wearable centimetre sized devices
Pads: hand-held decimetre-sized devices
Boards: metre sized interactive display devices.

These three forms proposed by Weiser are characterized by being macro-sized, having a planar form and on incorporating visual output displays. If we relax each of these three characteristics we can expand this range into a much more diverse and potentially more useful range of Ubiquitous Computing devices. Hence, three additional forms for ubiquitous systems have been proposed:[6]

Dust: miniaturized devices can be without visual output displays, e.g. Micro Electro-Mechanical Systems (MEMS), ranging from nanometres through micrometers to millimetres. See also Smart dust.
Skin: fabrics based upon light emitting and conductive polymers, organic computer devices, can be formed into more flexible non-planar display surfaces and products such as clothes and curtains, see OLED display. MEMS device can also be painted onto various surfaces so that a variety of physical world structures can act as networked surfaces of MEMS.
Clay: ensembles of MEMS can be formed into arbitrary three dimensional shapes as artefacts resembling many different kinds of physical object (see also Tangible interface).

In his book The Rise of the Network Society, Manuel Castells suggests that there is an ongoing shift from already-decentralised, stand-alone microcomputers and mainframes towards entirely pervasive computing. In his model of a pervasive computing system, Castells uses the example of the Internet as the start of a pervasive computing system. The logical progression from that paradigm is a system where that networking logic becomes applicable in every realm of daily activity, in every location and every context. Castells envisages a system where billions of miniature, ubiquitous inter-communication devices will be spread worldwide, "like pigment in the wall paint".
Ubiquitous computing may be seen to consist of many layers, each with their own roles, which together form a single system:
Layer 1: task management layer

Monitors user task, context and index
Map user's task to need for the services in the environment
To manage complex dependencies

Layer 2: environment management layer

To monitor a resource and its capabilities
To map service need, user level states of specific capabilities

Layer 3: environment layer

To monitor a relevant resource
To manage reliability of the resources

History[edit]
Mark Weiser coined the phrase "ubiquitous computing" around 1988, during his tenure as Chief Technologist of the Xerox Palo Alto Research Center (PARC). Both alone and with PARC Director and Chief Scientist John Seely Brown, Weiser wrote some of the earliest papers on the subject, largely defining it and sketching out its major concerns.[7][8][9]
Recognizing that the extension of processing power into everyday scenarios would necessitate understandings of social, cultural and psychological phenomena beyond its proper ambit, Weiser was influenced by many fields outside computer science, including "philosophy, phenomenology, anthropology, psychology, post-Modernism, sociology of science and feminist criticism". He was explicit about "the humanistic origins of the ‘invisible ideal in post-modernist thought'",[9] referencing as well the ironically dystopian Philip K. Dick novel Ubik.
Andy Hopper from Cambridge University UK proposed and demonstrated the concept of "Teleporting" - where applications follow the user wherever he/she moves.
Roy Want, while a researcher and student working under Andy Hopper at Cambridge University, worked on the "Active Badge System", which is an advanced location computing system where personal mobility that is merged with computing.
Bill Schilit (now at Google) also did some earlier work in this topic, and participated in the early Mobile Computing workshop held in Santa Cruz in 1996.
Dr. Ken Sakamura of the University of Tokyo, Japan leads the Ubiquitous Networking Laboratory (UNL), Tokyo as well as the T-Engine Forum. The joint goal of Sakamura's Ubiquitous Networking specification and the T-Engine forum, is to enable any everyday device to broadcast and receive information.[10][11]
MIT has also contributed significant research in this field, notably Things That Think consortium (directed by Hiroshi Ishii, Joseph A. Paradiso and Rosalind Picard) at the Media Lab[12] and the CSAIL effort known as Project Oxygen.[13] Other major contributors include University of Washington's Ubicomp Lab (directed by Shwetak Patel), Georgia Tech's College of Computing, Cornell University's People Aware Computing Lab, NYU's Interactive Telecommunications Program, UC Irvine's Department of Informatics, Microsoft Research, Intel Research and Equator,[14] Ajou University UCRi &amp; CUS.[15]
Examples[edit]
One of the earliest ubiquitous systems was artist Natalie Jeremijenko's "Live Wire", also known as "Dangling String", installed at Xerox PARC during Mark Weiser's time there. This was a piece of string attached to a stepper motor and controlled by a LAN connection; network activity caused the string to twitch, yielding a peripherally noticeable indication of traffic. Weiser called this an example of calm technology.[16]
A present manifestation of this trend is the widespread diffusion of mobile phones. Many of mobile phones supporting high speed data transmission, video services, and mobile devices with powerful computational ability. Although these mobile devices are not necessarily manifestations of Ubiquitous Computing, there are examples, such as Japan’s Yaoyorozu (“Eight Million Gods”) Project in which mobile devices, coupled with radio frequency identification tags demonstrate that Ubiquitous Computing is already present in some form.[17]
Ambient Devices has produced an "orb", a "dashboard", and a "weather beacon": these decorative devices receive data from a wireless network and report current events, such as stock prices and the weather, like the Nabaztag produced by Violet Snowden.
The Australian futurist Mark Pesce has produced a highly configurable 52-LED LAMP enabled lamp which uses Wi-Fi named MooresCloud after Moore's Law.[18]
The Unified Computer Intelligence Corporation has launched a device called Ubi - The Ubiquitous Computer that is designed to allow voice interaction with the home and provide constant access to information.[19]
Ubiquitous Computing research has focused on building an environment in which computers allow humans to focus attention on select aspects of the environment and operate in supervisory and policy-making roles. Ubiquitous Computing emphasizes the creation of a human computer interface that can interpret and support a user’s intentions. For example, MIT’s Project Oxygen seeks to create a system in which computation is as pervasive as air:

In the future, computation will be human centered. It will be freely available everywhere, like batteries and power sockets, or oxygen in the air we breathe…We will not need to carry our own devices around with us. Instead, configurable generic devices, either handheld or embedded in the environment, will bring computation to us, whenever we need it and wherever we might be. As we interact with these “anonymous” devices, they will adopt our information personalities. They will respect our desires for privacy and security. We won’t have to type, click, or learn new computer jargon. Instead, we’ll communicate naturally, using speech and gestures that describe our intent…

This is a fundamental transition that does not seek to escape the physical world and “enter some metallic, gigabyte-infested cyberspace” but rather brings computers and communications to us, making them “synonymous with the useful tasks they perform”.[17]
Network robots link ubiquitous networks with robots, contributing to the creation of new lifestyles and solutions to address a variety of social problems including the aging of population and nursing care.[20]
Issues[edit]
Privacy is easily the most often-cited criticism of ubiquitous computing (ubicomp), and may be the greatest barrier to its long-term success.[21]
An article by Linda Little and Pam Briggs on this privacy issue, states that: "These are the kinds of privacy principles that have been established by the industry - but over the past two years, we have been trying to understand whether such principles reflect the concerns of the ordinary citizen. Some of the key research questions we have been addressing are: What are users' key concerns regarding privacy management in a ubiquitous context and do they reflect 'expert' privacy principles? Do these concerns vary as a function of context? Will users have enough confidence in privacy management procedures to hand-over management and administration of their privacy preferences? Motahari, et al., (2007) argue people do not have a complete understanding of the threats to their privacy. While users of ubicomp systems are aware of inappropriate use of their personal information, legal obligations and inadequate security they are less aware of setting preferences for who has access and any social inferences that can be made by observations by other people. They further argue a holistic approach is needed as traditional approaches and current investigations are not enough to address privacy threats in ubiquitous computing. Recognising - in line with a number of other researchers (Harper &amp; Singleton, 2001; Paine, et al., 2007) - that privacy concerns are likely to be highly situation-dependent, we have developed a method of enquiry which displays a rich context to the user in order to elicit more detailed information about those privacy factors that underpin our acceptance of ubiquitous computing".[22]
Public policy problems are often “preceded by long shadows, long trains of activity”, emerging slowly, over decades or even the course of a century. There is a need for a long-term view to guide policy decision making, as this will assist in identifying long-term problems or opportunities related to the Ubiquitous Computing environment. This information can reduce uncertainty and guide the decisions of both policy makers and those directly involved in system development (Wedemeyer et al. 2001). One important consideration is the degree to which different opinions form around a single problem. Some issues may have strong consensus about their importance, even if there are great differences in opinion regarding the cause or solution. For example, few people will differ in their assessment of a highly tangible problem with physical impact such as terrorists using new weapons of mass destruction to destroy human life. The problem statements outlined above that address the future evolution of the human species or challenges to identity have clear cultural or religious implications and are likely to have greater variance in opinion about them.[17]
There is still the issue, what actually 'content' is in an ubiquitous environment. Where in other media environment the interface is clearly distinct, in an ubiquitous environment 'content' differs. Artur Lugmayr defined such a smart environment by describing it as ambient media. It is constituted of the communication of information in ubiquitous and pervasive environments. The concept of ambient media relates to ambient media form, ambient media content, and ambient media technology. It's principles have been established by Artur Lugmayr and are manifestation, morphing, intelligence, and experience.[23]
See also[edit]


List of ubiquitous computing research centers
Augmented reality
Ambient intelligence
Calm technology
Computer accessibility
Context-aware pervasive systems
Human-centered computing (discipline)
Human-computer interaction
Mobile interaction
Natural user interface
Pervasive game
Pervasive informatics
Physical computing
Radio-frequency identification
Sensor grid
Smart, Connected Products
Sentient computing
Smart device
System on Chip
Task computing
Transreality gaming
Ubiquitous commerce
Ubiquitous learning
Ubiquitous robot
User experience
Virtual reality
Wearable computer
Ambient media
Internet of Things


References[edit]


^ Nieuwdorp, E. (2007). "The pervasive discourse". Computers in Entertainment 5 (2): 13. doi:10.1145/1279540.1279553.&#160;
^ Hansmann, Uwe (2003). Pervasive Computing: The Mobile World. Springer. ISBN&#160;3-540-00218-9.&#160;
^ Lugmayr, Artur; Risse, Thomas; Stockleben, Bjoern; Laurila, Kari; Kaario, Juha (September 2009). "Semantic ambient media—an introduction". Multimedia Tools and Applications 44 (3): 337–359. doi:10.1007/s11042-009-0282-z.&#160;
^ Greenfield, Adam (2006). Everyware: the dawning age of ubiquitous computing. New Riders. pp.&#160;11–12. ISBN&#160;0-321-38401-6.&#160;
^ "World Haptics Conferences". Haptics Technical Committee. Retrieved 2007-10-13.&#160;
^ a b Poslad, Stefan (2009). Ubiquitous Computing Smart Devices, Smart Environments and Smart Interaction. Wiley. ISBN&#160;978-0-470-03560-3.&#160;
^ Weiser, Mark (1991). "The Computer for the 21st Century". Retrieved 2012-12-19.&#160;
^ Weiser; Gold; Brown (1999-05-11). "Ubiquitous computing". Retrieved 2008-05-07.&#160;
^ a b Weiser, Mark (1996-03-17). "Ubiquitous computing". Retrieved 2007-11-03.&#160;
^ "IEEE Xplore Abstract - T-Engine: Japan's ubiquitous computing architecture is ready for prime time". Ieeexplore.ieee.org. doi:10.1109/MPRV.2005.40. Retrieved 2015-10-13.&#160;
^ "The name of T-Engine Forum was changed to TRON Forum". T-engine.org. 2015-04-01. Retrieved 2015-10-13.&#160;
^ "MIT Media Lab - Things That Think Consortium". MIT. Retrieved 2007-11-03.&#160;
^ "MIT Project Oxygen: Overview". MIT. Retrieved 2007-11-03.&#160;
^ "Equator". UCL. Retrieved 2009-11-19.&#160;
^ "Center_of_excellence_for_Ubiquitous_System". CUS. Retrieved 2008-05-04.&#160;
^ Weiser, Mark; Rich Gold; John Seely Brown (1999). "The origins of ubiquitous computing research at PARC in the late 1980s". IBM systems journal 38 (4): 693. doi:10.1147/sj.384.0693.&#160;
^ a b c Winter, Jenifer (December 2008). "Emerging Policy Problems Related to Ubiquitous Computing: Negotiating Stakeholders’ Visions of the Future". Knowledge, Technology, &amp; Policy 21 (4): 191–203. doi:10.1007/s12130-008-9058-4.&#160;
^ Fingas, Jon (2012-10-13). "MooresCloud Light runs Linux, puts LAMP on your lamp (video)". Engadget.com. Retrieved 2015-10-13.&#160;
^ "Ubi Cloud". Theubi.com. Retrieved 2015-10-13.&#160;
^ [1] Archived October 24, 2007 at the Wayback Machine
^ Hong, Jason (2005). "An architecture for privacy-sensitive ubiquitous computing". p.&#160;310.&#160;
^ Little, Linda; Briggs, Pam (2009). "Privacy Factors for Successful Ubiquitous Computing". International Journal of E-Business Research 5 (2): 20.&#160;
^ "NOVATICA: General information in English". Ati.es. 2015-09-27. Retrieved 2015-10-13.&#160;


Further reading[edit]

Adam Greenfield's book Everyware: The Dawning Age of Ubiquitous Computing (ISBN 0-321-38401-6).

External links[edit]

International Conference on Pervasive Computing (Pervasive)
Pervasive Computing (IEEE)
Pervasive and Mobile Computing journal, PMC (Elsevier)
Proceedings of the Semantic Ambient Media Workshop Series (iAMEA)









v
t
e


Major fields of computer science







Note: Computer science can also be divided into different topics or fields according to the ACM Computing Classification System.






Hardware



Printed circuit board
Peripheral
Integrated circuit
Very-large-scale integration
Energy consumption
Electronic design automation








Computer systems
organization



Computer architecture
Embedded system
Real-time computing
Dependability








Networks



Network architecture
Network protocol
Network components
Network scheduler
Network performance evaluation
Network service








Software organization



Interpreter
Middleware
Virtual machine
Operating system
Software quality








Software notations
and tools



Programming paradigm
Programming language
Compiler
Domain-specific language
Modeling language
Software framework
Integrated development environment
Software configuration management
Software library
Software repository








Software development



Software development process
Requirements analysis
Software design
Software implementation
Software verification and validation
Software maintenance
Programming team
Open-source model








Theory of computation



Model of computation
Formal language
Automata theory
Computational complexity theory
Logic
Semantics








Algorithms



Algorithm design
Analysis of algorithms
Randomized algorithm
Computational geometry








Mathematics
of computing



Discrete mathematics
Probability
Statistics
Mathematical software
Information theory
Mathematical analysis
Numerical analysis








Information
systems



Database management system
Information storage systems
Enterprise information system
Social information systems
Geographic information system
Decision support system
Process control system
Multimedia information system
Data mining
Digital library
Computing platform
Digital marketing
World Wide Web
Information retrieval








Security



Cryptography
Formal methods
Security services
Intrusion detection system
Hardware security
Network security
Information security
Application security








Human–computer
interaction



Interaction design
Social computing
Ubiquitous computing
Visualization
Accessibility








Concurrency



Concurrent computing
Parallel computing
Distributed computing
Multithreading
Multiprocessing








Artificial
intelligence



Natural language processing
Knowledge representation and reasoning
Computer vision
Automated planning and scheduling
Search methodology
Control method
Philosophy of artificial intelligence
Distributed artificial intelligence








Machine learning



Supervised learning
Unsupervised learning
Reinforcement learning
Multi-task learning
Machine learning algorithms
Cross-validation








Graphics



Animation
Rendering
Image manipulation
Graphics processing unit
Mixed reality
Virtual reality
Image compression
Solid modeling








Applied
computing



E-commerce
Enterprise software
Computational mathematics
Computational physics
Computational chemistry
Computational biology
Computational social science
Computational engineering
Computational healthcare
Digital art
Electronic publishing
Cyberwarfare
Electronic voting
Video game
Word processing
Operations research
Educational technology
Document management











 Computer science portal
















v
t
e


Virtual reality · Mixed reality · Reality






Concepts



Virtuality
Virtual cinematography
Augmented reality
Augmented virtuality
Real life
Projection augmented model
Reality–virtuality continuum
Artificial reality
Simulated reality
Ubiquitous computing
Virtual world (Persistent world)
Multimodal interaction
Telepresence
Immersion








Technology



Compositing
Camera resectioning
Haptic suit
Head-mounted display (Optical head-mounted display)
Head-up display
Image-based modeling and rendering
Real-time computer graphics
Virtual retinal display
Wearable computer
Stereoscopy (Computer stereo vision, Computer vision)
Chroma key
Visual hull
Free viewpoint television
Omnidirectional treadmill
Hidden surface determination








Tracking



Motion capture
Tracking system
Types

Optical
Inertial
Magnetic


Devices

Wired glove
Gametrak
HoloLens
PlayStation Move
Leap Motion
Kinect
Sixense TrueMotion










Immersive devices



Personal

Google Cardboard
HTC Vive
Oculus Rift
Samsung Gear VR
PlayStation VR
Razer OSVR


Rooms

AlloSphere
Cave
TreadPort


History

Sensorama
Virtual Boy
Famicom 3D System
Sword of Damocles
Sega VR
Virtuality










Applications



Pervasive game
ARToolKit
Interactive art (Virtual graffiti)








See also



Simulated reality in fiction
















v
t
e


Ambient intelligence






Concepts



Context awareness
Internet of Things
Object hyperlinking
Profiling
Spime
Supranet
Ubiquitous computing
Web of Things
Wireless sensor networks








Technologies



6LoWPAN
ANT+
DASH7
IEEE 802.15.4
Internet 0
Machine to machine
Radio-frequency identification
Smartdust
Tera-play
XBee








Platforms



Arduino
Contiki
Electric Imp
Gadgeteer
ioBridge
Netduino
Raspberry Pi
TinyOS
Wiring
Xively
NodeMCU








Applications



Ambient device
CeNSE
Connected car
Home automation
HomeOS
Internet refrigerator
Nabaztag
Smart city
Smart TV
Smarter Planet








Pioneers



Kevin Ashton
Adam Dunkels
Stefano Marzano
Donald Norman
Roel Pieper
Josef Preishuber-Pflügl
John Seely Brown
Bruce Sterling
Mark Weiser








Other



Ambient Devices
AmbieSense
Ebbits project
IPSO Alliance
















v
t
e


Sub-disciplines of computing









Hardware
Software
Firmware








Information system



Information security
Multimedia database
Intelligent database
Big data
Knowledge-based systems
Recommender System
Geographic information systems
Decision support system
Data engineering
Knowledge engineering
Fuzzy logic
Data analysis
System analysis and design
Project management
Knowledge management
Data integration
High-performance computing
Semantic web








Computer science



Database management system
Communications system
Computational geometry
Machine learning
Data mining
Parallel programming
Coding theory
Theory of computation
Constraint programming
Computational biology (Bioinformatics)
Design and analysis of algorithms
Information retrieval
Computational science
Symbolic computation
Distributed computing
Evolutionary computation
Natural computation
Combinatorial optimization
Parallel processing








Computer engineering



Multimedia
Satellite navigation (GNSS)
Embedded systems
Real-time computing
Computer architecture
Pair programming
System programming
Neural networks
Speech recognition
Signal analysis
Computer vision (Visual computing)
IC Design
Voice over IP
Speech synthesis
Human-Computer Interaction
Microprocessor
Image processing
Natural language processing
Speech processing
Digital signal processing








Software engineering



Software maintenance
Formal methods
Software quality
Software quality assurance
Measurement Software
Fault-tolerant software
Software testing
Enterprise architecture
Software architecture
Software engineering economics
Agile software development
Software design pattern
Software modelling
Systems analyst
Object-oriented analysis and design (UML)
Requirements analysis
Software development
Software configuration management
Software project management
Software engineering management
Software development process (Software release life cycle)
Software design
Software deployment
Software enhancement








Computer network



Network security
Secure electronic transaction
Network Performance Evaluation (QoS)
Cloud computing
Routing
Distributed systems (Distributed database)
Information theory
Wireless network
Next-generation network
Cellular network
Optical transport network (Optical networking)
Cryptography
Network simulation
Pattern recognition
Network administrators
Network equipment
Network design
Ubiquitous and Mobile computing
Data center
Mobile communications
Digital communication
Communications satellite
Telecommunication (Telecommunications network)








Business informatics



ITIL
ITSM
Enterprise resource planning
Electronic business
Business intelligence
Human Resources Development
Security management
Configuration management
Technology management
Power management
Service management
Project management
Systems management
Network management
Content management
Customer relationship management
Incident management
Asset management
Integrated management
Communications management
System administrator













Authority control



NDL: 01003351















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ubiquitous_computing&amp;oldid=689989880"					
				Categories: Ubiquitous computingHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from October 2015All articles needing additional references				
							
		
		
			Navigation menu

			
									
						Personal tools
						
							Create accountLog in						
					
									
										
						Namespaces
						
															Article
															Talk
													
					
										
												
							Variants
						

						
							
															
						
					
									
				
										
						Views
						
															Read
															Edit
															View history
													
					
										
						More

						
							
															
						
					
										
						
							Search
						

						
							
														
						
					
									
			
			
				
						
			Navigation

			
									
						Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store					
							
		
			
			Interaction

			
									
						HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page					
							
		
			
			Tools

			
									
						What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page					
							
		
			
			Print/export

			
									
						Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version					
							
		
			
			Languages

			
									
						CatalàDanskDeutschEspañolفارسیFrançais한국어ItalianoNederlands日本語PolskiPortuguêsSuomiУкраїнська中文					
				Edit links			
		
				
		
		
							
											 This page was last modified on 10 November 2015, at 16:58.
											Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
									
							
											Privacy policy
											About Wikipedia
											Disclaimers
											Contact Wikipedia
											Developers
											