


		
		
		
			

							
						


			United States Army
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				

United States Army






Emblem of the United States Department of the Army



Active
14 June 1775&#160;– present
(240 years,&#160;5 months)[1][2]


Country
&#160;United States of America


Allegiance
United States Constitution


Type
Army


Role
Ground-based military warfare


Size
546,057 Active personnel (2012)
559,244 Reserve and National Guard personnel (2012)
1,105,301 total (2012)[3]
4,948 aircraft[4]


Part&#160;of

U.S. Department of Defense

Dept. of the Army (1947–)




Motto
"This We'll Defend"


Colors
Black, Gold &#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;[5]


March
"The Army Goes Rolling Along"


Anniversaries
Army Day (14 June)


Engagements

American Revolutionary War
Whiskey Rebellion
Indian Wars

Northwest Indian War

First Barbary War
War of 1812
Patriot War
Mexican–American War
Utah War
Cortina Troubles
Reform War
American Civil War
Las Cuevas War
Spanish–American War
Banana Wars
Philippine–American War
Boxer Rebellion
Border War
World War I
Russian Civil War
World War II
Puerto Rican Nationalist Revolts
Korean War
1958 Lebanon crisis
Operation Power Pack
Vietnam War
Korean DMZ Conflict
Operation Eagle Claw
Multinational Force Lebanon
Invasion of Grenada
Operation Golden Pheasant
Invasion of Panama
Persian Gulf War
Somali Civil War
Kosovo War
Operation Enduring Freedom

Afghanistan
Philippines
Horn of Africa
Trans Sahara

Iraq War
War in North-West Pakistan
Pakistan-United States skirmishes
Intervention against ISIL


Website
www.Army.mil


Commanders


Commander-in-Chief
President Barack Obama


Secretary of Defense
The Honorable Ashton Carter


Secretary of the Army
The Honorable John M. McHugh


Chief of Staff
GEN Mark A. Milley


Vice Chief of Staff
GEN Dan Allyn


Sergeant Major
SMA Daniel A. Dailey


Insignia


Flag



Identification
symbol



The United States Army (USA) is the largest branch of the United States Armed Forces and performs land-based military operations. It is one of the seven uniformed services of the United States, and is designated as the Army of the United States in the United States Constitution, Article 2, Section 2, Clause 1 and United States Code, Title 10, Subtitle B, Chapter 301, Section 3001. As the largest and senior branch of the U.S. military, the modern U.S. Army has its roots in the Continental Army, which was formed (14 June 1775) to fight the American Revolutionary War (1775–83)—before the U.S. was established as a country.[6] After the Revolutionary War, the Congress of the Confederation created the United States Army on 3 June 1784, to replace the disbanded Continental Army.[7][8] The United States Army considers itself descended from the Continental Army, and dates its institutional inception from the origin of that armed force in 1775.[6]
As a uniformed military service, the Army is part of the Department of the Army, which is one of the three military departments of the Department of Defense. The U.S. Army is headed by a civilian senior appointed civil servant, the Secretary of the Army (SECARMY), and by a chief military officer, the Chief of Staff of the Army (CSA) who is also a member of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. In the fiscal year 2011, the reported strengths for the Regular Army (USA) was 546,057 soldiers; the Army National Guard (ARNG) had 358,078 soldiers, and the United States Army Reserve (USAR) had 201,166 soldiers; the combined-component strength of the U.S. Army was 1,105,301 soldiers.[3] As a branch of the armed forces, the mission of the U.S. Army is "to fight and win our Nation's wars, by providing prompt, sustained, land dominance, across the full range of military operations and the spectrum of conflict, in support of combatant commanders."[9]



Contents


1 Mission
2 History

2.1 Origins
2.2 19th century

2.2.1 Early Wars on the Frontier
2.2.2 American Civil War
2.2.3 Later 19th century


2.3 20th century
2.4 21st century


3 Organization

3.1 Army components
3.2 Army commands and army service component commands
3.3 Structure
3.4 Regular combat maneuver organizations
3.5 Special operations forces


4 Personnel

4.1 Commissioned officers
4.2 Warrant officers
4.3 Enlisted personnel
4.4 Training


5 Equipment

5.1 Weapons
5.2 Vehicles
5.3 Uniforms

5.3.1 Berets


5.4 Tents
5.5 3D printing


6 See also
7 References
8 Further reading
9 External links



Mission
The United States Army serves as the land-based branch of the U.S. Armed Forces. Section 3062 of Title 10 US Code defines the purpose of the army as:[10][11]

Preserving the peace and security and providing for the defense of the United States, the Commonwealths and possessions and any areas occupied by the United States
Supporting the national policies
Implementing the national objectives
Overcoming any nations responsible for aggressive acts that imperil the peace and security of the United States

History
Main article: History of the United States Army





This article or section may need to be cleaned up or summarized. This section has been split from/to History of the United States Army.


Origins




Storming of Redoubt #10 in the Siege of Yorktown during the American Revolutionary War prompted the British government to begin negotiations, resulting in the Treaty of Paris and British recognition of the United States of America.


The Continental Army was created on 14 June 1775 by the Continental Congress[12] as a unified army for the colonies to fight Great Britain, with George Washington appointed as its commander.[6][13][14][15] The army was initially led by men who had served in the British Army or colonial militias and who brought much of British military heritage with them. As the Revolutionary War progressed, French aid, resources, and military thinking influenced the new army. A number of European soldiers came on their own to help, such as Friedrich Wilhelm von Steuben, who taught the army Prussian tactics and organizational skills.
The army fought numerous pitched battles and in the South 1780–81 sometimes used the Fabian strategy and hit-and-run tactics, hitting where the enemy was weakest, to wear down the British forces. Washington led victories against the British at Trenton and Princeton, but lost a series of battles around New York City in 1776 and Philadelphia in 1777. With a decisive victory at Yorktown, and the help of the French, the Continental Army prevailed against the British.
After the war, though, the Continental Army was quickly given land certificates and disbanded in a reflection of the republican distrust of standing armies. State militias became the new nation's sole ground army, with the exception of a regiment to guard the Western Frontier and one battery of artillery guarding West Point's arsenal. However, because of continuing conflict with Native Americans, it was soon realized that it was necessary to field a trained standing army. The Regular Army was at first very small, and after General St. Clair's defeat at the Battle of the Wabash, the Regular Army was reorganized as the Legion of the United States, which was established in 1791 and renamed the "United States Army" in 1796.
19th century
Early Wars on the Frontier
Further information: Army on the Frontier




General Andrew Jackson stands on the parapet of his makeshift defenses as his troops repulse attacking Highlanders during the defense of New Orleans, the final major battle of the War of 1812


The War of 1812, the second and last American war against the United Kingdom, was less successful for the U.S. than the Revolution and Northwest Indian War against natives had been, though it ended on a high note for Americans as well. After the taking control of Lake Erie in 1813, the Americans were able to seize parts of western Upper Canada, burn York and defeat Tecumseh, which caused his Indian Confederacy to collapse. Following ending victories in the province of Upper Canada, which dubbed the U.S. Army "Regulars, by God!", British troops were able to capture and burn Washington. The regular army, however, proved they were professional and capable of defeating the British army during the invasions of Plattsburgh and Baltimore, prompting British agreement on the previously rejected terms of a status quo ante bellum. Two weeks after a treaty was signed (but not ratified), Andrew Jackson defeated the British in the Battle of New Orleans and became a national hero. Per the treaty both sides returned to the status quo with no victor.
The army's major campaign against the Indians was fought in Florida against Seminoles. It took long wars (1818–58) to finally defeat the Seminoles and move them to Oklahoma. The usual strategy in Indian wars was to seize control of the Indians winter food supply, but that was no use in Florida where there was no winter. The second strategy was to form alliances with other Indian tribes, but that too was useless because the Seminoles had destroyed all the other Indians when they entered Florida in the late eighteenth century.[16]
The U.S. Army fought and won the Mexican–American War (1846–1848), which was a defining event for both countries.[17] The U.S. victory resulted in acquisition of territory that eventually became all or parts of the states of California, Nevada, Utah, Colorado, Arizona, Wyoming and New Mexico.
American Civil War
Further information: Union Army




The Battle of Gettysburg, the turning point of the American Civil War


The American Civil War was the costliest war for the U.S. in terms of casualties. After most slave states, located in the southern U.S., formed the Confederate States of America, C.S. troops led by former U.S. Army officers, mobilized a very large fraction of Southern white manpower. Forces of the United States (the "Union" or "the North") formed the Union Army consisting of a small body of regular army units and a large body of volunteer units raised from every state, north and south, except South Carolina.[citation needed]
For the first two years Confederate forces did well in set battles but lost control of the border states.[18] The Confederates had the advantage of defending a very large country in an area where disease caused twice as many deaths as combat. The Union pursued a strategy of seizing the coastline, blockading the ports, and taking control of the river systems. By 1863 the Confederacy was being strangled. Its eastern armies fought well, but the western armies were defeated one after another until the Union forces captured New Orleans in 1862 along with the Tennessee River. In the famous Vicksburg Campaign of 1862–63, Ulysses Grant seized the Mississippi River and cut off the Southwest. Grant took command of Union forces in 1864 and after a series of battles with very heavy casualties, he had Lee under siege in Richmond as William T. Sherman captured Atlanta and marched through Georgia and the Carolinas. The Confederate capital was abandoned in April 1865 and Lee subsequently surrendered his army at Appomattox Court House; all other Confederate armies surrendered within a few months.
The war remains the deadliest conflict in American history, resulting in the deaths of 620,000 soldiers. Based on 1860 census figures, 8% of all white males aged 13 to 43 died in the war, including 6.4% in the North and 18% in the South.[19]
Later 19th century
Following the Civil War, the U.S. Army had the mission of containing western tribes of Native Americans on their reservations. There were many forts set up, and several campaigns. U. S. Army troops also occupied several of the Southern states during the Reconstruction Era.
The key battles of the Spanish–American War of 1898 were fought by the Navy. Using mostly new volunteers, the US Army defeated Spain in land campaigns in Cuba and played the central role in suppressing a rebellion in the Philippines.
20th century




U.S. Army troops assault on a German bunker, France, circa 1918


Starting in 1910, the army began acquiring fixed-wing aircraft.[20] In 1910, Mexico was having a civil war, peasant rebels fighting government soldiers. The army was deployed to American towns near the border to ensure safety to lives and property. In 1916, Pancho Villa, a major rebel leader, attacked Columbus, New Mexico, prompting a U.S. intervention in Mexico until 7 February 1917. They fought the rebels and the Mexican federal troops until 1918. The United States joined World War I in 1917 on the side of Britain, France, Russia, Italy and other allies. U.S. troops were sent to the Western Front and were involved in the last offences that ended the war. With the armistice in November 1918, the army once again decreased its forces.




American soldiers hunt Japanese infiltrators during the Bougainville Campaign


For a list of campaigns see List of United States Army campaigns during World War II
The United States joined World War II in December 1941 after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. On the European front, U.S. Army troops formed a significant portion of the forces that captured North Africa and Sicily, and later fought in Italy. On D-Day, June 6, 1944, and in the subsequent liberation of Europe and defeat of Nazi Germany, millions of U.S. Army troops played a central role. In the Pacific War, U.S. Army soldiers participated alongside the United States Marine Corps in capturing the Pacific Islands from Japanese control. Following the Axis surrenders in May (Germany) and August (Japan) of 1945, army troops were deployed to Japan and Germany to occupy the two defeated nations. Two years after World War II, the Army Air Forces separated from the army to become the United States Air Force in September 1947 after decades of attempting to separate. Also, in 1948, the army was desegregated by order of President Harry S. Truman.




Men of the 3rd Battalion, 504th Parachute Infantry Regiment, part of the 82nd Airborne Division, advance in a snowstorm behind a tank, January 1945


The end of World War II set the stage for the East–West confrontation known as the Cold War. With the outbreak of the Korean War, concerns over the defense of Western Europe rose. Two corps, V and VII, were reactivated under Seventh United States Army in 1950 and American strength in Europe rose from one division to four. Hundreds of thousands of U.S. troops remained stationed in West Germany, with others in Belgium, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom, until the 1990s in anticipation of a possible Soviet attack.




U.S. Army soldiers look upon an atomic bomb test of Operation Buster-Jangle at the Nevada Test Site during the Korean War


During the Cold War, American troops and their allies fought Communist forces in Korea and Vietnam. The Korean War began in 1950, when the Soviets walked out of a U.N. Security meeting, removing their possible veto. Under a United Nations umbrella, hundreds of thousands of U.S. troops fought to prevent the takeover of South Korea by North Korea, and later, to invade the northern nation. After repeated advances and retreats by both sides, and the PRC People's Volunteer Army's entry into the war, the Korean Armistice Agreement returned the peninsula to the status quo in 1953.
The Vietnam War is often regarded as a low point for the U.S. Army due to the use of drafted personnel, the unpopularity of the war with the American public, and frustrating restrictions placed on the military by American political leaders. While American forces had been stationed in the Republic of Vietnam since 1959, in intelligence &amp; advising/training roles, they did not deploy in large numbers until 1965, after the Gulf of Tonkin Incident. American forces effectively established and maintained control of the "traditional" battlefield, however they struggled to counter the guerrilla hit and run tactics of the communist Viet Cong and the North Vietnamese Army. On a tactical level, American soldiers (and the U.S. military as a whole) did not lose a sizable battle.[21]




A U.S. Army infantry patrol moves up to assault the last North Vietnamese Army position at Dak To, South Vietnam during Operation Hawthorne


During the 1960s the Department of Defense continued to scrutinize the reserve forces and to question the number of divisions and brigades as well as the redundancy of maintaining two reserve components, the Army National Guard and the Army Reserve.[22] In 1967 Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara decided that 15 combat divisions in the Army National Guard were unnecessary and cut the number to 8 divisions (1 mechanized infantry, 2 armored, and 5 infantry), but increased the number of brigades from 7 to 18 (1 airborne, 1 armored, 2 mechanized infantry, and 14 infantry). The loss of the divisions did not set well with the states. Their objections included the inadequate maneuver element mix for those that remained and the end to the practice of rotating divisional commands among the states that supported them. Under the proposal, the remaining division commanders were to reside in the state of the division base. No reduction, however, in total Army National Guard strength was to take place, which convinced the governors to accept the plan. The states reorganized their forces accordingly between 1 December 1967 and 1 May 1968.




M1 Abrams move out before the Battle of Al Busayyah during the Gulf War


The Total Force Policy was adopted by Chief of Staff of the Army General Creighton Abrams in the aftermath of the Vietnam War and involves treating the three components of the army – the Regular Army, the Army National Guard and the Army Reserve as a single force.[23] Believing that no U.S. president should be able to take the United States (and more specifically the U.S. Army) to war without the support of the American people, General Abrams intertwined the structure of the three components of the army in such a way as to make extended operations impossible, without the involvement of both the Army National Guard and the Army Reserve.[24]
The 1980s was mostly a decade of reorganization. The army converted to an all-volunteer force with greater emphasis on training and technology. The Goldwater-Nichols Act of 1986 created unified combatant commands bringing the army together with the other four military services under unified, geographically organized command structures. The army also played a role in the invasions of Grenada in 1983 (Operation Urgent Fury) and Panama in 1989 (Operation Just Cause).




U.S. Army soldiers prepare to take La Comandancia in the El Chorrillo neighborhood of Panama City during the United States invasion of Panama


By 1989 Germany was nearing reunification and the Cold War was coming to a close. Army leadership reacted by starting to plan for a reduction in strength. By November 1989 Pentagon briefers were laying out plans to reduce army end strength by 23%, from 750,000 to 580,000.[25] A number of incentives such as early retirement were used. In 1990 Iraq invaded its smaller neighbor, Kuwait, and U.S. land forces, quickly deployed to assure the protection of Saudi Arabia. In January 1991 Operation Desert Storm commenced, a U.S.-led coalition which deployed over 500,000 troops, the bulk of them from U.S. Army formations, to drive out Iraqi forces. The campaign ended in total victory, as Western coalition forces routed the Iraqi Army, organized along Soviet lines, in just one hundred hours.
After Operation Desert Storm, the army did not see major combat operations for the remainder of the 1990s but did participate in a number of peacekeeping activities. In 1990 the Department of Defense issued guidance for "rebalancing" after a review of the Total Force Policy,[26] but in 2004, Air War College scholars concluded the guidance would reverse the Total Force Policy which is an "essential ingredient to the successful application of military force."[27]
21st century




Army Rangers from the 1st Ranger Battalion conduct a MOUT exercise at Fort Bragg, North Carolina.






Army Rangers take part in a raid during operation in Nahr-e Saraj, Afghanistan


On September 11, 2001, 53 Army civilians (47 employees and six contractors) and 22 soldiers were among the 125 victims killed in the Pentagon in a terrorist attack when American Airlines Flight 77 commandeered by five Al-Qaeda hijackers slammed into the western side of the building, as part of the September 11 attacks.[28] Lieutenant General Timothy Maude was the highest-ranking military official killed at the Pentagon, and the most senior U.S. Army officer killed by foreign action since the death of Lieutenant General Simon B. Buckner, Jr. on June 18, 1945, in the Battle of Okinawa during World War II.[29]
In response to the September 11 attacks, and as part of the Global War on Terror, U.S. and NATO forces invaded Afghanistan in October 2001, displacing the Taliban government. The U.S. Army also led the combined U.S. and allied invasion of Iraq in 2003. In the following years the mission changed from conflict between regular militaries to counterinsurgency, resulting in the deaths of more than 4,000 U.S service members (as of March 2008) and injuries to thousands more.[30][31] 23,813 insurgents[32] were killed in Iraq between 2003–2011.
The army's chief modernization plan was the FCS program. Many systems were canceled and the remaining were swept into the BCT modernization program.[citation needed] In response to Budget sequestration in 2013 the army is planned to shrink to a size not seen since the WWII buildup.[33] The 2015 expenditure for Army research, development and acquisition changed from $32 billion projected in 2012 for FY15, to $21 billion for FY15 expected in 2014.[34]
Organization
Main article: Structure of the United States Army




Organization chart[35]


Army components
The task of organizing the U.S. Army commenced in 1775.[36] In the first one hundred years of its existence, the United States Army was maintained as a small peacetime force to man permanent forts and perform other non-wartime duties such as engineering and construction works. During times of war, the U.S. Army was augmented by the much larger United States Volunteers which were raised independently by various state governments. States also maintained full-time militias which could also be called into the service of the army.




U.S. general officers, World War II, Europe


By the twentieth century, the U.S. Army had mobilized the U.S. Volunteers on four separate occasions during each of the major wars of the nineteenth century. During World War I, the "National Army" was organized to fight the conflict, replacing the concept of U.S. Volunteers.[37] It was demobilized at the end of World War I, and was replaced by the Regular Army, the Organized Reserve Corps, and the State Militias. In the 1920s and 1930s, the "career" soldiers were known as the "Regular Army" with the "Enlisted Reserve Corps" and "Officer Reserve Corps" augmented to fill vacancies when needed.[38]
In 1941, the "Army of the United States" was founded to fight World War II. The Regular Army, Army of the United States, the National Guard, and Officer/Enlisted Reserve Corps (ORC and ERC) existed simultaneously. After World War II, the ORC and ERC were combined into the United States Army Reserve. The Army of the United States was re-established for the Korean War and Vietnam War and was demobilized upon the suspension of the draft.[38]
Currently, the army is divided into the Regular Army, the Army Reserve, and the Army National Guard.[37] The army is also divided into major branches such as Air Defense Artillery, Infantry, Aviation, Signal Corps, Corps of Engineers, and Armor. Before 1903 members of the National Guard were considered state soldiers unless federalized (i.e., activated) by the President. Since the Militia Act of 1903 all National Guard soldiers have held dual status: as National Guardsmen under the authority of the governor of their state or territory and, when activated, as a reserve of the U.S. Army under the authority of the President.
Since the adoption of the total force policy, in the aftermath of the Vietnam War, reserve component soldiers have taken a more active role in U.S. military operations. For example, Reserve and Guard units took part in the Gulf War, peacekeeping in Kosovo, Afghanistan, and the 2003 invasion of Iraq.
Army commands and army service component commands
 Headquarters, United States Department of the Army (HQDA):


Army Commands
Current commander
Location of headquarters


 United States Army Forces Command (FORSCOM)
GEN Robert B. Abrams
Fort Bragg, North Carolina


 United States Army Materiel Command (AMC)
GEN Dennis L. Via
Redstone Arsenal, Alabama


 United States Army Training and Doctrine Command (TRADOC)
GEN David G. Perkins
Fort Eustis, Virginia


Army Service Component Commands
Current commander
Location of headquarters


 United States Army Africa (USARAF) / Ninth Army / United States Army Southern European Task Force[39]
MG Darryl A. Williams
Caserma Ederle, Vicenza, Italy


 United States Army Central (ARCENT) / Third Army
LTG James L. Terry
Shaw Air Force Base, South Carolina


 United States Army Europe (USAREUR) / Seventh Army (US)
LTG Ben Hodges
Clay Kaserne, Wiesbaden, Germany


 United States Army North (ARNORTH) / Fifth Army
LTG Perry L. Wiggins
Joint Base San Antonio, Texas


 United States Army Pacific (USARPAC)
GEN Vincent K. Brooks
Fort Shafter, Hawaii


 United States Army South (ARSOUTH) / Sixth Army
MG Clarence K.K. Chinn
Joint Base San Antonio, Texas


 Surface Deployment and Distribution Command (SDDC)
MG Susan A. Davidson[40]
Scott AFB, Illinois


 United States Army Space and Missile Defense Command/ United States Army Strategic Command (USASMDC/ARSTRAT)
LTG David Mann
Redstone Arsenal, Alabama


 United States Army Special Operations Command (USASOC)
LTG Charles T. Cleveland
Fort Bragg, North Carolina


Operational Force Headquarters
Current commander
Location of headquarters


 Eighth Army (EUSA)[41]
LTG Bernard S. Champoux
Yongsan Garrison, South Korea


 United States Army Cyber Command (ARCYBER)[42][43][44]
LTG Edward Cardon
Fort Belvoir, Virginia


Direct reporting units
Current commander
Location of headquarters


Arlington National Cemetery and Soldiers' and Airmen's Home National Cemetery[45]
Jack E. Lechner
Arlington, Virginia


 Second Army[42][46]
LTG Edward Cardon
Fort Belvoir, Virginia


United States Army Accessions Support Brigade (USAASB)[47]
COL Brian M. Cavanaugh
Fort Knox, Kentucky


United States Army Acquisition Support Center (USASC)[48]
Craig A. Spisak
Fort Belvoir, Virginia


 United States Army Corps of Engineers (USACE)
LTG Thomas P. Bostick
Washington, D.C.


 United States Army Criminal Investigation Command (USACIDC)
MG David E. Quantock
Quantico, Virginia


 United States Army Installation Management Command (IMCOM)
LTG David D. Halverson
Joint Base San Antonio, Texas


 United States Army Intelligence and Security Command (INSCOM)
MG George J. Franz III
Fort Belvoir, Virginia


 United States Army Medical Command (MEDCOM)
LTG Patricia D. Horoho
Joint Base San Antonio, Texas


 United States Army Military District of Washington (MDW)
MG Jeffrey S. Buchanan
Fort Lesley J. McNair, Washington, D.C.


 United States Army Test and Evaluation Command (ATEC)
MG Peter D. Utley
Alexandria, Virginia


 United States Army War College (AWC)[49]
MG William Rapp
Carlisle, Pennsylvania


 United States Military Academy (USMA)
LTG Robert L. Caslen
West Point, New York


Subordinate to United States Army Forces Command
Current commander
Location of headquarters


 First Army (FUSA)[50]
LTG Michael S. Tucker
Rock Island Arsenal, Rock Island, Illinois


 United States Army Reserve Command (USARC)[51]
LTG Jeffrey W. Talley
Fort Bragg, North Carolina


Source: U.S. Army organization[52]
Structure
Main article: Transformation of the United States Army




U.S. Army Soldiers of 1st Battalion, 175th Infantry Regiment, Maryland Army National Guard conduct an urban cordon and search exercise as part of the army readiness and training evaluation program in the mock city of Balad at Fort Dix, NJ






Soldiers from the 6th Infantry Regiment taking up positions on a street corner during a foot patrol in Ramadi, Iraq


The United States Army is made up of three components: the active component, the Regular Army; and two reserve components, the Army National Guard and the Army Reserve. Both reserve components are primarily composed of part-time soldiers who train once a month, known as battle assemblies or unit training assemblies (UTAs), and conduct two to three weeks of annual training each year. Both the Regular Army and the Army Reserve are organized under Title 10 of the United States Code, while the National Guard is organized under Title 32. While the Army National Guard is organized, trained and equipped as a component of the U.S. Army, when it is not in federal service it is under the command of individual state and territorial governors; the District of Columbia National Guard, however, reports to the U.S. President, not the district's mayor, even when not federalized. Any or all of the National Guard can be federalized by presidential order and against the governor's wishes.[53]
The army is led by a civilian Secretary of the Army, who has the statutory authority to conduct all the affairs of the army under the authority, direction and control of the Secretary of Defense.[54] The Chief of Staff of the Army, who is the highest-ranked military officer in the army, serves as the principal military adviser and executive agent for the Secretary of the Army, i.e., its service chief; and as a member of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, a body composed of the service chiefs from each of the four military services belonging to the Department of Defense who advise the President of the United States, the Secretary of Defense, and the National Security Council on operational military matters, under the guidance of the Chairman and Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.[55][56] In 1986, the Goldwater–Nichols Act mandated that operational control of the services follows a chain of command from the President to the Secretary of Defense directly to the unified combatant commanders, who have control of all armed forces units in their geographic or function area of responsibility. Thus, the secretaries of the military departments (and their respective service chiefs underneath them) only have the responsibility to organize, train and equip their service components. The army provides trained forces to the combatant commanders for use as directed by the Secretary of Defense.[57]




The 1st Cavalry Division's combat aviation brigade performs a mock charge with the horse detachment


Through 2013, the army is shifting to six geographical commands that will line up with the six geographical unified combatant commands (COCOM):

United States Army Central headquartered at Shaw Air Force Base, South Carolina
United States Army North headquartered at Fort Sam Houston, Texas
United States Army South headquartered at Fort Sam Houston, Texas
United States Army Europe headquartered at Clay Kaserne, Wiesbaden, Germany
United States Army Pacific headquartered at Fort Shafter, Hawaii
United States Army Africa headquartered at Vicenza, Italy





U.S. Army Special Forces soldiers from the 3rd Special Forces Group patrol a field in the Gulistan district of Farah, Afghanistan


The army is also changing its base unit from divisions to brigades. Division lineage will be retained, but the divisional headquarters will be able to command any brigade, not just brigades that carry their divisional lineage. The central part of this plan is that each brigade will be modular, i.e., all brigades of the same type will be exactly the same, and thus any brigade can be commanded by any division. As specified before the 2013 end-strength re-definitions, the three major types of ground combat brigades are:

Armor brigade, with strength of 4,743 troops as of 2014.
Stryker brigades, with strength of 4,500 troops as of 2014.
Infantry brigades, with strength of 4,413 troops as of 2014.

In addition, there are combat support and service support modular brigades. Combat support brigades include aviation (CAB) brigades, which will come in heavy and light varieties, fires (artillery) brigades (now transforms to division artillery), and battlefield surveillance brigades. Combat service support brigades include sustainment brigades and come in several varieties and serve the standard support role in an army.
Regular combat maneuver organizations

To track the effects of the 2018 budget cuts, see Transformation of the United States Army#Divisions and Brigades

The U.S. Army currently consists of 10 active divisions as well as several independent units. The force is in the process of contracting after several years of growth. In June 2013, the Army announced plans to downsize to 32 active combat brigade teams by 2015 to match a reduction in active duty strength to 490,000 soldiers. Army Chief of Staff Raymond Odierno has projected that by 2018 the Army will eventually shrink to "450,000 in the active component, 335,000 in the National Guard and 195,000 in U.S. Army Reserve."[58]
Within the Army National Guard and United States Army Reserve there are a further eight divisions, over fifteen maneuver brigades, additional combat support and combat service support brigades, and independent cavalry, infantry, artillery, aviation, engineer, and support battalions. The Army Reserve in particular provides virtually all psychological operations and civil affairs units.
 United States Army Forces Command (FORSCOM):


Name
Headquarters
Subunits




1st Armored Division
Fort Bliss, Texas
1st Stryker BCT, 2nd &amp; 3rd Armored BCTs, DIVARTY and Combat Aviation Brigade (CAB).[59]




1st Cavalry Division
Fort Hood, Texas
1st, 2nd, &amp; 3rd Armored BCTs, DIVARTY &amp; CAB.


 1st Infantry Division
Fort Riley, Kansas
1st &amp; 2nd Armored BCTs, DIVARTY &amp; CAB.




2nd Infantry Division
Camp Red Cloud, South Korea
1st &amp; 2nd Stryker BCTs, &amp; DIVARTY at Joint Base Lewis-McChord, Washington under administrative control of 7th Infantry Division. 16th ROK Army Brigade (soon to be included in structure),[60] CAB at Camp Humphreys South Korea




3rd Infantry Division
Fort Stewart, Georgia
1st Armored, 2nd Infantry BCT (Light), &amp; DIVARTY at Fort Stewart, Georgia; 3rd Armored BCT at Fort Benning, Georgia; CAB at Hunter Army Airfield, Georgia.




4th Infantry Division
Fort Carson, Colorado
1st Stryker BCT, 2nd Infantry BCT (Light), 3rd Armored BCT, DIVARTY &amp; CAB.




10th Mountain Division
Fort Drum, New York
1st, 2nd Infantry BCTs (Light), DIVARTY &amp; CAB at Fort Drum; 3rd Infantry BCT (Light) at Fort Polk, Louisiana.




25th Infantry Division
Schofield Barracks, Hawaii
1st Stryker BCT at Fort Wainwright, Alaska; 2nd Stryker BCT, 3rd Infantry BCT (Light) &amp; DIVARTY at Schofield Barracks; CAB at Wheeler Army Airfield, Hawaii; &amp; 4th Infantry BCT (Airborne) at Joint Base Elmendorf-Richardson, Alaska.




82nd Airborne Division
Fort Bragg, North Carolina
1st, 2nd, &amp; 3rd Infantry BCTs (Airborne), DIVARTY &amp; CAB.




101st Airborne Division
Fort Campbell, Kentucky
1st, 2nd &amp; 3rd Infantry BCTs (Air Assault), DIVARTY &amp; CAB.




173rd Airborne Brigade Combat Team
Vicenza, Italy
Infantry BCT (Airborne): 2 airborne infantry battalions in Vicenza. 1 cavalry squadron &amp; 1 airborne field artillery battalion in Grafenwoehr, Germany. 1 special troops battalion, &amp; 1 support battalion at Vicenza.




2nd Cavalry Regiment
Vilseck, Germany
Stryker BCT: 6 squadrons: 1st, 2nd &amp; 3rd (Stryker Infantry), 4th (RSTA), Fires Squadron (3x6 155&#160;mm towed artillery), Regimental Engineer Squadron (Military Intelligence, Signal, Engineer &amp; Anti-Armor), &amp; Regimental Support Squadron.




3d Cavalry Regiment
Fort Hood, Texas
Stryker BCT: 6 squadrons: 1st, 2nd &amp; 3rd (Stryker Infantry), 4th (RSTA), Fires Squadron (3x6 155&#160;mm towed artillery), &amp; Regimental Support Squadron; 5 troops: Regimental HQ, Military Intelligence, Signal, Engineer &amp; Anti-Armor.




11th Armored Cavalry Regiment
Fort Irwin, California
Armored Cavalry Regiment: Two Combined Arms squadrons (each with two Mechanized Infantry Troops and two Armor Troops) and one support squadron augmented by an Army National Guard field artillery battalion and reconnaissance squadron. Also serves as Opposing Force (OPFOR) at National Training Center (NTC).


For a description of US Army tactical organizational structure, see: a US context, and also a global context.
Special operations forces
 United States Army Special Operations Command (Airborne) (USASOC):[61]


Name
Headquarters
Structure and purpose




Special Forces Command (Airborne)"Green Berets"
Fort Bragg, North Carolina
The command manages seven groups (five Regular Army, two Army National Guard) capable of unconventional warfare, foreign internal defense, special reconnaissance, direct action, and counter-terrorism.




John F. Kennedy Special Warfare Center and School
Ft. Bragg, North Carolina
Selection &amp; training for Special Forces, Civil Affairs &amp; Military Information Support Operations Soldiers.




75th Ranger Regiment "Rangers"
Fort Benning, Georgia
Three maneuver battalions and one special troops battalion of elite airborne infantry specializing in direct action raids and airfield seizures.




Army Special Operations Aviation Command
Ft. Bragg, North Carolina
Organizes, mans, trains, resources and equips Army special operations aviation units to provide responsive, special operations aviation support to Special Operations Forces (SOF), including the 160th Special Operations Aviation Regiment (Airborne).




Military Information Support Operations Command (Airborne) (Provisional)
Ft. Bragg, North Carolina
Performs psychological operations via two operational groups, the 4th Military Information Support Group and 8th Military Information Support Group, and one independent battalion, the 3rd Military Information Support Battalion (Airborne), that supports media production and dissemination.




95th Civil Affairs Brigade (Airborne)
Ft. Bragg, North Carolina
Enables military commanders and U.S. Ambassadors to improve relationships with various stakeholders in a local area to meet the objectives of the U.S. government via five operational battalions.




528th Sustainment Brigade, Special Operations (Airborne)
Ft. Bragg, North Carolina
Provides combat service support and combat health support units for all USASOC elements.




1st Special Forces Operational Detachment-Delta "Delta Force"
Ft. Bragg, North Carolina
Elite special operations &amp; counter-terrorism unit under the control of Joint Special Operations Command.


Personnel
Main articles: Ranks and Insignia of NATO, United States Army officer rank insignia and United States Army enlisted rank insignia
These are the U.S. Army ranks authorized for use today and their equivalent NATO designations. Although no living officer currently holds the rank of General of the Army, it is still authorized by Congress for use in wartime.
Commissioned officers
Main article: Commissioned Officers
There are several paths to becoming a commissioned officer[62] including the United States Military Academy, Reserve Officers' Training Corps, and Officer Candidate School. Regardless of which road an officer takes, the insignia are the same. Certain professions, including physicians, pharmacists, nurses, lawyers, and chaplains are commissioned directly into the army and are designated by insignia unique to their staff community.
Most army commissioned officers are promoted based on an "up or out" system. The Defense Officer Personnel Management Act of 1980 establishes rules for timing of promotions and limits the number of officers that can serve at any given time.
Army regulations call for addressing all personnel with the rank of general as 'General (last name)' regardless of the number of stars. Likewise, both colonels and lieutenant colonels are addressed as 'Colonel (last name)' and first and second lieutenants as 'Lieutenant (last name).'[63]


US DoD Pay Grade
O-1
O-2
O-3
O-4
O-5
O-6
O-7
O-8
O-9
O-10
Special
Special


Insignia














Title
Second
Lieutenant
First
Lieutenant
Captain
Major
Lieutenant
Colonel
Colonel
Brigadier
General
Major
General
Lieutenant
General
General
General of the
Army
General of the Armies of the United States


Abbreviation
2LT
1LT
CPT
MAJ
LTC
COL
BG
MG
LTG
GEN
GA
-



NATO Code
OF-1
OF-2
OF-3
OF-4
OF-5
OF-6
OF-7
OF-8
OF-9
OF-10
-


Note: General of the Army is reserved for wartime.[64]


Warrant officers
Main article: Warrant officers
Warrant officers[62] are single track, specialty officers with subject matter expertise in a particular area. They are initially appointed as warrant officers (in the rank of WO1) by the Secretary of the Army, but receive their commission upon promotion to chief warrant officer two (CW2).
By regulation, warrant officers are addressed as 'Mr. (last name)' or 'Ms. (last name).'[63] However, many personnel address warrant officers as 'Chief (last name)'. Enlisted soldiers say "sir" or "ma'am" when addressing them.


US DoD pay grade
W-1
W-2
W-3
W-4
W-5


Insignia







Title
Warrant Officer 1
Chief Warrant Officer 2
Chief Warrant Officer 3
Chief Warrant Officer 4
Chief Warrant Officer 5


Abbreviation
WO1
CW2
CW3
CW4
CW5


NATO Rank
WO-1
WO-2
WO-3
WO-4
WO-5


Enlisted personnel
Main article: Enlisted personnel
Sergeants and corporals are referred to as NCOs, short for non-commissioned officers.[62][65] This distinguishes corporals from the more numerous specialists, who have the same pay grade but do not exercise leadership responsibilities.
Privates (E1 and E2) and privates first class (E3) are addressed as 'Private (last name)', specialists as 'Specialist (last name)', corporals as 'Corporal (last name)', and sergeants, staff sergeants, sergeants first class, and master sergeants all as 'Sergeant (last name).' First sergeants are addressed as 'First Sergeant (last name)', and sergeants major and command sergeants major are addressed as 'Sergeant Major (last name)'.[63]


US DoD Pay grade
E-1
E-2
E-3
E-4
E-5
E-6
E-7
E-8
E-9


Insignia
No Insignia














Title
Private
Private
Private
First Class
Specialist
Corporal
Sergeant
Staff
Sergeant
Sergeant
First Class
Master
Sergeant
First
Sergeant
Sergeant
Major
Command
Sergeant Major
Sergeant Major
of the Army


Abbreviation
PV1 ¹
PV2 ¹
PFC
SPC ²
CPL
SGT
SSG
SFC
MSG
1SG
SGM
CSM
SMA


NATO Code
OR-1
OR-2
OR-3
OR-4
OR-4
OR-5
OR-6
OR-7
OR-8
OR-8
OR-9
OR-9
OR-9


¹ PVT is also used as an abbreviation for both private ranks when pay grade need not be distinguished.[66]
² SP4 is sometimes encountered instead of SPC for specialist. This is a holdover from when there were additional specialist ranks at pay grades E-5 to E-7.


Training




Rangers practice fast roping techniques from an MH-47 during an exercise at Fort Bragg


Training in the U.S. Army is generally divided into two categories – individual and collective. Basic training consists of 10&#160;weeks for most recruits followed by Advanced Individualized Training (AIT) where they receive training for their military occupational specialties (MOS). Some individuals MOSs range anywhere from 14–20 weeks of One Station Unit Training (OSUT), which combines Basic Training and AIT. The length of AIT school varies by the MOS The length of time spent in AIT depends on the MOS of the soldier, and some highly technical MOS training may require many months (e.g., foreign language translators). Depending on the needs of the army, Basic Combat Training for combat arms soldiers is conducted at a number of locations, but two of the longest-running are the Armor School and the Infantry School, both at Fort Benning, Georgia.
Following their basic and advanced training at the individual-level, soldiers may choose to continue their training and apply for an "additional skill identifier" (ASI). The ASI allows the army to take a wide ranging MOS and focus it into a more specific MOS. For example, a combat medic, whose duties are to provide pre-hospital emergency treatment, may receive ASI training to become a cardiovascular specialist, a dialysis specialist, or even a licensed practical nurse. For commissioned officers, ASI training includes pre-commissioning training either at USMA, or via ROTC, or by completing OCS. After commissioning, officers undergo branch specific training at the Basic Officer Leaders Course, (formerly called Officer Basic Course), which varies in time and location according their future assignments. Further career development is available through the Army Correspondence Course Program.




Marksmanship training


Collective training at the unit level takes place at the unit's assigned station, but the most intensive training at higher echelons is conducted at the three combat training centers (CTC); the National Training Center (NTC) at Fort Irwin, California, the Joint Readiness Training Center (JRTC) at Fort Polk, Louisiana, and the Joint Multinational Training Center (JMRC) at the Hohenfels Training Area in Hohenfels, Germany. ARFORGEN is the Army Force Generation process approved in 2006 to meet the need to continuously replenish forces for deployment, at unit level, and for other echelons as required by the mission. Individual-level replenishment still requires training at a unit level, which is conducted at the continental US (CONUS) replacement center at Fort Bliss, in New Mexico and Texas, before their individual deployment.
Equipment
Main article: Equipment of the United States Army
Weapons




Lockheed Martin Terminal High Altitude Area Defense (THAAD) system used by the army for ballistic missile protection



Individual weapons

The army employs various individual weapons to provide light firepower at short ranges. The most common weapons used by the army are the compact variant of the M16 rifle, the M4 carbine,[67] as well as the 7.62x51 mm variant of the FN SCAR for Army Rangers. The primary sidearm in the U.S. Army is the 9&#160;mm M9 pistol but the M11 pistol is also used. Both handguns are to be replaced through the Modular Handgun System program.[68]
Many units are supplemented with a variety of specialized weapons, including the M249 SAW (Squad Automatic Weapon), to provide suppressive fire at the fire-team level.[69] Indirect fire is provided by the M203 grenade launcher. The M1014 Joint Service Combat Shotgun or the Mossberg 590 Shotgun are used for door breaching and close-quarters combat. The M14EBR is used by designated marksmen, and the M107 Long Range Sniper Rifle, the M2010 Enhanced Sniper Rifle, and the M110 Semi-Automatic Sniper Rifle are used by snipers. Hand grenades, such as the M67 fragmentation grenade and M18 smoke grenade, are also used.




American troops of the 28th Infantry Division march down the Avenue des Champs-Élysées, Paris, in the Victory Parade.






3rd Infantry Division soldiers manning an M1A1 Abrams in Iraq



Crew served weapons

The army employs various crew-served weapons to provide heavy firepower at ranges exceeding that of individual weapons.
The M240 is the US Army's standard Medium Machine Gun.[70] The M2 heavy machine gun is generally used as a vehicle-mounted machine gun. In the same way, the 40&#160;mm MK 19 grenade machine gun is mainly used by motorized units.[71]
The US Army uses three types of mortar for indirect fire support when heavier artillery may not be appropriate or available. The smallest of these is the 60&#160;mm M224, normally assigned at the infantry company level.[72] At the next higher echelon, infantry battalions are typically supported by a section of 81&#160;mm M252 mortars.[73] The largest mortar in the army's inventory is the 120&#160;mm M120/M121, usually employed by mechanized units.[74]
Fire support for light infantry units is provided by towed howitzers, including the 105&#160;mm M119A1[75] and the 155&#160;mm M777 (which will replace the M198).[76]
The US Army utilizes a variety of direct-fire rockets and missiles to provide infantry with an Anti-Armor Capability. The AT4 is an unguided projectile that can destroy armor and bunkers at ranges up to 500 meters. The FIM-92 Stinger is a shoulder-launched, heat seeking anti-aircraft missile. The FGM-148 Javelin and BGM-71 TOW are anti-tank guided missiles.
Vehicles




A US soldier on patrol with the support of a Humvee vehicle


The army's most common vehicle is the High Mobility Multipurpose Wheeled Vehicle (HMMWV), commonly called the Humvee, which is capable of serving as a cargo/troop carrier, weapons platform, and ambulance, among many other roles.[77] While they operate a wide variety of combat support vehicles, one of the most common types centers on the family of HEMTT vehicles. The M1A2 Abrams is the army's main battle tank,[78] while the M2A3 Bradley is the standard infantry fighting vehicle.[79] Other vehicles include the Stryker,[80] and the M113 armored personnel carrier,[81] and multiple types of Mine Resistant Ambush Protected (MRAP) vehicles.
The Pentagon bought 25,000 MRAP vehicles since 2007 in 25 variants through rapid acquisition with no long-term plans for the platforms. The Army plans to divest 7,456 vehicles and retain 8,585. Of the total number of vehicles the Army will keep, 5,036 will be put in storage, 1,073 will be used for training, and the remainder will be spread across the active force. The Oshkosh M-ATV will be kept the most at 5,681 vehicles, as it is smaller and lighter than other MRAPs for off-road mobility. The other most retained vehicle will be the Navistar MaxxPro Dash with 2,633 vehicles, plus 301 Maxxpro ambulances. Thousands of other MRAPs like the Cougar, BAE Caiman, and larger MaxxPros will be disposed of.[82]
The U.S. Army's principal artillery weapons are the M109A6 Paladin self-propelled howitzer[83] and the M270 Multiple Launch Rocket System (MLRS),[84] both mounted on tracked platforms and assigned to heavy mechanized units.
While the U.S. Army operates a few fixed-wing aircraft, it mainly operates several types of rotary-wing aircraft. These include the AH-64 Apache attack helicopter,[85] the OH-58D Kiowa Warrior armed reconnaissance/light attack helicopter,[86] the UH-60 Black Hawk utility tactical transport helicopter,[87] and the CH-47 Chinook heavy-lift transport helicopter.[88] Restructuring plans call for reduction of 750 aircraft and from 7 to 4 types.[89]
Fixed wing aircraft used by the US Army are for non-front line combat and light transport roles. The army relies on the United States Air Force for airlift capabilities.
Uniforms
Main article: Uniforms of the United States Army
The Army Combat Uniform, or ACU, currently features a digital Universal Camouflage Pattern (UCP) and is designed for use in woodland, desert, and urban environments. However, Soldiers operating in Afghanistan are being issued a fire-resistant ACU with the "MultiCam" pattern, officially known as Operation Enduring Freedom Camouflage Pattern or "OCP".[90]




The Ranger Honor Platoon marching in dress uniform.


The standard garrison service uniform is the Army Service Uniform, which functions as both a garrison uniform (when worn with a white shirt and necktie) and a dress uniform (when worn with a white shirt and either a necktie for parades or a bow tie for after six or black tie events).
Berets
The U.S. Army black beret (having been permanently replaced with the patrol cap) is no longer worn with the new ACU for garrison duty. After years of complaints that it wasn't suited well for most work conditions, Army Chief of Staff General Martin Dempsey eliminated it for wear with the ACU in June 2011. Soldiers still wear berets who are currently in a unit in jump status, whether the wearer is parachute-qualified, or not (maroon beret), Members of the 75th Ranger Regiment and the Airborne and Ranger Training Brigade (tan beret), and Special Forces (rifle green beret) and may wear it with the Army Service Uniform for non-ceremonial functions. Unit commanders may still direct the wear of patrol caps in these units in training environments or motor pools.
Tents
Main article: Tent




A DRASH maintenance facility in Iraq


The army has relied heavily on tents to provide the various facilities needed while on deployment. The most common tent uses for the military are as temporary barracks (sleeping quarters), DFAC buildings (dining facilities), forward operating bases (FOBs), after action review (AAR), tactical operations center (TOC), morale, welfare, and recreation (MWR) facilities, and security checkpoints. Furthermore, most of these tents are set up and operated through the support of Natick Soldier Systems Center.
The U.S. Army is beginning to use a more modern tent called the deployable rapid assembly shelter or DRASH. In 2008, DRASH became part of the Army's Standard Integrated Command Post System.[91]
3D printing
In November 2012, the United States Army developed a tactical 3D printing capability to allow it to rapidly manufacture critical components on the battlefield. (BBC)
See also

America's Army (Video games for recruitment)
Army National Guard
Comparative military ranks
History of the US Army
List of active United States military aircraft
List of former United States Army medical units
List of wars involving the United States
Officer Candidate School (United States Army)
Reserve Officers' Training Corps and Junior Reserve Officers' Training Corps
Timeline of United States military operations
Transformation of the United States Army
U.S. Army Regimental System
United States Military Academy
United States Army Basic Training
United States Army Center of Military History
Soldier's Creed
United States Volunteers
Vehicle markings of the United States military
Warrant Officer Candidate School (United States Army)
Army CHESS (Computer Hardware Enterprise Software and Solutions)
Military–industrial complex

References


^ Wright, Jr., Robert K. (1983). The Continental Army (Army Lineage Series). Washington, DC: Center of Military History, United States Army. ISBN&#160;9780160019319. OCLC&#160;8806011.&#160;
^ Maass, John R. "June 14th: The Birthday of the U.S. Army". U.S. Army Center of Military History. Retrieved 30 October 2013.
^ a b Department of the Army, Deputy Chief of Staff (Human Resources/G-1), "Army Demographics – FY12 Army Profile" (archived from the original on 2015-05-01)(demographics brochure)
^ Flightglobal - World Air Forces 2015 (PDF), Flightglobal.com
^ Us Future Combat &amp; Weapon Systems Handbook By Ibp Usa, p.15
^ a b c "14 June: The Birthday of the U.S. Army". United States Army Center of Military History. Retrieved 1 July 2011.&#160; an excerpt from Robert Wright, The Continental Army
^ Library of Congress, Journals of the Continental Congress, Volume 27
^ "Army Birthdays". United States Army Center of Military History. 15 November 2004. Archived from the original on 20 April 2010. Retrieved Jun 2010.&#160;
^ "The United States Army - Organization". army.mil. Retrieved 1 April 2015.&#160;
^ DA Pamphlet 10-1 Organization of the United States Army; Figure 1.2 Military Operations.
^ "10 USC 3062: Policy; composition; organized peace establishment". US House of Representatives. Retrieved 21 Aug 13.&#160; Check date values in: |access-date= (help)
^ Cont'l Cong., Formation of the Continental Army, in 2 Journals of the Continental Congress, 1774–1789 89–90 (Library of Cong. eds., 1905).
^ Cont'l Cong., Commission for General Washington, in 2 Journals of the Continental Congress, 1774-1789 96-7 (Library of Cong. eds., 1905).
^ Cont'l Cong., Instructions for General Washington, in 2 Journals of the Continental Congress, 1774-1789 100-1 (Library of Cong. eds., 1905).
^ Cont'l Cong., Resolution Changing "United Colonies" to "United States", in 5 Journals of the Continental Congress, 1774-1789 747 (Library of Cong. eds., 1905).
^ Ron Field and Richard Hook, The Seminole Wars 1818–58 (2009)
^ "The U.S.-Mexican War - PBS". pbs.org. Retrieved 1 April 2015.&#160;
^ McPherson, James M., ed. The Atlas of the Civil War, (Philadelphia, PA, 2010)
^ Maris Vinovskis (1990). "Toward a social history of the American Civil War: exploratory essays". Cambridge University Press. p. 7. ISBN 0-521-39559-3
^ Cragg, Dan, ed., The Guide to Military Installations, Stackpole Books, Harrisburg, 1983, p. 272.
^ Woodruff, Mark. Unheralded Victory: The Defeat of the Viet Cong and the North Vietnamese Army 1961–1973 (Arlington, VA: Vandamere Press, 1999).
^ Wilson, John B. (1997). Maneuver and Firepower: The Evolution of Divisions and Separate Brigades. Washington, DC: Center of Military History, Chapter XII, for references see Note 48.
^ Army National Guard Constitution
^ Carafano, James, Total Force Policy and the Abrams Doctrine: Unfulfilled Promise, Uncertain Future, Foreign Policy Research Institute, 3 February 2005.
^ An Army at War: Change in the Midst of Conflict, p. 515, via Google Books
^ Section 1101, National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Years 1990 and 1991, Department of Defense Interim Report to Congress, September 1990. (See "rebalancing" as used in finance.)
^ Downey, Chris, The Total Force Policy and Effective Force, Air War College, 19 March 2004.
^ "September 11, 2001 Pentagon Victims". patriotresource.com. Retrieved 13 November 2015.&#160;
^ "9/11 a day of remembrance". The Star Press. Muncie, Indiana.
^ Lafta, R; Doocy, S; Roberts, L (2006). John Pike, ed. "U.S. Casualties in Iraq". The Lancet (GlobalSecurity.org, published 4 September 2007) 368 (9545): 1421–1428. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(06)69491-9. PMID&#160;17055943. Archived from the original (web page) on 5 September 2007. Retrieved 16 January 2012.&#160; |first1= missing |last1= in Authors list (help)
^ The Human Cost of the War in Iraq: A Mortality Study, 2002–2006&#160;PDF&#160;(603&#160;KB). By Gilbert Burnham, Shannon Doocy, Elizabeth Dzeng, Riyadh Lafta, and Les Roberts. A supplement to the second Lancet study.
^ 597 killed in 2003,[1], 23,984 killed from 2004 through 2009 (with the exceptions of May 2004 and March 2009), [2] 652 killed in May 2004, [3] 45 killed in March 2009, [4] 676 killed in 2010, [5] 451 killed in 2011 (with the exception of February),[6] [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] thus giving a total of 26,405 dead.
^ Shanker, Thom; Cooper, Helene (23 February 2014). "Pentagon Plans to Shrink Army to Pre-World War II Level". The New York Times Company. Retrieved 23 February 2014.&#160;
^ Drwiega, Andrew. "Missions Solutions Summit: Army Leaders Warn of Rough Ride Ahead" Rotor&amp;Wing, June 4, 2014. Accessed: June 8, 2014.
^ DA Pam 10-1 Organization of the United States Army; Figure 1-1. '"Army Organizations Execute Specific Functions and Assigned Missions"
^ Organization of the United States Army: America's Army 1775 – 1995, DA PAM 10–1. Headquarters, Department of the Army, Washington, 14 June 1994.
^ a b Finnegan, John Patrick; Romana Danysh (1998). "Chapter 2: World War I". In Jeffrey J. Clarke. Military Intelligence. Army Lineage Series. Washington, D.C., United States: Center of Military History, United States Army. online. ISBN&#160;0-16-048828-1. OCLC&#160;35741383.&#160;
^ a b Pullen, Randy (23 April 2008). "Army Reserve Marks First 100 Years". DefenceTalk. Archived from the original (online article) on 24 April 2008. Retrieved 8 August 2008.&#160;
^ http://armypubs.army.mil/epubs/pdf/go1204.pdf
^ "Commanding General" (PDF). United States Army, Surface Deployment and Distribution Command. 7 September 2010. Retrieved 26 February 2012.&#160;
^ http://www.apd.army.mil/pdffiles/go1202.pdf
^ a b http://www.apd.army.mil/pdffiles/go1402.pdf
^ http://www.apd.army.mil/pdffiles/go1026.pdf
^ U.S. Army (1 October 2010). "Army establishes Army Cyber Command". army.mil. Retrieved 1 April 2015.&#160;
^ http://www.apd.army.mil/pdffiles/go1475.pdf
^ The Relationship of U. S. Army Cyber Command and Second Army, U.S. Army Cyber Command, last accessed 12 January 2015
^ http://www.apd.army.mil/pdffiles/go1215.pdf
^ http://www.apd.army.mil/pdffiles/go0633.pdf
^ http://www.apd.army.mil/pdffiles/go1390.pdf
^ "First Army - Mission". army.mil. Retrieved 1 April 2015.&#160;
^ http://www.apd.army.mil/pdffiles/go1102.pdf
^ Organization, United States Army
^ Perpich v. Department of Defense, 496 U.S. 334 (1990)
^ 10 U.S.C. 3013
^ 10 U.S.C. 3033
^ 10 U.S.C. 151
^ 10 U.S.C. 162
^ http://www.army.mil/article/140768/CSA__SMA_hold_virtual_town_hall/ CSA Odierno and SMA Chandler virtual town hall, Jan 6, 2015
^ 3rd Infantry BCT scheduled for inactivation "Army to cut 10 BCTs, reorganize the rest | Army Times". armytimes.com. Retrieved 2013-07-10.&#160;
^ "South Korean troops form combined division with U.S. Army". Army Times. 14 January 2015. Retrieved 13 November 2015.&#160;
^ USASOC Headquarters Fact Sheet, from the USASOC official website, last accessed 27 June 2015
^ a b c From the Future Soldiers Web Site.
^ a b c Army Regulation 600-20
^ "Department of Defense - Officer Rank Insignia". defense.gov. Retrieved 1 April 2015.&#160;
^ From the Enlisted Soldiers Descriptions Web Site.
^ http://www.apd.army.mil/pdffiles/r600_20.pdf
^ M4. U.S. Army Fact Files
^ Individual Weapons Future Innovations, Project Manager Soldier Weapons.
^ M249, U.S. Army Fact Files
^ M240, U.S. Army Fact Files
^ MK 19, U.S. Army Fact Files
^ M224, U.S. Army Fact Files
^ M252, U.S. Army Fact Files
^ M120, U.S. Army Fact Files
^ M119, U.S. Army Fact Files
^ John Pike. "M777 Lightweight 155mm howitzer (LW155)". globalsecurity.org. Retrieved 1 April 2015.&#160;
^ HMMWV, U.S. Army Fact Files
^ Abrams, U.S. Army Fact Files
^ Bradley, United States Army Fact Files
^ Stryker, U.S. Army Fact Files
^ M113, U.S. Army Fact Files
^ "Majority of MRAPs to be scrapped or stored", Military Times, 5 January 2014
^ Paladin, Army.mil
^ MLRS, U.S. Army Fact Files
^ Apache, U.S. Army Fact Files
^ Kiowa, U.S. Army Fact Files
^ Blackhawk, U.S. Army Fact Files
^ Chinook, U.S. Army Fact Files
^ Stevenson, Beth (22 January 2015), "US Army continues to face financial challenge of rotary fleet maintenance", Flightglobal (Reed Business Information), archived from the original on 23 January 2015, retrieved 23 January 2015&#160;
^ Lopez, C. (20 February 2010). "Soldiers to get new cammo pattern for wear in Afghanistan". US Army. Retrieved 22 February 2010.&#160;
^ NG, DHS Technologies to support SICPS/TMSS United Press International


Further reading

Bailey, Beth. America's Army: Making the All-Volunteer Force Hardcover (2009) excerpt
Bluhm, Jr,, Raymond K. (Editor-in-Chief); Andrade, Dale; Jacobs, Bruce; Langellier, John; Newell, Clayton R.; Seelinger, Matthew (2004). U.S. Army: A Complete History (Beaux Arts ed.). Arlington, VA: The Army Historical Foundation. p.&#160;744. ISBN&#160;978-0-88363-640-4.&#160;
Kretchik, Walter E. U.S. Army Doctrine: From the American Revolution to the War on Terror (University Press of Kansas; 2011) 392 pages; studies military doctrine in four distinct eras: 1779–1904, 1905–1944, 1944–1962, and 1962 to the present.
Woodward, David R. The American Army and the First World War (Cambridge University Press, 2014). 484 pp. online review

External links



Find more about
United States Army
at Wikipedia's sister projects




Definitions from Wiktionary



Media from Commons



News stories from Wikinews



Quotations from Wikiquote



Source texts from Wikisource



Textbooks from Wikibooks



Learning resources from Wikiversity



Army.mil – United States Army official website
GoArmy.com – official recruiting site
U.S. Army Collection – Missouri History Museum
Finding Aids for researching the US Army (compiled by the United States Army Center of Military History)
US-militaria.com – The US Army during the second world war
&#160;This article incorporates&#160;public domain material from the United States Army Center of Military History document "Army Birthdays".









v
t
e


&#160;United States Army






Leadership



Secretary of the Army
Under Secretary of the Army
Chief of Staff
Vice Chief of Staff
4-star generals
Army Staff Senior Warrant Officer
Sergeant Major of the Army
House Armed Services Committee (House Subcommittee on Air and Land Forces)
Senate Committee on Armed Services (Senate Subcommittee on Air and Land Forces)











Components
and
commands



Regular Army
Army Reserve
Army National Guard
Active Units





Army commands




Forces
Training and Doctrine
Materiel









Service components




Africa
Central
Europe
Pacific
North
South
Special Operations
Surface Deployment and Distribution
Space and Missile Defense









Direct reporting
units




Second Army
Medical
Intelligence and Security
Criminal Investigation
Corps of Engineers
Military District of Washington
Test and Evaluation
Military Academy
Reserve
Acquisition Support Center
Installation Management









Field armies




First
Third
Fifth
Sixth
Seventh
Eighth
Ninth









Branches




Acquisition Corps
Adjutant General's Corps
Air Defense Artillery Branch
Armor Branch
Aviation Branch
Army Band
Chaplain Corps
Chemical Corps
Civil Affairs Corps
Corps of Engineers
Dental Corps
Field Artillery Corps
Finance Corps
Infantry Branch
Inspector General's Corps
Judge Advocate General's Corps
Logistics Branch
Medical Corps
Medical Service Corps
Medical Specialist Corps
Military Intelligence Corps
Military Police Corps
Nurse Corps
Ordnance Corps
Psychological Operations
Quartermaster Corps
Signal Corps
Special Forces
Transportation Corps
Veterinary Corps











Installations



The Pentagon
United States and Overseas
Germany
Kosovo
Kuwait
South Korea








Training



Basic Training
BOLC
ROTC
OCS
WOBC
WOCS
West Point
MOS








Uniforms and
insignia



Awards and decorations
Badges
Branch
Officer
Warrant
Enlisted
Uniforms





Coats of arms




Air Defense Artillery
Armor
Aviation
Artillery
Cavalry
Engineer
Infantry











Equipment



Individual weapons
Crew-served weapons
Vehicles








History and
traditions



History
Continental Army
National Army
Army of the United States
United States Army Air Forces
Center of Military History
Institute of Heraldry
America's Army
Army Art Program
Army Band
Old Guard Fife and Drum Corps
Flag
National Museum
Rangers
U.S. Army Regimental System
Soldier's Creed
The Army Goes Rolling Along
Draft
Service numbers











 Category
 Portal
















v
t
e


United States Armed Forces









 Book
 Portal

A
MC
N
AF
CG


 Category

A
MC
N
AF
CG
PHS
NOAA


Navbox

A
MC
N
AF
CG










Leadership



Commander-in-chief: President of the United States
Secretary of Defense
Deputy Secretary of Defense
Joint Chiefs of Staff:

Chairman
Vice Chairman


United States Congress: Committees on Armed Services:

Senate
House


Active duty four-star officers
Highest ranking officers in history
National Security Act of 1947
Goldwater–Nichols Act








Organization





Service departments




Department of Defense (Secretary): Army (Secretary)
Navy (Secretary)
Air Force (Secretary)
Department of Homeland Security (Secretary): Coast Guard









Branches




Army (Chief of Staff)
Marine Corps (Commandant)
Navy (Chief of Naval Operations)
Air Force (Chief of Staff)
Coast Guard (Commandant)









Other uniformed services




Public Health Service Commissioned Corps (Surgeon General)
NOAA Commissioned Officer Corps (Director)









Reserve components




Reserves:

A
MC
N
AF
CG


National Guard:

A
AF


Naval militias
State defense forces









Civilian auxiliaries




Military Auxiliary Radio System
Merchant Marine
Civil Air Patrol
Coast Guard Auxiliary









Unified Combatant Command




Northern
Central
European
Pacific
Southern
Africa
Special Operations
Strategic
Transportation











Structure



United States Code

Title 10
Title 14
Title 32
Title 50


The Pentagon
Installations
Units:

A
MC
N
AF
CG


Logistics
Media








Operations and history



Current deployments
Conflicts
Wars
Timeline
History:

A
MC
N
AF
CG


Colonial
World War II
Civil affairs
African Americans
Asian Americans
Buddhist Americans
Jewish Americans
Muslim Americans
Pakistani Americans
Sikh Americans
Historiography:

A: 1/2
MC
N
AF


Art:

A
AF










Personnel





Training




MEPS
ASVAB
Recruit training:

A
MC
N
AF
CG


Officer candidate school:

A
MC
N
AF


Warrant:

A
MC


Service academies:

A (prep)
N (prep)
AF (prep)
CG
Merchant Marine
PHS


Junior/Reserve Officers' Training Corps:

A: MJC/SMC
MC/N
AF


Medical
Other education









Uniforms




Uniforms:

A
MC
N
AF
CG


Awards &amp; decorations:

Inter-service
A
MC/N
AF
CG
PHS
NOAA
Foreign
International
Devices


Badges:

Identification
A
MC
N
AF
CG











Ranks




Enlisted:

A
MC
N
AF
CG


Warrant officers
Officer:

A
MC
N
AF
CG
PHS
NOAA











Other




Oath:

Enlistment
Office


Creeds &amp; Codes:

Code of Conduct
NCO
A
MC
N
AF
CG


Service numbers:

A
MC
N
AF
CG


Military Occupational Specialty/Rating/Air Force Specialty Code
Pay
Uniform Code of Military Justice
Judge Advocate General's Corps
Military Health System/TRICARE
Separation
Veterans Affairs
Conscription
Chiefs of Chaplains:

A
MC
N
AF
CG













Equipment



A
MC:

vehicles
weapons
other


N
AF
CG





Land




Individual weapons
Crew-served weapons
Vehicles (active)









Sea




All watercraft
Ships:

A
N (active)
AF
CG
MSC
NOAA


Weapons:

N
CG


Aircraft:

N
CG
NOAA


Reactors









Air




Aircraft

World War I
active


Aircraft designation
Missiles
Helicopter arms









Other




Electronics (designations)
Flags:

A
MC
N
AF
CG
Ensign
Jack
Guidons


Food
WMDs:

Nuclear
Biological
Chemical
















Legend
A = Army
MC = Marine Corps
N = Navy
AF = Air Force
CG = Coast Guard
PHS = Public Health Service
NOAA = National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
MSC = Military Sealift Command
















v
t
e


United States Department of Defense









Headquarters: The Pentagon


Ashton Carter, Secretary of Defense
Robert Work, Deputy Secretary of Defense












&#160;
Office of the Secretary of Defense
(including Defense Agencies and DoD Field Activities)











Deputy Secretary of Defense




Deputy's Advisory Working Group
Office of Net Assessment
Special Access Program Oversight Committee









Under Secretary of Defense
for Acquisition, Technology and Logistics




Director, Defense Research and Engineering
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
Missile Defense Agency
Defense Contract Management Agency
Defense Logistics Agency
Defense Technical Information Center
Defense Threat Reduction Agency
Office of Economic Adjustment
Defense Acquisition University
Defense Acquisition Board









Under Secretary of Defense for Policy




Defense Security Cooperation Agency
Defense Prisoner of War/Missing Personnel Office
Defense Policy Board Advisory Committee









Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)




Defense Contract Audit Agency
Defense Finance and Accounting Service









Under Secretary of Defense
for Personnel and Readiness




Defense Commissary Agency
Department of Defense Education Activity
DoD Human Resources Activity
Military Health System
Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences
Defense Equal Opportunity Management Institute
Office of the Chancellor for Education and Professional Development









Under Secretary of Defense
for Intelligence




Defense Intelligence Agency
Defense Security Service
Defense Information Systems Agency
National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency
National Reconnaissance Office
National Security Agency (Director)









Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs




Defense Media Activity (American Forces Press Service, American Forces Radio and Television Service, Stars and Stripes, The Pentagon Channel)









General Counsel of the Department of Defense




Defense Legal Services Agency









Director of Administration and Management




Pentagon Force Protection Agency
Washington Headquarters Services





















&#160;
Military Departments











Department of the Army




Secretary of the Army
The Secretariat: Under Secretary of the Army
Assistant Secretary for Acquisition, Logistics, and Technology
Assistant Secretary for Civil Works
Assistant Secretary (Financial Management and Comptroller)
Assistant Secretary of the Army for Installations, Energy and Environment
Assistant Secretary of the Army for Manpower and Reserve Affairs
General Counsel of the Army
The Administrative Assistant
The Army Staff: Chief of Staff of the Army
Vice Chief of Staff of the Army
Sergeant Major of the Army
Deputy Chief of Staff G-8
Chief of Chaplains
Judge Advocate General
Provost Marshal General
Surgeon General
U.S. Army field organizations: see Structure of the United States Army









Department of the Navy




Secretary of the Navy
The Secretariat: Under Secretary of the Navy
Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Financial Management and Comptroller)
Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Installations and Environment)
Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Manpower and Reserve Affairs)
Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Research, Development and Acquisitions)
General Counsel of the Navy
Judge Advocate General
Naval Criminal Investigative Service
Naval Inspector General
Headquarters Marine Corps: Commandant of the Marine Corps
Assistant Commandant of the Marine Corps
Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps
Chaplain
U.S. Marine Corps field organizations: see Organization of the United States Marine Corps
Office of the Chief of Naval Operations: Chief of Naval Operations
Vice Chief of Naval Operations
Master Chief Petty Officer of the Navy
Director of Naval Reactors
Chief of Chaplains
Chief of Naval Personnel
Surgeon General United States Navy field organizations: see Structure of the United States Navy









Department of the Air Force




Secretary of the Air Force
The Secretariat: Under Secretary of the Air Force
Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Acquisition)
Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Financial Management &amp; Comptroller)
Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Installations, Environment &amp; Logistics)
Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Manpower &amp; Reserve Affairs)
General Counsel of the Air Force
Air Force Office of Special Investigations
The Air Staff: Chief of Staff of the Air Force
Vice Chief of Staff of the Air Force
Chief Master Sergeant of the Air Force
Chief of Chaplains
Chief of Safety
Chief Scientist
Judge Advocate General
Surgeon General
U.S. Air Force field organizations: Major Commands
Direct Reporting Units
Field Operating Agencies


















&#160;
Joint Chiefs of Staff









Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
Senior Enlisted Advisor to the Chairman
Joint Requirements Oversight Council
Director of the Joint Staff
Joint Staff
National Military Command Center
Alternate National Military Command Center
National Defense University















&#160;
Combatant Commands









Africa Command
Central Command
European Command
Northern Command
Pacific Command
Southern Command
Special Operations Command (Joint Special Operations Command)
Strategic Command (Cyber Command)
Transportation Command















&#160;
National Guard Bureau









Chief of the National Guard Bureau
Air National Guard
Army National Guard















&#160;
Office of the Inspector General









Defense Criminal Investigative Service



















v
t
e


United States&#160;articles






History




Timeline



Pre-Columbian era
Colonial era

Thirteen Colonies
Military history
Continental Congress


American Revolution

War


American frontier
Federalist Era
War of 1812
Territorial acquisitions
Territorial evolution
Mexican–American War
Civil War
Reconstruction Era
Indian Wars
Gilded Age
Progressive Era
African-American Civil Rights Movement 1865-1895&#160;/ 1896-1954
Spanish–American War
Imperialism
World War I
Roaring Twenties
Great Depression
World War II

Home front


American Century
Cold War
Korean War
Space Race
African-American Civil Rights Movement (1954–68)
Feminist Movement
Vietnam War
Post-Cold War (1991–present)
War on Terror

War in Afghanistan
Iraq War


Timeline of modern American conservatism








By topic



Demographic
Discoveries
Economic

Debt ceiling


Inventions

before 1890
1890–1945
1946–91
after 1991


Military
Postal
Technological and industrial











Geography







Cities, towns, and villages
Counties
Extreme points
Islands
Mountains

Peaks
Ranges
Appalachian
Rocky


National Park System
Regions

East Coast
West Coast
Great Plains
Gulf
Mid-Atlantic
Midwestern
New England
Pacific
Central
Eastern
Northern
Northeastern
Northwestern
Southern
Southeastern
Southwestern
Western


Rivers

Colorado
Columbia
Mississippi
Missouri
Ohio
Rio Grande


States
Territory
Time
Water supply and sanitation











Politics








Federal




Executive



President

Executive Office


Cabinet&#160;/ Executive departments
Civil service
Independent agencies
Law enforcement
Public policy








Legislature



Congress

Senate

Vice President
President pro tem


House of Representatives

Speaker












Judiciary



Supreme Court
Federal judiciary
Courts of appeals
District courts








Law



Constitution

Federalism
Preemption
Separation of powers


Bill of Rights

Civil liberties


Code of Federal Regulations
Federal Reporter
United States Code
United States Reports








Intelligence



Central Intelligence Agency
Defense Intelligence Agency
Federal Bureau of Investigation
National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency
National Reconnaissance Office
National Security Agency
Office of the Director of National Intelligence








Uniformed



Armed Forces

Air Force
Army
Coast Guard
Marine Corps
National Guard
Navy


NOAA Corps
Public Health Service Corps














Administrative divisions
Elections

Electoral College


Foreign policy
Foreign relations
Ideologies
Local governments
Parties

Democratic Party
Republican Party
Third parties


51st state

Political status of Puerto Rico


Red states and blue states

Purple America


Scandals
State governments
Uncle Sam














Economy







Agriculture
Banking
Communications
Companies

by state


Dollar (currency)
Energy
Exports
Federal Budget
Federal Reserve System
Financial position
Insurance
Labor unions
Mining
Public debt
Social welfare programs
Taxation
Tourism
Trade
Transportation
Unemployment
Wall Street











Society








Culture



Americana
Architecture
Art
Cinema
Crime
Cuisine
Dance
Demographics
Education
Family structure
Fashion
Flag
Folklore
Health care
Health insurance
Incarceration
Languages

American English
Indigenous languages
ASL

Black American Sign Language


HSL
Plains Sign Talk
Arabic
Chinese
French
German
Italian
Russian
Spanish


Literature
Media
Music
Names
People
Philosophy
Public holidays
Radio
Religion
Sports
Television
Theater








Social class



Affluence
American Dream
Educational attainment
Homelessness
Home-ownership
Household income
Income inequality
Middle class
Personal income
Poverty
Professional and working class conflict
Smoking
Standard of living
Wealth








Issues



Abortion
Affirmative action
Anti-Americanism
Capital punishment
Criticism of government
Discrimination
Drug policy
Energy policy
Environmental movement
Exceptionalism
Gun politics
Health care reform
Human rights
Immigration

Illegal


International rankings
Islamophobia
LGBT rights

Same-sex marriage


Nationalism
Obesity
Racism
Separation of church and state
Terrorism


















Outline
Index



Book
Category
Portal
WikiProject













Authority control



WorldCat
VIAF: 135579316
LCCN: n79063202
GND: 2188-X
SUDOC: 026376687
BNF: cb11863615b (data)
















United States Army portal
Military of the United States portal















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=United_States_Army&amp;oldid=690444021"					
				Categories: United States ArmyUniformed services of the United StatesMilitary units and formations established in 17751775 establishments in the Thirteen ColoniesHidden categories: CS1 errors: datesCS1 errors: missing author or editorWikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalismUse dmy dates from October 2012All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from August 2015Articles with unsourced statements from December 2011Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the United States Army Center of Military HistoryWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers				
							
		
		
			Navigation menu

			
									
						Personal tools
						
							Create accountLog in						
					
									
										
						Namespaces
						
															Article
															Talk
													
					
										
												
							Variants
						

						
							
															
						
					
									
				
										
						Views
						
															Read
															View source
															View history
													
					
										
						More

						
							
															
						
					
										
						
							Search
						

						
							
														
						
					
									
			
			
				
						
			Navigation

			
									
						Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store					
							
		
			
			Interaction

			
									
						HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page					
							
		
			
			Tools

			
									
						What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page					
							
		
			
			Print/export

			
									
						Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version					
							
		
			
			Languages

			
									
						AfrikaansالعربيةবাংলাБеларускаяБългарскиBrezhonegCatalàČeštinaCorsuCymraegDanskDeutschΕλληνικάEspañolEsperantoEuskaraفارسیFrançaisGaeilgeગુજરાતી한국어HrvatskiBahasa IndonesiaItalianoעבריתಕನ್ನಡҚазақшаLatinaLatviešuLietuviųМакедонскиമലയാളംBahasa MelayuNederlands日本語Norsk bokmålNorsk nynorskپنجابیPolskiPortuguêsRomânăРусскийScotsShqipSicilianuSimple EnglishSlovenščinaСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSuomiSvenskaதமிழ்తెలుగుTürkçeУкраїнськаاردوTiếng Việtייִדיש中文					
				Edit links			
		
				
		
		
							
											 This page was last modified on 13 November 2015, at 11:23.
											Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
									
							
											Privacy policy
											About Wikipedia
											Disclaimers
											Contact Wikipedia
											Developers
											