


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Visual effects
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				"VFX" redirects here. For the 1968 US Navy fighter program, see VFX (aircraft).
In filmmaking, visual effects (abbreviated VFX) are the processes by which imagery is created and/or manipulated outside the context of a live action shot. Visual effects involve the integration of live-action footage and generated imagery to create environments which look realistic, but would be dangerous, expensive, impractical, or simply impossible to capture on film. Visual effects using computer generated imagery have recently become accessible to the independent filmmaker with the introduction of affordable and easy-to-use animation and compositing software.



Contents


1 Timing
2 Categories
3 Types
4 See also
5 Further reading
6 External links



Timing[edit]
Visual effects are often integral to a movie's story and appeal. Although most visual effects work is completed during post-production, it usually must be carefully planned and choreographed in pre-production and production. Visual effects primarily executed in Post-Production, with the use of multiple tools and technologies such as graphic design, modeling, animation and similar software, while special effects such as explosions and car chases are made on set. A visual effects supervisor is usually involved with the production from an early stage to work closely with production and the film's director design, guide and lead the teams required to achieve the desired effects.
Categories[edit]
Visual effects may be divided into at least four categories:

Matte paintings and stills: digital or traditional paintings or photographs which serve as background plates for keyed or rotoscoped elements.
Live-action effects: keying actors or models through bluescreening and greenscreening.
Digital animation: modeling, computer graphics lighting, texturing, rigging, animating, and rendering computer-generated 3D characters, particle effects, digital sets, backgrounds.
Digital effects (commonly shortened to digital FX or FX) are the various processes by which imagery is created and/or manipulated with or from photographic assets. Digital effects often involve the integration of still photography and computer-generated imagery (CGI) in order to create environments which look realistic, but would be dangerous, costly, or simply impossible to capture in camera. FX is usually associated with the still photography world in contrast to visual effects which is associated with motion film production.

Types[edit]
VFX can be categorized into:

Simulation FX
Matte painting
Compositing

See also[edit]

Animation
Match moving
Bluescreen/greenscreen
Compositing
Computer-generated imagery
Front projection effect
Matte painting
Physical effects, another category of special effects
Optics#Visual effects
Rear projection effect
Special effects
VFX Creative Director
Visual Effects Society

Further reading[edit]

The VES Handbook of Visual Effects: Industry Standard VFX Practices and Procedures, Jeffrey A. Okun &amp; Susan Zwerman, Publisher: Focal Press 2010


T. Porter and T. Duff, "Compositing Digital Images", Proceedings of SIGGRAPH '84, 18 (1984).
The Art and Science of Digital Compositing (ISBN 0-12-133960-2)
McClean, Shilo T. (2007). Digital Storytelling: The Narrative Power of Visual Effects in Film. The MIT Press. ISBN&#160;0-262-13465-9.&#160;
Mark Cotta Vaz; Craig Barron: The Invisible Art: The Legends of Movie Matte Painting. San Francisco, Cal.: Chronicle Books, 2002; ISBN 0-8118-3136-1
Peter Ellenshaw; Ellenshaw Under Glass - Going to the Matte for Disney
Richard Rickitt: Special Effects: The History and Technique. Billboard Books; 2nd edition, 2007; ISBN 0-8230-8408-6.
Patel, Mayur (2009). The Digital Visual Effects Studio: The Artists and Their Work Revealed. ISBN&#160;1-4486-6547-7.&#160;

External links[edit]

Take Five Minutes to Watch 100 Years of Visual Effects by Rosa Golijan - Gizmodo.com - August 27, 2009









v
t
e


Special effects






Practical



Physical effects
Prosthetic makeup
Animatronics
Puppetry
Suitmation
Miniature effect&#160;(hanging)
Pyrotechnics
Aerial rigging&#160;(Wire-flying)
Squib
Matte painting
Sugar glass
Theatrical blood








In-camera



Tilted plane focus
Forced perspective
Schüfftan process
Dolly zoom
Lens flares
Lighting effects
Filtration
Shutter effects
Time-lapse

Slow motion
Fast motion
Speed ramping


Bipacks
Slit-scan
Reverse motion
Front projection
Rear projection
Multiple exposure
Infrared photography
Bullet time








Visual



Computer-generated imagery
Split screen
Stop motion
Go motion
Chroma key
Compositing&#160;(digital)
Optical printing
Introvision
Smallgantics
Match moving
















v
t
e


Filmmaking






Development



Film treatment

scriptment


Step outline
Screenplay

process
Spec Script
Film Adaptation
Hook
Option


Film budgeting
Film finance

pitch


Green-light








Pre-production



Script breakdown

process


Shooting script
Storyboard
Casting

Rehearsal


Production board

production strip


Day Out of Days
Production schedule
Shooting schedule

one-liner










Production



Film crew
Cinematic techniques
Principal photography

Cinematography
Videography


Daily call sheet
Dailies (rushes)
Daily Reports

Film inventory report
Production report
Daily production report
Daily progress report
Sound report
Cost report
Daily editor log










Post-production



Film editing
Re-recording
Sync sound
Soundtrack
Music
Special effects

sound
visual


Negative cost








Distribution



Film distributor

list


Film release

wide
limited
delayed


Roadshow








Related



Box office
Guerrilla filmmaking
Development hell
Film
Filmography
Film industry
Film rights
Turnaround















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Visual_effects&amp;oldid=691237729"					
				Categories: Visual effectsCinematic techniquesFilm and video technologySpecial effectsComputer graphic techniques				
							
		
		
			Navigation menu

			
									
						Personal tools
						
							Create accountLog in						
					
									
										
						Namespaces
						
															Article
															Talk
													
					
										
												
							Variants
						

						
							
															
						
					
									
				
										
						Views
						
															Read
															Edit
															View history
													
					
										
						More

						
							
															
						
					
										
						
							Search
						

						
							
														
						
					
									
			
			
				
						
			Navigation

			
									
						Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store					
							
		
			
			Interaction

			
									
						HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page					
							
		
			
			Tools

			
									
						What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page					
							
		
			
			Print/export

			
									
						Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version					
							
		
			
			Languages

			
									
						العربيةБългарскиDanskDeutschفارسی한국어Italianoമലയാളം日本語Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSuomiSvenskaУкраїнськаTiếng Việt					
				Edit links			
		
				
		
		
							
											 This page was last modified on 18 November 2015, at 15:00.
											Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
									
							
											Privacy policy
											About Wikipedia
											Disclaimers
											Contact Wikipedia
											Developers
											