


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Class-based programming
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				




This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2013)




Programming paradigms




Action
Agent-oriented
Array-oriented
Automata-based
Concurrent computing

Relativistic programming


Data-driven
Declarative (contrast: Imperative)

Constraint

Constraint logic

Concurrent constraint logic




Dataflow

Flow-based
Cell-oriented (spreadsheets)
Reactive


Functional

Functional logic
Purely functional


Logic

Abductive logic
Answer set
Concurrent logic
Functional logic
Inductive logic




End-user programming
Event-driven

Service-oriented
Time-driven


Expression-oriented
Feature-oriented
Function-level (contrast: Value-level)
Generic
Imperative (contrast: Declarative)

Literate
Procedural


Inductive programming
Language-oriented

Natural language programming
Discipline-specific
Domain-specific
Grammar-oriented

Dialecting


Intentional


Metaprogramming

Automatic
Reflective

Attribute-oriented


Homoiconic
Template

Policy-based




Non-structured (contrast: Structured)

Array


Nondeterministic
Parallel computing

Process-oriented


Point-free style

Concatenative


Semantic
Structured (contrast: Non-structured)

Block-structured
Modular (contrast: Monolithic)
Object-oriented (OOP)

Class-based
Concurrent
Prototype-based
By separation of concerns:

Aspect-oriented
Role-oriented
Subject-oriented




Recursive


Value-level (contrast: Function-level)
Probabilistic
Concept







v
t
e





Class-based programming, or more commonly class-orientation, is a style of object-oriented programming (OOP) in which inheritance is achieved by defining classes of objects, as opposed to the objects themselves (compare prototype-based programming).
The most popular and developed model of OOP is a class-based model, as opposed to an object-based model. In this model, objects are entities that combine state (i.e. data), behavior (i.e. procedures, or methods) and identity (unique existence among all other objects). The structure and behavior of an object are defined by a class, which is a definition, or blueprint, of all objects of a specific type. An object must be explicitly created based on a class and an object thus created is considered to be an instance of that class. An object is similar to a structure, with the addition of method pointers, member access control, and an implicit data member which locates instances of the class (i.e. actual objects of that class) in the class hierarchy (essential for runtime inheritance features).



Contents


1 Encapsulation
2 Inheritance
3 Critique of class-based models
4 Example languages
5 See also
6 References



Encapsulation[edit]
Encapsulation prevents users from breaking the invariants of the class, which is useful because it allows the implementation of a class of objects to be changed for aspects not exposed in the interface without impact to user code. The definitions of encapsulation focus on the grouping and packaging of related information (cohesion) rather than security issues. OOP languages do not normally offer formal security restrictions to the internal object state. Using a method of access is a matter of convention for the interface design.
Inheritance[edit]
Main article: Inheritance
In class-based programming, inheritance is done by defining new classes as extensions of existing classes: the existing class is the parent class and the new class is the child class. If a child class has only one parent class, this is known as single inheritance, while if a child class can have more than one parent class, this is known as multiple inheritance. This organizes classes into a hierarchy, either a tree (if single inheritance) or lattice (if multiple inheritance).
The defining feature of inheritance is that both interface and implementation are inherited; if only interface is inherited, this is known as interface inheritance or subtyping. Inheritance can also be done without classes, as in prototype-based programming.
Critique of class-based models[edit]
Class-based languages, or, to be more precise, typed languages, where subclassing is the only way of subtyping, have been criticized for mixing up implementations and interfaces—the essential principle in object-oriented programming. The critics say one might create a bag class that stores a collection of objects, then extend it to make a new class called a set class where the duplication of objects is eliminated.[1][2] Now, a function that takes an object of the bag class may expect that adding two objects increases the size of a bag by two, yet if one passes an object of a set class, then adding two objects may or may not increase the size of a bag by two. The problem arises precisely because subclassing implies subtyping even in the instances where the principle of subtyping, known as the Liskov substitution principle, does not hold. Therefore normally one must distinguish subtyping and subclassing. Most current object-oriented languages distinguish subtyping and subclassing, however some approaches to design do not.
Also, another common example is that a person object created from a child class cannot become an object of parent class because a child class and a parent class inherit a person class but class-based languages mostly do not allow to change the kind of class of the object at runtime. For class-based languages, this restriction is essential in order to preserve unified view of the class to its users. The users should not need to care whether one of the implementations of a method happens to cause changes that break the invariants of the class. Such changes can be made by destroying the object and constructing another in its place. Polymorphism can be used to preserve the relevant interfaces even when such changes are done, because the objects are viewed as black box abstractions and accessed via object identity. However, usually the value of object references referring to the object is changed, which causes effects to client code.
Example languages[edit]
See also: Category:Class-based programming languages
Although Simula introduced the class abstraction, the canonical example of a class-based language is Smalltalk. Others include PHP, C++, Java, C#, and Objective-C.
See also[edit]

Prototype-based programming (contrast)
Programming paradigms
Class (computer programming)

References[edit]


^ Kiselyov, Oleg. "Subtyping, Subclassing, and Trouble with OOP". Retrieved 7 October 2012.&#160;
^ Ducasse, Stéphane. "A set cannot be a subtype of a bag". Retrieved 7 October 2012.&#160;










v
t
e


Types of programming languages









Array
Aspect-oriented
Class-based
Concatenative
Concurrent
Data-structured
Dataflow
Declarative
Domain-specific
Dynamic
Esoteric
Event-driven
Extensible
Functional
Imperative
Logic
Macro
Metaprogramming
Multi-paradigm
Object-based
Object-oriented
Pipeline
Procedural
Prototype-based
Reflective
Rule-based
Scripting
Synchronous
Templating











Assembly
Compiled
Interpreted
Machine











Low-level
High-level
Very high-level











First generation
Second generation
Third generation
Fourth generation
Fifth generation











Non-English-based
Off-side rule
Visual















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Class-based_programming&amp;oldid=691374509"					
				Categories: Object-oriented programmingHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from February 2013All articles needing additional references				
							
		
		
			