


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Cryptography
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				"Secret code" redirects here. For the Aya Kamiki album, see Secret Code.
"Cryptology" redirects here. For the David S. Ware album, see Cryptology (album).




German Lorenz cipher machine, used in World War&#160;II to encrypt very-high-level general staff messages


Cryptography or cryptology; from Greek κρυπτός kryptós, "hidden, secret"; and γράφειν graphein, "writing", or -λογία -logia, "study", respectively[1] is the practice and study of techniques for secure communication in the presence of third parties (called adversaries).[2] These adversaries are often referred to as Eve in cryptography, while the sender and recipient of messages are called Alice and Bob respectively.[3] More generally, cryptography is about constructing and analyzing protocols that block Eve (or adversaries);[4] various aspects in information security such as data confidentiality, data integrity, authentication, and non-repudiation[5] are central to modern cryptography. Modern cryptography exists at the intersection of the disciplines of mathematics, computer science, and electrical engineering. Applications of cryptography include ATM cards, computer passwords, and electronic commerce.
Cryptography prior to the modern age was effectively synonymous with encryption, the conversion of information from a readable state to apparent nonsense. The originator of an encrypted message (Alice) shared the decoding technique needed to recover the original information only with intended recipients (Bob), thereby precluding unwanted persons (Eve) from doing the same. Since World War&#160;I and the advent of the computer, the methods used to carry out cryptology have become increasingly complex and its application more widespread.
Modern cryptography is heavily based on mathematical theory and computer science practice; cryptographic algorithms are designed around computational hardness assumptions, making such algorithms hard to break in practice by any adversary. It is theoretically possible to break such a system, but it is infeasible to do so by any known practical means. These schemes are therefore termed computationally secure; theoretical advances, e.g., improvements in integer factorization algorithms, and faster computing technology require these solutions to be continually adapted. There exist information-theoretically secure schemes that provably cannot be broken even with unlimited computing power—an example is the one-time pad—but these schemes are more difficult to implement than the best theoretically breakable but computationally secure mechanisms.
The growth of cryptographic technology has raised a number of legal issues in the information age. Cryptography's potential for use as a tool for espionage and sedition has led many governments to classify it as a weapon and to limit or even prohibit its use and export.[6] In some jurisdictions where the use of cryptography is legal, laws permit investigators to compel the disclosure of encryption keys for documents relevant to an investigation.[7] Cryptography also plays a major role in digital rights management and piracy of digital media.[8]



Contents


1 Terminology
2 History of cryptography and cryptanalysis

2.1 Classic cryptography
2.2 Computer era


3 Modern cryptography

3.1 Symmetric-key cryptography
3.2 Public-key cryptography
3.3 Cryptanalysis
3.4 Cryptographic primitives
3.5 Cryptosystems


4 Legal issues

4.1 Prohibitions
4.2 Export controls
4.3 NSA involvement
4.4 Digital rights management
4.5 Forced disclosure of encryption keys


5 See also
6 References
7 Further reading
8 External links



Terminology[edit]




Alphabet shift ciphers are believed to have been used by Julius Caesar over 2,000 years ago. [3] This is an example with k=3. In other words, the letters in the alphabet are shifted three in one direction to encrypt and three in the other direction to decrypt.


Until modern times, cryptography referred almost exclusively to encryption, which is the process of converting ordinary information (called plaintext) into unintelligible text (called ciphertext).[9] Decryption is the reverse, in other words, moving from the unintelligible ciphertext back to plaintext. A cipher (or cypher) is a pair of algorithms that create the encryption and the reversing decryption. The detailed operation of a cipher is controlled both by the algorithm and in each instance by a "key". This is a secret (ideally known only to the communicants), usually a short string of characters, which is needed to decrypt the ciphertext. Formally, a "cryptosystem" is the ordered list of elements of finite possible plaintexts, finite possible cyphertexts, finite possible keys, and the encryption and decryption algorithms which correspond to each key. Keys are important both formally and in actual practice, as ciphers without variable keys can be trivially broken with only the knowledge of the cipher used and are therefore useless (or even counter-productive) for most purposes. Historically, ciphers were often used directly for encryption or decryption without additional procedures such as authentication or integrity checks. There are two kinds of cryptosystems: symmetric and asymmetric. In symmetric systems the same key (the secret key) is used to encrypt and decrypt a message. Data manipulation in symmetric systems is faster than asymmetric systems as they generally use shorter key lengths. Asymmetric systems use public key to encrypt a message and a private key to decrypt it. Use of asymmetric systems enhances the security of communication.[10]
In colloquial use, the term "code" is often used to mean any method of encryption or concealment of meaning. However, in cryptography, code has a more specific meaning. It means the replacement of a unit of plaintext (i.e., a meaningful word or phrase) with a code word (for example, "wallaby" replaces "attack at dawn"). Codes are no longer used in serious cryptography—except incidentally for such things as unit designations (e.g., Bronco Flight or Operation Overlord)—since properly chosen ciphers are both more practical and more secure than even the best codes and also are better adapted to computers.
Cryptanalysis is the term used for the study of methods for obtaining the meaning of encrypted information without access to the key normally required to do so; i.e., it is the study of how to crack encryption algorithms or their implementations.
Some use the terms cryptography and cryptology interchangeably in English, while others (including US military practice generally) use cryptography to refer specifically to the use and practice of cryptographic techniques and cryptology to refer to the combined study of cryptography and cryptanalysis.[11][12] English is more flexible than several other languages in which cryptology (done by cryptologists) is always used in the second sense above. RFC 2828 advises that steganography is sometimes included in cryptology.[13]
The study of characteristics of languages that have some application in cryptography or cryptology (e.g. frequency data, letter combinations, universal patterns, etc.) is called cryptolinguistics.
History of cryptography and cryptanalysis[edit]
Main article: History of cryptography
Before the modern era, cryptography was concerned solely with message confidentiality (i.e., encryption)—conversion of messages from a comprehensible form into an incomprehensible one and back again at the other end, rendering it unreadable by interceptors or eavesdroppers without secret knowledge (namely the key needed for decryption of that message). Encryption attempted to ensure secrecy in communications, such as those of spies, military leaders, and diplomats. In recent decades, the field has expanded beyond confidentiality concerns to include techniques for message integrity checking, sender/receiver identity authentication, digital signatures, interactive proofs and secure computation, among others.
Classic cryptography[edit]




Reconstructed ancient Greek scytale, an early cipher device


The earliest forms of secret writing required little more than writing implements since most people could not read. More literacy, or literate opponents, required actual cryptography. The main classical cipher types are transposition ciphers, which rearrange the order of letters in a message (e.g., 'hello world' becomes 'ehlol owrdl' in a trivially simple rearrangement scheme), and substitution ciphers, which systematically replace letters or groups of letters with other letters or groups of letters (e.g., 'fly at once' becomes 'gmz bu podf' by replacing each letter with the one following it in the Latin alphabet). Simple versions of either have never offered much confidentiality from enterprising opponents. An early substitution cipher was the Caesar cipher, in which each letter in the plaintext was replaced by a letter some fixed number of positions further down the alphabet. Suetonius reports that Julius Caesar used it with a shift of three to communicate with his generals. Atbash is an example of an early Hebrew cipher. The earliest known use of cryptography is some carved ciphertext on stone in Egypt (ca 1900 BCE), but this may have been done for the amusement of literate observers rather than as a way of concealing information.
The Greeks of Classical times are said to have known of ciphers (e.g., the scytale transposition cipher claimed to have been used by the Spartan military).[14] Steganography (i.e., hiding even the existence of a message so as to keep it confidential) was also first developed in ancient times. An early example, from Herodotus, was a message tattooed on a slave's shaved head and concealed under the regrown hair.[9] More modern examples of steganography include the use of invisible ink, microdots, and digital watermarks to conceal information.
In India, the 2000-year-old Kamasutra of Vātsyāyana speaks of two different kinds of ciphers called Kautiliyam and Mulavediya. In the Kautiliyam, the cipher letter substitutions are based on phonetic relations, such as vowels becoming consonants. In the Mulavediya, the cipher alphabet consists of pairing letters and using the reciprocal ones.[9]




First page of a book by Al-Kindi which discusses encryption of messages


Ciphertexts produced by a classical cipher (and some modern ciphers) always reveal statistical information about the plaintext, which can often be used to break them. After the discovery of frequency analysis, perhaps by the Arab mathematician and polymath Al-Kindi (also known as Alkindus) in the 9th century,[15] nearly all such ciphers became more or less readily breakable by any informed attacker. Such classical ciphers still enjoy popularity today, though mostly as puzzles (see cryptogram). Al-Kindi wrote a book on cryptography entitled Risalah fi Istikhraj al-Mu'amma (Manuscript for the Deciphering Cryptographic Messages), which described the first known use frequency analysis cryptanalysis techniques.[15][16]




16th-century book-shaped French cipher machine, with arms of Henri II of France






Enciphered letter from Gabriel de Luetz d'Aramon, French Ambassador to the Ottoman Empire, after 1546, with partial decipherment


Essentially all ciphers remained vulnerable to cryptanalysis using the frequency analysis technique until the development of the polyalphabetic cipher, most clearly by Leon Battista Alberti around the year 1467, though there is some indication that it was already known to Al-Kindi.[16] Alberti's innovation was to use different ciphers (i.e., substitution alphabets) for various parts of a message (perhaps for each successive plaintext letter at the limit). He also invented what was probably the first automatic cipher device, a wheel which implemented a partial realization of his invention. In the polyalphabetic Vigenère cipher, encryption uses a key word, which controls letter substitution depending on which letter of the key word is used. In the mid-19th century Charles Babbage showed that the Vigenère cipher was vulnerable to Kasiski examination, but this was first published about ten years later by Friedrich Kasiski.[17]
Although frequency analysis can be a powerful and general technique against many ciphers, encryption has still often been effective in practice, as many a would-be cryptanalyst was unaware of the technique. Breaking a message without using frequency analysis essentially required knowledge of the cipher used and perhaps of the key involved, thus making espionage, bribery, burglary, defection, etc., more attractive approaches to the cryptanalytically uninformed. It was finally explicitly recognized in the 19th century that secrecy of a cipher's algorithm is not a sensible nor practical safeguard of message security; in fact, it was further realized that any adequate cryptographic scheme (including ciphers) should remain secure even if the adversary fully understands the cipher algorithm itself. Security of the key used should alone be sufficient for a good cipher to maintain confidentiality under an attack. This fundamental principle was first explicitly stated in 1883 by Auguste Kerckhoffs and is generally called Kerckhoffs's Principle; alternatively and more bluntly, it was restated by Claude Shannon, the inventor of information theory and the fundamentals of theoretical cryptography, as Shannon's Maxim—'the enemy knows the system'.
Different physical devices and aids have been used to assist with ciphers. One of the earliest may have been the scytale of ancient Greece, a rod supposedly used by the Spartans as an aid for a transposition cipher (see image above). In medieval times, other aids were invented such as the cipher grille, which was also used for a kind of steganography. With the invention of polyalphabetic ciphers came more sophisticated aids such as Alberti's own cipher disk, Johannes Trithemius' tabula recta scheme, and Thomas Jefferson's multi cylinder (not publicly known, and reinvented independently by Bazeries around 1900). Many mechanical encryption/decryption devices were invented early in the 20th century, and several patented, among them rotor machines—famously including the Enigma machine used by the German government and military from the late 1920s and during World War II.[18] The ciphers implemented by better quality examples of these machine designs brought about a substantial increase in cryptanalytic difficulty after WWI.[19]
Computer era[edit]
Cryptanalysis of the new mechanical devices proved to be both difficult and laborious. In the United Kingdom, cryptanalytic efforts at Bletchley Park during WWII spurred the development of more efficient means for carrying out repetitious tasks. This culminated in the development of the Colossus, the world's first fully electronic, digital, programmable computer, which assisted in the decryption of ciphers generated by the German Army's Lorenz SZ40/42 machine.
Just as the development of digital computers and electronics helped in cryptanalysis, it made possible much more complex ciphers. Furthermore, computers allowed for the encryption of any kind of data representable in any binary format, unlike classical ciphers which only encrypted written language texts; this was new and significant. Computer use has thus supplanted linguistic cryptography, both for cipher design and cryptanalysis. Many computer ciphers can be characterized by their operation on binary bit sequences (sometimes in groups or blocks), unlike classical and mechanical schemes, which generally manipulate traditional characters (i.e., letters and digits) directly. However, computers have also assisted cryptanalysis, which has compensated to some extent for increased cipher complexity. Nonetheless, good modern ciphers have stayed ahead of cryptanalysis; it is typically the case that use of a quality cipher is very efficient (i.e., fast and requiring few resources, such as memory or CPU capability), while breaking it requires an effort many orders of magnitude larger, and vastly larger than that required for any classical cipher, making cryptanalysis so inefficient and impractical as to be effectively impossible.
Extensive open academic research into cryptography is relatively recent; it began only in the mid-1970s. In recent times, IBM personnel designed the algorithm that became the Federal (i.e., US) Data Encryption Standard; Whitfield Diffie and Martin Hellman published their key agreement algorithm;[20] and the RSA algorithm was published in Martin Gardner's Scientific American column. Since then, cryptography has become a widely used tool in communications, computer networks, and computer security generally. Some modern cryptographic techniques can only keep their keys secret if certain mathematical problems are intractable, such as the integer factorization or the discrete logarithm problems, so there are deep connections with abstract mathematics. There are very few cryptosystems that are proven to be unconditionally secure. The one-time pad is one. There are a few important ones that are proven secure under certain unproven assumptions. For example, the infeasibility of factoring extremely large integers is the basis for believing that RSA is secure, and some other systems, but even there, the proof is usually lost due to practical considerations. There are systems similar to RSA, such as one by Michael O. Rabin that is provably secure provided factoring n = pq is impossible, but the more practical system RSA has never been proved secure in this sense. The discrete logarithm problem is the basis for believing some other cryptosystems are secure, and again, there are related, less practical systems that are provably secure relative to the discrete log problem.[21]
As well as being aware of cryptographic history, cryptographic algorithm and system designers must also sensibly consider probable future developments while working on their designs. For instance, continuous improvements in computer processing power have increased the scope of brute-force attacks, so when specifying key lengths, the required key lengths are similarly advancing.[22] The potential effects of quantum computing are already being considered by some cryptographic system designers; the announced imminence of small implementations of these machines may be making the need for this preemptive caution rather more than merely speculative.[5]
Essentially, prior to the early 20th century, cryptography was chiefly concerned with linguistic and lexicographic patterns. Since then the emphasis has shifted, and cryptography now makes extensive use of mathematics, including aspects of information theory, computational complexity, statistics, combinatorics, abstract algebra, number theory, and finite mathematics generally. Cryptography is also a branch of engineering, but an unusual one since it deals with active, intelligent, and malevolent opposition (see cryptographic engineering and security engineering); other kinds of engineering (e.g., civil or chemical engineering) need deal only with neutral natural forces. There is also active research examining the relationship between cryptographic problems and quantum physics (see quantum cryptography and quantum computer).
Modern cryptography[edit]
The modern field of cryptography can be divided into several areas of study. The chief ones are discussed here; see Topics in Cryptography for more.
Symmetric-key cryptography[edit]
Main article: Symmetric-key algorithm




Symmetric-key cryptography, where a single key is used for encryption and decryption


Symmetric-key cryptography refers to encryption methods in which both the sender and receiver share the same key (or, less commonly, in which their keys are different, but related in an easily computable way). This was the only kind of encryption publicly known until June 1976.[20]




One round (out of 8.5) of the IDEA cipher, used in some versions of PGP for high-speed encryption of, for instance, e-mail


Symmetric key ciphers are implemented as either block ciphers or stream ciphers. A block cipher enciphers input in blocks of plaintext as opposed to individual characters, the input form used by a stream cipher.
The Data Encryption Standard (DES) and the Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) are block cipher designs which have been designated cryptography standards by the US government (though DES's designation was finally withdrawn after the AES was adopted).[23] Despite its deprecation as an official standard, DES (especially its still-approved and much more secure triple-DES variant) remains quite popular; it is used across a wide range of applications, from ATM encryption[24] to e-mail privacy[25] and secure remote access.[26] Many other block ciphers have been designed and released, with considerable variation in quality. Many have been thoroughly broken, such as FEAL.[5][27]
Stream ciphers, in contrast to the 'block' type, create an arbitrarily long stream of key material, which is combined with the plaintext bit-by-bit or character-by-character, somewhat like the one-time pad. In a stream cipher, the output stream is created based on a hidden internal state which changes as the cipher operates. That internal state is initially set up using the secret key material. RC4 is a widely used stream cipher; see Category:Stream ciphers.[5] Block ciphers can be used as stream ciphers; see Block cipher modes of operation.
Cryptographic hash functions are a third type of cryptographic algorithm. They take a message of any length as input, and output a short, fixed length hash which can be used in (for example) a digital signature. For good hash functions, an attacker cannot find two messages that produce the same hash. MD4 is a long-used hash function which is now broken; MD5, a strengthened variant of MD4, is also widely used but broken in practice. The US National Security Agency developed the Secure Hash Algorithm series of MD5-like hash functions: SHA-0 was a flawed algorithm that the agency withdrew; SHA-1 is widely deployed and more secure than MD5, but cryptanalysts have identified attacks against it; the SHA-2 family improves on SHA-1, but it isn't yet widely deployed; and the US standards authority thought it "prudent" from a security perspective to develop a new standard to "significantly improve the robustness of NIST's overall hash algorithm toolkit."[28] Thus, a hash function design competition was meant to select a new U.S. national standard, to be called SHA-3, by 2012. The competition ended on October 2, 2012 when the NIST announced that Keccak would be the new SHA-3 hash algorithm.[29]
Message authentication codes (MACs) are much like cryptographic hash functions, except that a secret key can be used to authenticate the hash value upon receipt;[5] this additional complication blocks an attack scheme against bare digest algorithms, and so has been thought worth the effort.
Public-key cryptography[edit]
Main article: Public-key cryptography




Public-key cryptography, where different keys are used for encryption and decryption


Symmetric-key cryptosystems use the same key for encryption and decryption of a message, though a message or group of messages may have a different key than others. A significant disadvantage of symmetric ciphers is the key management necessary to use them securely. Each distinct pair of communicating parties must, ideally, share a different key, and perhaps each ciphertext exchanged as well. The number of keys required increases as the square of the number of network members, which very quickly requires complex key management schemes to keep them all consistent and secret. The difficulty of securely establishing a secret key between two communicating parties, when a secure channel does not already exist between them, also presents a chicken-and-egg problem which is a considerable practical obstacle for cryptography users in the real world.




Whitfield Diffie and Martin Hellman, authors of the first published paper on public-key cryptography


In a groundbreaking 1976 paper, Whitfield Diffie and Martin Hellman proposed the notion of public-key (also, more generally, called asymmetric key) cryptography in which two different but mathematically related keys are used—a public key and a private key.[30] A public key system is so constructed that calculation of one key (the 'private key') is computationally infeasible from the other (the 'public key'), even though they are necessarily related. Instead, both keys are generated secretly, as an interrelated pair.[31] The historian David Kahn described public-key cryptography as "the most revolutionary new concept in the field since polyalphabetic substitution emerged in the Renaissance".[32]
In public-key cryptosystems, the public key may be freely distributed, while its paired private key must remain secret. In a public-key encryption system, the public key is used for encryption, while the private or secret key is used for decryption. While Diffie and Hellman could not find such a system, they showed that public-key cryptography was indeed possible by presenting the Diffie–Hellman key exchange protocol, a solution that is now widely used in secure communications to allow two parties to secretly agree on a shared encryption key.[20]
Diffie and Hellman's publication sparked widespread academic efforts in finding a practical public-key encryption system. This race was finally won in 1978 by Ronald Rivest, Adi Shamir, and Len Adleman, whose solution has since become known as the RSA algorithm.[33]
The Diffie–Hellman and RSA algorithms, in addition to being the first publicly known examples of high quality public-key algorithms, have been among the most widely used. Others include the Cramer–Shoup cryptosystem, ElGamal encryption, and various elliptic curve techniques. See Category:Asymmetric-key cryptosystems.
To much surprise, a document published in 1997 by the Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ), a British intelligence organization, revealed that cryptographers at GCHQ had anticipated several academic developments.[34] Reportedly, around 1970, James H. Ellis had conceived the principles of asymmetric key cryptography. In 1973, Clifford Cocks invented a solution that essentially resembles the RSA algorithm.[34][35] And in 1974, Malcolm J. Williamson is claimed to have developed the Diffie–Hellman key exchange.[36]




Padlock icon from the Firefox Web browser, which indicates that TLS, a public-key cryptography system, is in use.


Public-key cryptography can also be used for implementing digital signature schemes. A digital signature is reminiscent of an ordinary signature; they both have the characteristic of being easy for a user to produce, but difficult for anyone else to forge. Digital signatures can also be permanently tied to the content of the message being signed; they cannot then be 'moved' from one document to another, for any attempt will be detectable. In digital signature schemes, there are two algorithms: one for signing, in which a secret key is used to process the message (or a hash of the message, or both), and one for verification, in which the matching public key is used with the message to check the validity of the signature. RSA and DSA are two of the most popular digital signature schemes. Digital signatures are central to the operation of public key infrastructures and many network security schemes (e.g., SSL/TLS, many VPNs, etc.).[27]
Public-key algorithms are most often based on the computational complexity of "hard" problems, often from number theory. For example, the hardness of RSA is related to the integer factorization problem, while Diffie–Hellman and DSA are related to the discrete logarithm problem. More recently, elliptic curve cryptography has developed, a system in which security is based on number theoretic problems involving elliptic curves. Because of the difficulty of the underlying problems, most public-key algorithms involve operations such as modular multiplication and exponentiation, which are much more computationally expensive than the techniques used in most block ciphers, especially with typical key sizes. As a result, public-key cryptosystems are commonly hybrid cryptosystems, in which a fast high-quality symmetric-key encryption algorithm is used for the message itself, while the relevant symmetric key is sent with the message, but encrypted using a public-key algorithm. Similarly, hybrid signature schemes are often used, in which a cryptographic hash function is computed, and only the resulting hash is digitally signed.[5]
Cryptanalysis[edit]
Main article: Cryptanalysis




Variants of the Enigma machine, used by Germany's military and civil authorities from the late 1920s through World War II, implemented a complex electro-mechanical polyalphabetic cipher. Breaking and reading of the Enigma cipher at Poland's Cipher Bureau, for 7 years before the war, and subsequent decryption at Bletchley Park, was important to Allied victory.[9]


The goal of cryptanalysis is to find some weakness or insecurity in a cryptographic scheme, thus permitting its subversion or evasion.
It is a common misconception that every encryption method can be broken. In connection with his WWII work at Bell Labs, Claude Shannon proved that the one-time pad cipher is unbreakable, provided the key material is truly random, never reused, kept secret from all possible attackers, and of equal or greater length than the message.[37] Most ciphers, apart from the one-time pad, can be broken with enough computational effort by brute force attack, but the amount of effort needed may be exponentially dependent on the key size, as compared to the effort needed to make use of the cipher. In such cases, effective security could be achieved if it is proven that the effort required (i.e., "work factor", in Shannon's terms) is beyond the ability of any adversary. This means it must be shown that no efficient method (as opposed to the time-consuming brute force method) can be found to break the cipher. Since no such proof has been found to date, the one-time-pad remains the only theoretically unbreakable cipher.
There are a wide variety of cryptanalytic attacks, and they can be classified in any of several ways. A common distinction turns on what Eve (an attacker) knows and what capabilities are available. In a ciphertext-only attack, Eve has access only to the ciphertext (good modern cryptosystems are usually effectively immune to ciphertext-only attacks). In a known-plaintext attack, Eve has access to a ciphertext and its corresponding plaintext (or to many such pairs). In a chosen-plaintext attack, Eve may choose a plaintext and learn its corresponding ciphertext (perhaps many times); an example is gardening, used by the British during WWII. In a chosen-ciphertext attack, Eve may be able to choose ciphertexts and learn their corresponding plaintexts.[5] Finally in a man-in-the-middle attack Eve gets in between Alice (the sender) and Bob (the recipient), accesses and modifies the traffic and then forwards it to the recipient.[38] Also important, often overwhelmingly so, are mistakes (generally in the design or use of one of the protocols involved; see Cryptanalysis of the Enigma for some historical examples of this).




Poznań monument (center) to Polish cryptologists whose breaking of Germany's Enigma machine ciphers, beginning in 1932, altered the course of World War II


Cryptanalysis of symmetric-key ciphers typically involves looking for attacks against the block ciphers or stream ciphers that are more efficient than any attack that could be against a perfect cipher. For example, a simple brute force attack against DES requires one known plaintext and 255 decryptions, trying approximately half of the possible keys, to reach a point at which chances are better than even that the key sought will have been found. But this may not be enough assurance; a linear cryptanalysis attack against DES requires 243 known plaintexts and approximately 243 DES operations.[39] This is a considerable improvement on brute force attacks.
Public-key algorithms are based on the computational difficulty of various problems. The most famous of these is integer factorization (e.g., the RSA algorithm is based on a problem related to integer factoring), but the discrete logarithm problem is also important. Much public-key cryptanalysis concerns numerical algorithms for solving these computational problems, or some of them, efficiently (i.e., in a practical time). For instance, the best known algorithms for solving the elliptic curve-based version of discrete logarithm are much more time-consuming than the best known algorithms for factoring, at least for problems of more or less equivalent size. Thus, other things being equal, to achieve an equivalent strength of attack resistance, factoring-based encryption techniques must use larger keys than elliptic curve techniques. For this reason, public-key cryptosystems based on elliptic curves have become popular since their invention in the mid-1990s.
While pure cryptanalysis uses weaknesses in the algorithms themselves, other attacks on cryptosystems are based on actual use of the algorithms in real devices, and are called side-channel attacks. If a cryptanalyst has access to, for example, the amount of time the device took to encrypt a number of plaintexts or report an error in a password or PIN character, he may be able to use a timing attack to break a cipher that is otherwise resistant to analysis. An attacker might also study the pattern and length of messages to derive valuable information; this is known as traffic analysis[40] and can be quite useful to an alert adversary. Poor administration of a cryptosystem, such as permitting too short keys, will make any system vulnerable, regardless of other virtues. And, of course, social engineering, and other attacks against the personnel who work with cryptosystems or the messages they handle (e.g., bribery, extortion, blackmail, espionage, torture, ...) may be the most productive attacks of all.
Cryptographic primitives[edit]
Much of the theoretical work in cryptography concerns cryptographic primitives—algorithms with basic cryptographic properties—and their relationship to other cryptographic problems. More complicated cryptographic tools are then built from these basic primitives. These primitives provide fundamental properties, which are used to develop more complex tools called cryptosystems or cryptographic protocols, which guarantee one or more high-level security properties. Note however, that the distinction between cryptographic primitives and cryptosystems, is quite arbitrary; for example, the RSA algorithm is sometimes considered a cryptosystem, and sometimes a primitive. Typical examples of cryptographic primitives include pseudorandom functions, one-way functions, etc.
Cryptosystems[edit]
One or more cryptographic primitives are often used to develop a more complex algorithm, called a cryptographic system, or cryptosystem. Cryptosystems (e.g., El-Gamal encryption) are designed to provide particular functionality (e.g., public key encryption) while guaranteeing certain security properties (e.g., chosen-plaintext attack (CPA) security in the random oracle model). Cryptosystems use the properties of the underlying cryptographic primitives to support the system's security properties. Of course, as the distinction between primitives and cryptosystems is somewhat arbitrary, a sophisticated cryptosystem can be derived from a combination of several more primitive cryptosystems. In many cases, the cryptosystem's structure involves back and forth communication among two or more parties in space (e.g., between the sender of a secure message and its receiver) or across time (e.g., cryptographically protected backup data). Such cryptosystems are sometimes called cryptographic protocols.
Some widely known cryptosystems include RSA encryption, Schnorr signature, El-Gamal encryption, PGP, etc. More complex cryptosystems include electronic cash[41] systems, signcryption systems, etc. Some more 'theoretical' cryptosystems include interactive proof systems,[42] (like zero-knowledge proofs),[43] systems for secret sharing,[44][45] etc.
Until recently[timeframe?], most security properties of most cryptosystems were demonstrated using empirical techniques or using ad hoc reasoning. Recently[timeframe?], there has been considerable effort to develop formal techniques for establishing the security of cryptosystems; this has been generally called provable security. The general idea of provable security is to give arguments about the computational difficulty needed to compromise some security aspect of the cryptosystem (i.e., to any adversary).
The study of how best to implement and integrate cryptography in software applications is itself a distinct field (see Cryptographic engineering and Security engineering).
Legal issues[edit]
See also: Cryptography laws in different nations
Prohibitions[edit]
Cryptography has long been of interest to intelligence gathering and law enforcement agencies. Secret communications may be criminal or even treasonous. Because of its facilitation of privacy, and the diminution of privacy attendant on its prohibition, cryptography is also of considerable interest to civil rights supporters. Accordingly, there has been a history of controversial legal issues surrounding cryptography, especially since the advent of inexpensive computers has made widespread access to high quality cryptography possible.
In some countries, even the domestic use of cryptography is, or has been, restricted. Until 1999, France significantly restricted the use of cryptography domestically, though it has since relaxed many of these rules. In China and Iran, a license is still required to use cryptography.[6] Many countries have tight restrictions on the use of cryptography. Among the more restrictive are laws in Belarus, Kazakhstan, Mongolia, Pakistan, Singapore, Tunisia, and Vietnam.[46]
In the United States, cryptography is legal for domestic use, but there has been much conflict over legal issues related to cryptography. One particularly important issue has been the export of cryptography and cryptographic software and hardware. Probably because of the importance of cryptanalysis in World War II and an expectation that cryptography would continue to be important for national security, many Western governments have, at some point, strictly regulated export of cryptography. After World War II, it was illegal in the US to sell or distribute encryption technology overseas; in fact, encryption was designated as auxiliary military equipment and put on the United States Munitions List.[47] Until the development of the personal computer, asymmetric key algorithms (i.e., public key techniques), and the Internet, this was not especially problematic. However, as the Internet grew and computers became more widely available, high-quality encryption techniques became well known around the globe.
Export controls[edit]
Main article: Export of cryptography
In the 1990s, there were several challenges to US export regulation of cryptography. After the source code for Philip Zimmermann's Pretty Good Privacy (PGP) encryption program found its way onto the Internet in June 1991, a complaint by RSA Security (then called RSA Data Security, Inc.) resulted in a lengthy criminal investigation of Zimmermann by the US Customs Service and the FBI, though no charges were ever filed.[48][49] Daniel J. Bernstein, then a graduate student at UC Berkeley, brought a lawsuit against the US government challenging some aspects of the restrictions based on free speech grounds. The 1995 case Bernstein v. United States ultimately resulted in a 1999 decision that printed source code for cryptographic algorithms and systems was protected as free speech by the United States Constitution.[50]
In 1996, thirty-nine countries signed the Wassenaar Arrangement, an arms control treaty that deals with the export of arms and "dual-use" technologies such as cryptography. The treaty stipulated that the use of cryptography with short key-lengths (56-bit for symmetric encryption, 512-bit for RSA) would no longer be export-controlled.[51] Cryptography exports from the US became less strictly regulated as a consequence of a major relaxation in 2000;[52] there are no longer very many restrictions on key sizes in US-exported mass-market software. Since this relaxation in US export restrictions, and because most personal computers connected to the Internet include US-sourced web browsers such as Firefox or Internet Explorer, almost every Internet user worldwide has potential access to quality cryptography via their browsers (e.g., via Transport Layer Security). The Mozilla Thunderbird and Microsoft Outlook E-mail client programs similarly can transmit and receive emails via TLS, and can send and receive email encrypted with S/MIME. Many Internet users don't realize that their basic application software contains such extensive cryptosystems. These browsers and email programs are so ubiquitous that even governments whose intent is to regulate civilian use of cryptography generally don't find it practical to do much to control distribution or use of cryptography of this quality, so even when such laws are in force, actual enforcement is often effectively impossible.[citation needed]
NSA involvement[edit]
See also: Clipper chip
Another contentious issue connected to cryptography in the United States is the influence of the National Security Agency on cipher development and policy. The NSA was involved with the design of DES during its development at IBM and its consideration by the National Bureau of Standards as a possible Federal Standard for cryptography.[53] DES was designed to be resistant to differential cryptanalysis,[54] a powerful and general cryptanalytic technique known to the NSA and IBM, that became publicly known only when it was rediscovered in the late 1980s.[55] According to Steven Levy, IBM discovered differential cryptanalysis,[49] but kept the technique secret at the NSA's request. The technique became publicly known only when Biham and Shamir re-discovered and announced it some years later. The entire affair illustrates the difficulty of determining what resources and knowledge an attacker might actually have.
Another instance of the NSA's involvement was the 1993 Clipper chip affair, an encryption microchip intended to be part of the Capstone cryptography-control initiative. Clipper was widely criticized by cryptographers for two reasons. The cipher algorithm (called Skipjack) was then classified (declassified in 1998, long after the Clipper initiative lapsed). The classified cipher caused concerns that the NSA had deliberately made the cipher weak in order to assist its intelligence efforts. The whole initiative was also criticized based on its violation of Kerckhoffs's Principle, as the scheme included a special escrow key held by the government for use by law enforcement, for example in wiretaps.[49]
Digital rights management[edit]
Main article: Digital rights management
Cryptography is central to digital rights management (DRM), a group of techniques for technologically controlling use of copyrighted material, being widely implemented and deployed at the behest of some copyright holders. In 1998, U.S. President Bill Clinton signed the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA), which criminalized all production, dissemination, and use of certain cryptanalytic techniques and technology (now known or later discovered); specifically, those that could be used to circumvent DRM technological schemes.[56] This had a noticeable impact on the cryptography research community since an argument can be made that any cryptanalytic research violated, or might violate, the DMCA. Similar statutes have since been enacted in several countries and regions, including the implementation in the EU Copyright Directive. Similar restrictions are called for by treaties signed by World Intellectual Property Organization member-states.
The United States Department of Justice and FBI have not enforced the DMCA as rigorously as had been feared by some, but the law, nonetheless, remains a controversial one. Niels Ferguson, a well-respected cryptography researcher, has publicly stated that he will not release some of his research into an Intel security design for fear of prosecution under the DMCA.[57] Both Alan Cox (longtime number 2 in Linux kernel development) and Edward Felten (and some of his students at Princeton) have encountered problems related to the Act. Dmitry Sklyarov was arrested during a visit to the US from Russia, and jailed for five months pending trial for alleged violations of the DMCA arising from work he had done in Russia, where the work was legal. In 2007, the cryptographic keys responsible for Blu-ray and HD DVD content scrambling were discovered and released onto the Internet. In both cases, the MPAA sent out numerous DMCA takedown notices, and there was a massive Internet backlash[8] triggered by the perceived impact of such notices on fair use and free speech.
Forced disclosure of encryption keys[edit]
Main article: Key disclosure law
In the United Kingdom, the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act gives UK police the powers to force suspects to decrypt files or hand over passwords that protect encryption keys. Failure to comply is an offense in its own right, punishable on conviction by a two-year jail sentence or up to five years in cases involving national security.[7] Successful prosecutions have occurred under the Act; the first, in 2009,[58] resulted in a term of 13 months' imprisonment.[59] Similar forced disclosure laws in Australia, Finland, France, and India compel individual suspects under investigation to hand over encryption keys or passwords during a criminal investigation.
In the United States, the federal criminal case of United States v. Fricosu addressed whether a search warrant can compel a person to reveal an encryption passphrase or password.[60] The Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF) argued that this is a violation of the protection from self-incrimination given by the Fifth Amendment.[61] In 2012, the court ruled that under the All Writs Act, the defendant was required to produce an unencrypted hard drive for the court.[62]
In many jurisdictions, the legal status of forced disclosure remains unclear.
See also[edit]

List of cryptographers
Encyclopedia of Cryptography and Security
List of important publications in cryptography
List of multiple discoveries (see "RSA")
List of unsolved problems in computer science
Outline of cryptography
Global surveillance
Strong cryptography
A Syllabical and Steganographical table - first cryptography chart

References[edit]


^ Liddell, Henry George; Scott, Robert; Jones, Henry Stuart; McKenzie, Roderick (1984). A Greek-English Lexicon. Oxford University Press.&#160;
^ Rivest, Ronald L. (1990). "Cryptography". In J. Van Leeuwen. Handbook of Theoretical Computer Science 1. Elsevier.&#160;
^ a b Biggs, Norman (2008). Codes: An introduction to Information Communication and Cryptography. Springer. p.&#160;171.&#160;
^ Bellare, Mihir; Rogaway, Phillip (21 September 2005). "Introduction". Introduction to Modern Cryptography. p.&#160;10.&#160;
^ a b c d e f g Menezes, A. J.; van Oorschot, P. C.; Vanstone, S. A. Handbook of Applied Cryptography. ISBN&#160;0-8493-8523-7.&#160;
^ a b "Overview per country". Crypto Law Survey. February 2013. Retrieved 26 March 2015.&#160;
^ a b "UK Data Encryption Disclosure Law Takes Effect". PC World. 1 October 2007. Retrieved 26 March 2015.&#160;
^ a b Doctorow, Cory (2 May 2007). "Digg users revolt over AACS key". Boing Boing. Retrieved 26 March 2015.&#160;
^ a b c d Kahn, David (1967). The Codebreakers. ISBN&#160;0-684-83130-9.&#160;
^ "An Introduction to Modern Cryptosystems".&#160;
^ Oded Goldreich, Foundations of Cryptography, Volume 1: Basic Tools, Cambridge University Press, 2001, ISBN 0-521-79172-3
^ "Cryptology (definition)". Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary (11th ed.). Merriam-Webster. Retrieved 26 March 2015.&#160;
^ "RFC 2828 - Internet Security Glossary". Internet Engineering Task Force. May 2000. Retrieved 26 March 2015.&#160;
^ I︠A︡shchenko, V. V. (2002). Cryptography: an introduction. AMS Bookstore. p.&#160;6. ISBN&#160;0-8218-2986-6.&#160;
^ a b Singh, Simon (2000). The Code Book. New York: Anchor Books. pp.&#160;14–20. ISBN&#160;9780385495325.&#160;
^ a b Al-Kadi, Ibrahim A. (April 1992). "The origins of cryptology: The Arab contributions". Cryptologia 16 (2): 97–126.&#160;
^ Schrödel, Tobias (October 2008). "Breaking Short Vigenère Ciphers". Cryptologia 32 (4): 334–337. doi:10.1080/01611190802336097.&#160;
^ Hakim, Joy (1995). A History of US: War, Peace and all that Jazz. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN&#160;0-19-509514-6.&#160;
^ Gannon, James (2001). Stealing Secrets, Telling Lies: How Spies and Codebreakers Helped Shape the Twentieth Century. Washington, D.C.: Brassey's. ISBN&#160;1-57488-367-4.&#160;
^ a b c Diffie, Whitfield; Hellman, Martin (November 1976). "New Directions in Cryptography" (PDF). IEEE Transactions on Information Theory. IT-22: 644–654.&#160;
^ Cryptography: Theory and Practice, Third Edition (Discrete Mathematics and Its Applications), 2005, by Douglas R. Stinson, Chapman and Hall/CRC
^ Blaze, Matt; Diffie, Whitefield; Rivest, Ronald L.; Schneier, Bruce; Shimomura, Tsutomu; Thompson, Eric; Wiener, Michael (January 1996). "Minimal key lengths for symmetric ciphers to provide adequate commercial security". Fortify. Retrieved 26 March 2015.&#160;
^ "FIPS PUB 197: The official Advanced Encryption Standard" (PDF). Computer Security Resource Center. National Institute of Standards and Technology. Retrieved 26 March 2015.&#160;
^ "NCUA letter to credit unions" (PDF). National Credit Union Administration. July 2004. Retrieved 26 March 2015.&#160;
^ "RFC 2440 - Open PGP Message Format". Internet Engineering Task Force. November 1998. Retrieved 26 March 2015.&#160;
^ Golen, Pawel (19 July 2002). "SSH". WindowSecurity. Retrieved 26 March 2015.&#160;
^ a b Schneier, Bruce (1996). Applied Cryptography (2nd ed.). Wiley. ISBN&#160;0-471-11709-9.&#160;
^ "Notices". Federal Register 72 (212). 2 November 2007.&#160;
Archived 28 February 2008 at the Wayback Machine
^ "NIST Selects Winner of Secure Hash Algorithm (SHA-3) Competition". Tech Beat. National Institute of Standards and Technology. October 2, 2012. Retrieved 26 March 2015.&#160;
^ Diffie, Whitfield; Hellman, Martin (8 June 1976). "Multi-user cryptographic techniques". AFIPS Proceedings 45: 109–112.&#160;
^ Ralph Merkle was working on similar ideas at the time and encountered publication delays, and Hellman has suggested that the term used should be Diffie–Hellman–Merkle aysmmetric key cryptography.
^ Kahn, David (Fall 1979). "Cryptology Goes Public". Foreign Affairs 58 (1): 153.&#160;
^ Rivest, Ronald L.; Shamir, A.; Adleman, L. (1978). "A Method for Obtaining Digital Signatures and Public-Key Cryptosystems". Communications of the ACM (Association for Computing Machinery) 21 (2): 120–126.&#160;
Archived November 16, 2001 at the Wayback Machine
Previously released as an MIT "Technical Memo" in April 1977, and published in Martin Gardner's Scientific American Mathematical recreations column
^ a b Wayner, Peter (24 December 1997). "British Document Outlines Early Encryption Discovery". New York Times. Retrieved 26 March 2015.&#160;
^ Cocks, Clifford (20 November 1973). "A Note on 'Non-Secret Encryption'" (PDF). CESG Research Report.&#160;
^ Singh, Simon (1999). The Code Book. Doubleday. pp.&#160;279–292.&#160;
^ Shannon, Claude; Weaver, Warren (1963). The Mathematical Theory of Communication. University of Illinois Press. ISBN&#160;0-252-72548-4.&#160;
^ "An Example of a Man-in-the-middle Attack Against Server Authenticated SSL-sessions" (PDF).&#160;
^ Junod, Pascal (2001). "On the Complexity of Matsui's Attack" (PDF). Selected Areas in Cryptography.&#160;
^ Song, Dawn; Wagner, David A.; Tian, Xuqing (2001). "Timing Analysis of Keystrokes and Timing Attacks on SSH" (PDF). Tenth USENIX Security Symposium.&#160;
^ Brands, S. (1994). "Untraceable Off-line Cash in Wallets with Observers". Advances in Cryptology—Proceedings of CRYPTO (Springer-Verlag).&#160;[dead link]
^ Babai, László (1985). "Trading group theory for randomness". Proceedings of the Seventeenth Annual Symposium on the Theory of Computing (Association for Computing Machinery).&#160;
^ Goldwasser, S.; Micali, S.; Rackoff, C. (1989). "The Knowledge Complexity of Interactive Proof Systems". SIAM Journal on Computing 18 (1): 186–208.&#160;
^ Blakley, G. (June 1979). "Safeguarding cryptographic keys". Proceedings of AFIPS 1979 48: 313–317.&#160;
^ Shamir, A. (1979). "How to share a secret". Communications of the ACM (Association for Computing Machinery) 22: 612–613.&#160;
^ "6.5.1 WHAT ARE THE CRYPTOGRAPHIC POLICIES OF SOME COUNTRIES?". RSA Laboratories. Retrieved 26 March 2015.&#160;
^ Rosenoer, Jonathan (1995). "CRYPTOGRAPHY &amp; SPEECH". CyberLaw.&#160; Missing or empty |url= (help)
Archived December 1, 2005 at the Wayback Machine
^ "Case Closed on Zimmermann PGP Investigation". IEEE Computer Society's Technical Committee on Security and Privacy. 14 February 1996. Retrieved 26 March 2015.&#160;
^ a b c Levy, Steven (2001). Crypto: How the Code Rebels Beat the Government—Saving Privacy in the Digital Age. Penguin Books. p.&#160;56. ISBN&#160;0-14-024432-8. OCLC&#160;244148644 48066852 48846639.&#160;
^ "Bernstein v USDOJ". Electronic Privacy Information Center. United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit. 6 May 1999. Retrieved 26 March 2015.&#160;
^ "DUAL-USE LIST - CATEGORY 5 – PART 2 – "INFORMATION SECURITY"" (DOC). Wassenaar Arrangement. Retrieved 26 March 2015.&#160;
^ "6.4 UNITED STATES CRYPTOGRAPHY EXPORT/IMPORT LAWS". RSA Laboratories. Retrieved 26 March 2015.&#160;
^ Schneier, Bruce (15 June 2000). "The Data Encryption Standard (DES)". Crypto-Gram. Retrieved 26 March 2015.&#160;
^ Coppersmith, D. (May 1994). "The Data Encryption Standard (DES) and its strength against attacks" (PDF). IBM Journal of Research and Development 38 (3): 243. doi:10.1147/rd.383.0243. Retrieved 26 March 2015.&#160;
^ Biham, E.; Shamir, A. (1991). "Differential cryptanalysis of DES-like cryptosystems" (PDF). Journal of Cryptology (Springer-Verlag) 4 (1): 3–72. Retrieved 26 March 2015.&#160;
^ "The Digital Millennium Copyright Act of 1998" (PDF). United States Copyright Office. Retrieved 26 March 2015.&#160;
^ Ferguson, Niels (15 August 2001). "Censorship in action: why I don't publish my HDCP results".&#160; Missing or empty |url= (help)
Archived December 1, 2001 at the Wayback Machine
^ Williams, Christopher (11 August 2009). "Two convicted for refusal to decrypt data". The Register. Retrieved 26 March 2015.&#160;
^ Williams, Christopher (24 November 2009). "UK jails schizophrenic for refusal to decrypt files". The Register. Retrieved 26 March 2015.&#160;
^ Ingold, John (January 4, 2012). "Password case reframes Fifth Amendment rights in context of digital world". The Denver Post. Retrieved 26 March 2015.&#160;
^ Leyden, John (13 July 2011). "US court test for rights not to hand over crypto keys". The Register. Retrieved 26 March 2015.&#160;
^ "ORDER GRANTING APPLICATION UNDER THE ALL WRITS ACT REQUIRING DEFENDANT FRICOSU TO ASSIST IN THE EXECUTION OF PREVIOUSLY ISSUED SEARCH WARRANTS" (PDF). United States District Court for the District of Colorado. Retrieved 26 March 2015.&#160;


Further reading[edit]
Further information: Books on cryptography


Becket, B (1988). Introduction to Cryptology. Blackwell Scientific Publications. ISBN&#160;0-632-01836-4. OCLC&#160;16832704.&#160; Excellent coverage of many classical ciphers and cryptography concepts and of the "modern" DES and RSA systems.
Cryptography and Mathematics by Bernhard Esslinger, 200 pages, part of the free open-source package CrypTool, PDF download at the Wayback Machine (archived July 22, 2011). CrypTool is the most widespread e-learning program about cryptography and cryptanalysis, open source.
In Code: A Mathematical Journey by Sarah Flannery (with David Flannery). Popular account of Sarah's award-winning project on public-key cryptography, co-written with her father.
James Gannon, Stealing Secrets, Telling Lies: How Spies and Codebreakers Helped Shape the Twentieth Century, Washington, D.C., Brassey's, 2001, ISBN 1-57488-367-4.
Oded Goldreich, Foundations of Cryptography, in two volumes, Cambridge University Press, 2001 and 2004.
Introduction to Modern Cryptography by Jonathan Katz and Yehuda Lindell.
Alvin's Secret Code by Clifford B. Hicks (children's novel that introduces some basic cryptography and cryptanalysis).
Ibrahim A. Al-Kadi, "The Origins of Cryptology: the Arab Contributions," Cryptologia, vol. 16, no. 2 (April 1992), pp.&#160;97–126.
Christof Paar, Jan Pelzl, Understanding Cryptography, A Textbook for Students and Practitioners. Springer, 2009. (Slides, online cryptography lectures and other information are available on the companion web site.) Very accessible introduction to practical cryptography for non-mathematicians.
Introduction to Modern Cryptography by Phillip Rogaway and Mihir Bellare, a mathematical introduction to theoretical cryptography including reduction-based security proofs. PDF download.
Johann-Christoph Woltag, 'Coded Communications (Encryption)' in Rüdiger Wolfrum (ed) Max Planck Encyclopedia of Public International Law (Oxford University Press 2009). *"Max Planck Encyclopedia of Public International Law".&#160;, giving an overview of international law issues regarding cryptography.
Jonathan Arbib &amp; John Dwyer, Discrete Mathematics for Cryptography, 1st Edition ISBN 978-1-907934-01-8.
Stallings, William (March 2013). Cryptography and Network Security: Principles and Practice (6th ed.). Prentice Hall. ISBN&#160;978-0133354690.&#160;


External links[edit]



Wikibooks has more on the topic of: Cryptography





At Wikiversity, you can learn more and teach others about Cryptography at the Department of Cryptography




Library resources about
Cryptography





Online books
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries





 The dictionary definition of cryptography at Wiktionary
 Media related to Cryptography at Wikimedia Commons

Cryptography on In Our Time at the BBC. (listen now)
Crypto Glossary and Dictionary of Technical Cryptography
NSA's CryptoKids.
Overview and Applications of Cryptology by the CrypTool Team; PDF; 3.8&#160;MB—July 2008
A Course in Cryptography by Raphael Pass &amp; Abhi Shelat - offered at Cornell in the form of lecture notes.
Cryptocorner.com by Chuck Easttom - A generalized resource on all aspects of cryptology.
For more on the use of cryptographic elements in fiction, see: Dooley, John F., William and Marilyn Ingersoll Professor of Computer Science, Knox College (23 August 2012). "Cryptology in Fiction".&#160;
The George Fabyan Collection at the Library of Congress has early editions of works of seventeenth-century English literature, publications relating to cryptography.













v
t
e


&#160;
Cryptography









History of cryptography
Cryptanalysis
Outline of cryptography











Symmetric-key algorithm
Block cipher
Stream cipher
Public-key cryptography
Cryptographic hash function
Message authentication code
Random numbers
Steganography









 Portal

















v
t
e


Espionage









Agents
Assets






Agent handling
Field agent
Non-official cover&#160;(strawperson
sockpuppet)
Official cover
Resident spy








Analysis



Intelligence assessment&#160;(cognitive traps
competing hypotheses)








Devices and
communications



Concealment device
Covert listening device
Cryptography
Cut-out
Dead drop&#160;(USB)
Numbers station
One-way voice link
Steganography&#160;(microdot)








Operations



Black operation&#160;(black bag
Wetwork)
Eavesdropping&#160;(SIGINT
MASINT)
False flag
Industrial espionage
Interpersonal (HUMINT) intelligence&#160;(interrogation
safe house
surveillance)
COINTELPRO
MINARET
SHAMROCK
















v
t
e


Hidden messages






Main



Hidden messages
Subliminal message








Audio



Backmasking
Reverse speech








Numeric



Numerology
Theomatics
Bible code
Cryptology








Visual



Fnord
Paranoiac-critical method
Pareidolia
Sacred geometry
Steganography
Visual cryptography








Other



Anagram
Apophenia
Asemic writing
Easter egg
Clustering illusion
Observer-expectancy effect
Pattern recognition
Palindrome
Unconscious mind
















v
t
e


Intelligence management






Collection




Interpersonal
(HUMINT)







Special reconnaissance&#160;(organizations)








Clandestine



Asset recruiting
Cell system
Covert action
Direct action
Operational techniques








Espionage



Agents&#160;(field
handling)
Asset
Black operation&#160;(black bag)
Concealment device
Cryptography
Cut-out
Dead drop
Denial and deception
Eavesdropping
False flag
Industrial espionage
Intelligence assessment
Interrogation
Numbers station
One-way voice link
Official cover
Non-official cover
Resident spy
Steganography
Surveillance











Signals (SIGINT)



By alliances, nations and industries
In modern history
Operational platforms by nation
Direction finding
Traffic analysis
TEMPEST








Measurement and
signature (MASINT)



Electro-optical
Geophysical
Nuclear
Radar
Radiofrequency
Materials
Casualty estimation&#160;(earthquake)








Other



Cultural (CULTINT)
Financial (FININT)
Geospatial (GEOINT)
Imagery (IMINT)
Market (MARKINT)
Open-source (OSINT)
Technical (TECHINT)











Analysis



Cognitive traps
Competing hypotheses
Target-centric
Words of estimative probability








Dissemination



Intelligence cycle security
Counterintelligence&#160;(organizations
failures)
Counterintelligence and counter-terrorism organizations
















v
t
e


Sub-disciplines of computing









Hardware
Software
Firmware








Information system



Information security
Multimedia database
Intelligent database
Big data
Knowledge-based systems
Recommender System
Geographic information systems
Decision support system
Data engineering
Knowledge engineering
Fuzzy logic
Data analysis
System analysis and design
Project management
Knowledge management
Data integration
High-performance computing
Semantic web








Computer science



Database management system
Communications system
Computational geometry
Machine learning
Data mining
Parallel programming
Coding theory
Theory of computation
Constraint programming
Computational biology (Bioinformatics)
Design and analysis of algorithms
Information retrieval
Computational science
Symbolic computation
Distributed computing
Evolutionary computation
Natural computation
Combinatorial optimization
Parallel processing








Computer engineering



Multimedia
Satellite navigation (GNSS)
Embedded systems
Real-time computing
Computer architecture
Pair programming
System programming
Neural networks
Speech recognition
Signal analysis
Computer vision (Visual computing)
IC Design
Voice over IP
Speech synthesis
Human-Computer Interaction
Microprocessor
Image processing
Natural language processing
Speech processing
Digital signal processing








Software engineering



Software maintenance
Formal methods
Software quality
Software quality assurance
Measurement Software
Fault-tolerant software
Software testing
Enterprise architecture
Software architecture
Software engineering economics
Agile software development
Software design pattern
Software modelling
Systems analyst
Object-oriented analysis and design (UML)
Requirements analysis
Software development
Software configuration management
Software project management
Software engineering management
Software development process (Software release life cycle)
Software design
Software deployment
Software enhancement








Computer network



Network security
Secure electronic transaction
Network Performance Evaluation (QoS)
Cloud computing
Routing
Distributed systems (Distributed database)
Information theory
Wireless network
Next-generation network
Cellular network
Optical transport network (Optical networking)
Cryptography
Network simulation
Pattern recognition
Network administrators
Network equipment
Network design
Ubiquitous and Mobile computing
Data center
Mobile communications
Digital communication
Communications satellite
Telecommunication (Telecommunications network)








Business informatics



ITIL
ITSM
Enterprise resource planning
Electronic business
Business intelligence
Human Resources Development
Security management
Configuration management
Technology management
Power management
Service management
Project management
Systems management
Network management
Content management
Customer relationship management
Incident management
Asset management
Integrated management
Communications management
System administrator
















Cryptography portal
Computer security portal















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cryptography&amp;oldid=691411519"					
				Categories: CryptographyBanking technologyFormal sciencesMathematical science occupationsHidden categories: All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from March 2015Pages using web citations with no URLUse dmy dates from September 2015Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesArticles containing Ancient Greek-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from August 2013				
							
		
		
			