


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Fourth-generation programming language
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				A fourth-generation programming language (4GL) is a computer programming language envisioned as a refinement of the style of languages classified as third-generation programming language (3GL). Each of the programming language generations aims to provide a higher level of abstraction of the internal computer hardware details, making the language more programmer-friendly, powerful and versatile. While the definition of 4GL has changed over time, it can be typified by operating more with large collections of information at once rather than focusing on just bits and bytes. Languages claimed to be 4GL may include support for database management, report generation, mathematical optimization, GUI development, or web development. Fourth-generation languages have often been compared to domain-specific languages (DSLs). Some researchers state that 4GLs are a subset of DSLs.[1][2]
The concept of 4GL was developed from the 1970s through the 1990s, overlapping most of the development of 3GL. While 3GLs like C, C++, C#, Java, and JavaScript remain popular for a wide variety of uses, 4GLs as originally defined found narrower uses.[citation needed] Some advanced 3GLs like Python, Ruby, and Perl combine some 4GL abilities within a general-purpose 3GL environment. Also, libraries with 4GL-like features have been developed as add-ons for most popular 3GLs. This has blurred the distinction of 4GL and 3GL.
In the 1980s and 1990s, there were efforts to develop fifth-generation programming languages (5GL).



Contents


1 History
2 Types
3 Examples
4 See also
5 References
6 External links



History[edit]
Though used er in papers and discussions, the term 4GL was first used formally by James Martin in his 1982 book Applications Development Without Programmers[3] to refer to non-procedural, high-level specification languages. In some primitive way, early 4GLs were included in the Informatics MARK-IV (1967) product and Sperry's MAPPER (1969 internal use, 1979 release).
The motivations for the '4GL' inception and continued interest are several. The term can apply to a large set of software products. It can also apply to an approach that looks for greater semantic properties and implementation power. Just as the 3GL offered greater power to the programmer, so too did the 4GL open up the development environment to a wider population.
In a sense, the 4GL is an example of 'black box' processing, each generation (in the sense of the page) is further from the machine (see the Computer Science history in regard to data structure improvements and information hiding). It is this latter nature that is directly associated with 4GL having errors that are harder, in many cases, to debug. In terms of applications, a 4GL could be business oriented or it could deal with some technical domain. Being further from the machine implies being closer to domain. Given the wide disparity of concepts and methods across domains, 4GL limitations lead to recognition of the need for the 5GL.[original research?]
The early input scheme for the 4GL supported entry of data within the 72-character limit of the punched card (8 bytes used for sequencing) where a card's tag would identify the type or function. With judicious use of a few cards, the 4GL deck could offer a wide variety of processing and reporting capability whereas the equivalent functionality coded in a 3GL could subsume, perhaps, a whole box or more of cards.[4]
The 72-character metaphor continued for a while as hardware progressed to larger memory and terminal interfaces. Even with its limitations, this approach supported highly sophisticated applications.
As interfaces improved and allowed longer statement lengths and grammar-driven input handling, greater power ensued. An example of this is described on the Nomad page.



Another example of Nomad's power is illustrated by Nicholas Rawlings in his comments for the Computer History Museum about NCSS (see citation below). He reports that James Martin asked Rawlings for a Nomad solution to a standard problem Martin called the Engineer's Problem: "give 6% raises to engineers whose job ratings had an average of 7 or better." Martin provided a "dozen pages of COBOL, and then just a page or two of Mark IV, from Informatics." Rawlings offered the following single statement, performing a set-at-a-time operation...



The development of the 4GL was influenced by several factors, with the hardware and operating system constraints having a large weight. When the 4GL was first introduced, a disparate mix of hardware and operating systems mandated custom application development support that was specific to the system in order to ensure sales. One example is the MAPPER system developed by Sperry. Though it has roots back to the beginning, the system has proven successful in many applications and has been ported to modern platforms. The latest variant is embedded in the BIS[5] offering of Unisys. MARK-IV is now known as VISION:BUILDER and is offered by Computer Associates.
Santa Fe railroad used MAPPER to develop a system, in a project that was an early example of 4GL, rapid prototyping, and programming by users.[6] The idea was that it was easier to teach railroad experts to use MAPPER than to teach programmers the "intricacies of railroad operations".[7]
One of the early (and portable) languages that had 4GL properties was Ramis developed by Gerald C. Cohen at Mathematica, a mathematical software company. Cohen left Mathematica and founded Information Builders to create a similar reporting-oriented 4GL, called FOCUS.
Later 4GL types are tied to a database system and are far different from the earlier types in their use of techniques and resources that have resulted from the general improvement of computing with time.
An interesting twist to the 4GL scene is realization that graphical interfaces and the related reasoning done by the user form a 'language' that is poorly understood.
Types[edit]
A number of different types of 4GLs exist:

Table-driven (codeless) programming, usually running with a runtime framework and libraries. Instead of using code, the developer defines his logic by selecting an operation in a pre-defined list of memory or data table manipulation commands. In other words, instead of coding, the developer uses Table-driven algorithm programming (See also control tables that can be used for this purpose). A good example of this type of 4GL language is PowerBuilder. These types of tools can be used for business application development usually consisting in a package allowing for both business data manipulation and reporting, therefore they come with GUI screens and report editors. They usually offer integration with lower level DLLs generated from a typical 3GL for when the need arise for more hardware/OS specific operations.
Report-generator programming languages take a description of the data format and the report to generate and from that they either generate the required report directly or they generate a program to generate the report. See also RPG
Similarly, forms generators manage online interactions with the application system users or generate programs to do so.
More ambitious 4GLs (sometimes termed fourth generation environments) attempt to automatically generate whole systems from the outputs of CASE tools, specifications of screens and reports, and possibly also the specification of some additional processing logic.
Data management 4GLs such as SAS, SPSS and Stata provide sophisticated coding commands for data manipulation, file reshaping, case selection and data documentation in the preparation of data for statistical analysis and reporting.

Some 4GLs have integrated tools which allow for the easy specification of all the required information:

James Martin's version of Information Engineering systems development methodology was automated to allow the input of the results of system analysis and design in the form of data flow diagrams, entity relationship diagrams, entity life history diagrams etc. from which hundreds of thousands of lines of COBOL would be generated overnight.
More recently Oracle Corporation's Oracle Designer and Oracle Developer Suite 4GL products could be integrated to produce database definitions and the forms and reports programs.

Examples[edit]
General use / versatile


Accell/SQL (4GL) from Unify Corporation.
Clarion
Clipper
CA-Telon 4GL Cobol/PLI generator
Cognos PowerHouse 4GL
DataFlex
Forté TOOL (transactional object-oriented language)
FOCUS from Information Builders Inc.
FoxPro
GeneXus (Knowledge-based Multi-Platform Development Tool)
IBM Rational EGL (Enterprise Generation Language)
LabVIEW
LINC
Omnis Studio SDK
OutSystems (Productivity/PaaS)
Panther
PowerBuilder
Perl
PHP
Python
Ruby
Oracle Application Development Framework
DEC RALLY
SheerPower4GL (Microsoft Windows only)
SQLWindows/Team Developer
Uniface
Visual DataFlex (Microsoft Windows only)
WinDev
Unix Shell
XBase++
Manage (SDS Sigma series mainframes)


Database query languages


FOCUS
4D QL
Informix-4GL
OpenEdge ABL
OpenROAD (Ingres 4GL)
Ramis
SQL


Report generators


BuildProfessional
LIRC
NATURAL
Oracle Reports
Progress 4GL Query/Results
Quest
RPG-II


Data manipulation, analysis, and reporting languages


Ab Initio
ABAP
Aubit-4GL
Audit Command Language
Clarion Programming Language
CorVision
Culprit
ADS/Online (plus transaction processing)
Easytrieve
FOCUS
GraphTalk
IDL
IGOR Pro
Informix-4GL
JSL
LANSA
LabVIEW
MANTIS
MAPPER (Unisys/Sperry) now part of BIS
MARK-IV (Sterling/Informatics) now VISION:BUILDER of CA
Simulink a component of MATLAB
NATURAL
Nomad
PL/SQL
Progress 4GL
PROIV
R
Ramis
S
Scilab
SAS
SPSS
SQL PL
SQR
Stata
Synon
Wolfram Language
XBase++
Xquery Backward compatible with SQL and forward compatible with XML data sources.


GUI creators


4th Dimension (Software)
MATLAB's GUIDE
Omnis Studio
OpenROAD
Progress 4GL AppBuilder
SuperCard
Revolution
XUL Can be used with Xquery to create web GUI database applications quickly.
Visual DataFlex


Mathematical optimization

AIMMS
AMPL
GAMS

Database-driven GUI application development

Action Request System
C/AL
Genexus
SB+/SystemBuilder
Progress Dynamics
Unify VISION

Screen painters and generators

SB+/SystemBuilder
Oracle Forms
Progress 4GL ProVision

Web development languages

ActiveVFP
CFML
Wavemaker open source, browser-based development platform for Ajax development based on Dojo, Spring, Hibernate
OutSystems

See also[edit]

List of fourth-generation programming languages
Domain-specific programming language
Rapid application development
Fifth-generation programming language

References[edit]


^ 35th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1002 Domain-Specific Languages for Software Engineering
^ Arie van Deursen; Paul Klint; Joost Visser (1998). "Domain-Specific Languages:An Annotated Bibliography". Retrieved 2009-03-15.&#160;
^ Martin, James. Application Development Without Programmers. Prentice-Hall, 1981. ISBN 0-13-038943-9.
^ Columbia University Computing History: IBM Cards
^ Unisys. Business Information Server (BIS).
^ Louis Schlueter, User-Designed Computing: The Next Generation, 1988. [book on report generator and MAPPER systems]
^ McNurlin &amp; Sprague. Technologies for Developing Systems Information Systems Management in Practice. Prentice Hall, 2003. ISBN 0-13-101139-1


External links[edit]

FourGen CASE Tools - Rapid Application Development Environment
Four J's Development Tools Genero, Genero Studio
IBM Informix Genero
4GL GPL/GNU OpenSource development tools project
Domain-Specific Languages for Software Engineering (Compares 4GLs to DSLs)
The fourgen site.
The Gillani fourgen site.
Up&#160;! 5GL to consolidate or to build component-based applications.

This article is based on material taken from the Free On-line Dictionary of Computing prior to 1 November 2008 and incorporated under the "relicensing" terms of the GFDL, version 1.3 or later.








v
t
e


Programming language generations









Generations Overview

1GL
2GL
3GL
4GL
5GL


















v
t
e


Types of computer languages









Architecture description
Hardware description
Markup
Modeling
Programming language
Query
Specification
Stylesheet
Template processing
Transformation













Authority control



BNF: cb11941625x (data)















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fourth-generation_programming_language&amp;oldid=691239600"					
				Categories: Programming language classification4GLHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from September 2015All articles that may contain original researchArticles that may contain original research from May 2008Wikipedia articles with BNF identifiers				
							
		
		
			