


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Game of skill
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				




This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2009)


A game of skill is a game where the outcome is determined mainly by mental or physical skill, rather than by chance. A game of skill generally has an element of chance, but skill plays a greater role in determining the outcome.
Most games of skill also involve a degree of chance, due to natural aspects of the environment, a randomizing device (such as dice, playing cards or a coin flip) or guessing due to incomplete information. Some games of skill such as poker may involve bluffing and other forms of psychological warfare.
The distinction between "chance" and "skill" has legal significance in countries where chance games are treated differently from skill games. The legal distinction is often vague and varies widely from one jurisdiction to the next.
Some commonly played games of skill include: chess, poker, collectible card games, contract bridge, backgammon, and mahjong.
In a number of countries like Germany, whether a game is considered of skill has legal implications with respect to whether money bets on the game's outcome are considered gambling or not. For example, poker is legally considered a game of chance in Germany (thus only allowed in casinos), whereas skat is considered a game of skill and competitions with money prizes are allowed.[1]
See also[edit]




Games portal




Kickback
Casino game
Mind sport
List of types of games
Memory sport
Strategy game

References[edit]


^ A. C. Spapens; Toine Spapens; Alan Littler; Cyrille Fijnaut (2008). Crime, Addiction and the Regulation of Gambling. BRILL. p.&#160;143. ISBN&#160;978-90-04-17218-0.&#160;










v
t
e


Types of games









Chance
Guessing
Party
Skill
Sport
Strategy
Street
Tabletop
Video









List of types of games











Authority control



GND: 4388795-8















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Game_of_skill&amp;oldid=691914759"					
				Categories: Game terminologySkillsHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from December 2009All articles needing additional referencesWikipedia articles with GND identifiers				
							
		
		
			