


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Instance (computer science)
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				For other uses, see Instance (disambiguation).





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2013)


In object-oriented programming (OOP), an instance is a specific realization of any object. Formally, "instance" is synonymous with "object" as they are each a particular value (realization), and these may be called an instance object; "instance" emphasizes the distinct identity of the object. The creation of an instance is called instantiation.
In class-based programming, objects are created from classes by subroutines called constructors, and destroyed by destructors. An object is an instance of a class, and may be called a class instance or class object; instantiation is then also known as construction. Not all classes can be instantiated&#160;–  abstract classes cannot be instantiated, while classes that can be instantiated are called concrete classes. In prototype-based programming, instantiation is instead done by copying a prototype.
An object may be varied in a number of ways. Each realized variation of that object is an instance. Each time a program runs, it is an instance of that program. That is, it is a member of a given class that has specified values rather than variables. In a non-programming context, you could think of "dog" as a type and your particular dog as an instance of that class.[1]
An important distinction is between the data type, which is interface, and the class, which is implementation.
The meaning of the term "type" in computer science is rather similar to the meaning of the word "type" in everyday language. For example, a barman can ask a client what type of beverage does he or she want&#160;–  coffee, tea or beer? A particular cup of coffee that the client receives is in the role of an instance, while two cups of coffee would form a set of two instances of coffee, determining its type at the same time.
References[edit]


^ "What is instance?&#160;– Definition from WhatIs.com". Whatis.techtarget.com. Retrieved February 9, 2014.&#160;









					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Instance_(computer_science)&amp;oldid=668567432"					
				Categories: Object (computer science)Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from June 2013All articles needing additional references				
							
		
		
			