


		
		
		
			

							
						


			Intellectual disability
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								  (Redirected from Intellectual disabilities)
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				See also: Developmental disability


Intellectual disability



Children with intellectual disability or other developmental conditions can compete in the Special Olympics.



Classification and external resources


Specialty
Psychiatry, pediatrics


ICD-10
F70-F79


ICD-9-CM
317-319


DiseasesDB
4509


MedlinePlus
001523


eMedicine
med/3095 neuro/605


MeSH
D008607


Intellectual disability (ID), also called intellectual development disorder (IDD) or general learning disability,[1] and formerly known as mental retardation (MR),[2][3][4] is a generalized neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by significantly impaired intellectual and adaptive functioning. It is defined by an IQ score below 70 in addition to deficits in two or more adaptive behaviors that affect everyday, general living. Once focused almost entirely on cognition, the definition now includes both a component relating to mental functioning and one relating to individuals' functional skills in their environments. As a result of this focus on the person's abilities in practice, a person with an unusually low IQ may not be considered intellectually disabled. Intellectual disability is subdivided into syndromic intellectual disability, in which intellectual deficits associated with other medical and behavioral signs and symptoms are present, and non-syndromic intellectual disability, in which intellectual deficits appear without other abnormalities. Down syndrome and fragile X syndrome are examples of syndromic intellectual disabilities.
Intellectual disability affects about 2–3% of the general population. 75–90% of the affected people have mild intellectual disability. Non-syndromic or idiopathic cases accounts for 30–50% of cases. About a quarter of cases are caused by a genetic disorder.[5] Cases of unknown cause affect about 95 million people as of 2013.[6]
The terms used for this condition are subject to a process called the euphemism treadmill. This means that whatever term is chosen for this condition, it eventually becomes perceived as an insult. The terms mental retardation and mentally retarded were invented in the middle of the 20th century to replace the previous set of terms, which were deemed to have become offensive. By the end of the 20th century, these terms themselves have come to be widely seen as disparaging, politically incorrect, and in need of replacement.[7] The term intellectual disability is now preferred by most advocates and researchers in most English-speaking countries.[3][4] As of 2015[update], the term "mental retardation" is still used by the World Health Organization in the ICD-10 codes, which have a section titled "Mental Retardation" (codes F70–F79). In the next revision, the ICD-11 is expected to replace the term mental retardation with either intellectual disability or intellectual developmental disorder, which the DSM-5 already uses.[8][9] Because of its specificity and lack of confusion with other conditions, the term "mental retardation" is still sometimes used in professional medical settings around the world, such as formal scientific research and health insurance paperwork.[10]



Contents


1 Signs and symptoms
2 Cause
3 Diagnosis

3.1 Intelligence quotient
3.2 Distinction from other disabilities
3.3 Limitations in more than one area


4 Management
5 Epidemiology
6 History

6.1 Terminology

6.1.1 United States
6.1.2 United Kingdom
6.1.3 Australia




7 Society and culture
8 Health disparities
9 See also
10 References
11 External links



Signs and symptoms
The signs and symptoms of intellectual disability are all behavioral. Most people with intellectual disability do not look like they are afflicted with such, especially if the disability is caused by environmental factors such as malnutrition or lead poisoning. The so-called typical appearance ascribed to people with intellectual disability is only present in a minority of cases, all of which are syndromic.
Children with intellectual disability may learn to sit up, to crawl, or to walk later than other children, or they may learn to talk later.[5] Both adults and children with intellectual disability may also exhibit some or all of the following characteristics:[5]

Delays in oral language development
Deficits in memory skills
Difficulty learning social rules
Difficulty with problem solving skills
Delays in the development of adaptive behaviors such as self-help or self-care skills
Lack of social inhibitors

Children with intellectual disability learn more slowly than a typical child. Children may take longer to learn language, develop social skills, and take care of their personal needs, such as dressing or eating. Learning will take them longer, require more repetition, and skills may need to be adapted to their learning levels. Nevertheless, virtually every child is able to learn, develop and become a participating member of the community.
In early childhood, mild intellectual disability (IQ 50–69) may not be obvious, and may not be identified until children begin school.[5] Even when poor academic performance is recognized, it may take expert assessment to distinguish mild intellectual disability from learning disability or emotional/behavioral disorders. People with mild intellectual disability are capable of learning reading and mathematics skills to approximately the level of a typical child aged nine to twelve.[5] They can learn self-care and practical skills, such as cooking or using the local mass transit system.[5] As individuals with intellectual disability reach adulthood, many learn to live independently and maintain gainful employment.
Moderate intellectual disability (IQ 35–49) is nearly always apparent within the first years of life. Speech delays are particularly common signs of moderate ID.[5] People with moderate intellectual disability need considerable supports in school, at home, and in the community in order to participate fully. While their academic potential is limited, they can learn simple health and safety skills and to participate in simple activities.[5] As adults, they may live with their parents, in a supportive group home, or even semi-independently with significant supportive services to help them, for example, manage their finances. As adults, they may work in a sheltered workshop.[5]
People with severe or profound intellectual disability need more intensive support and supervision their entire lives.[5] They may learn some activities of daily living. Some require full-time care by an attendant.[5]
Cause
Further information: X-linked intellectual disability




Down syndrome is one of the common genetic causes of intellectual disability.


Among children, the cause is unknown for one-third to one-half of cases.[5] Down syndrome, velocariofacial syndrome, and fetal alcohol spectrum disorders are the three most common inborn causes.[5] However, doctors have found many other causes. The most common are:

Genetic conditions. Sometimes disability is caused by abnormal genes inherited from parents, errors when genes combine, or other reasons. The most prevalent genetic conditions include Down syndrome, Klinefelter's syndrome, Fragile X syndrome (common among boys), neurofibromatosis, congenital hypothyroidism, Williams syndrome, phenylketonuria (PKU), and Prader-Willi syndrome. Other genetic conditions include Phelan-McDermid syndrome (22q13del), Mowat-Wilson syndrome, genetic ciliopathy,[11] and Siderius type X-linked intellectual disability (OMIM 300263) as caused by mutations in the PHF8 gene (OMIM 300560).[12][13] In the rarest of cases, abnormalities with the X or Y chromosome may also cause disability. 48, XXXX and 49, XXXXX syndrome affect a small number of girls worldwide, while boys may be affected by 47, XYY, 49, XXXXY, or 49, XYYYY.
Problems during pregnancy. Intellectual disability can result when the fetus does not develop properly. For example, there may be a problem with the way the fetus' cells divide as it grows. A pregnant person who drinks alcohol (see fetal alcohol spectrum disorder) or gets an infection like rubella during pregnancy may also have a baby with intellectual disability.
Problems at birth. If a baby has problems during labor and birth, such as not getting enough oxygen, he or she may have developmental disability due to brain damage.
Exposure to certain types of disease or toxins. Diseases like whooping cough, measles, or meningitis can cause intellectual disability if medical care is delayed or inadequate. Exposure to poisons like lead or mercury may also affect mental ability.
Iodine deficiency, affecting approximately 2&#160;billion people worldwide, is the leading preventable cause of intellectual disability in areas of the developing world where iodine deficiency is endemic. Iodine deficiency also causes goiter, an enlargement of the thyroid gland. More common than full-fledged cretinism, as intellectual disability caused by severe iodine deficiency is called, is mild impairment of intelligence. Certain areas of the world due to natural deficiency and governmental inaction are severely affected. India is the most outstanding, with 500&#160;million suffering from deficiency, 54&#160;million from goiter, and 2&#160;million from cretinism. Among other nations affected by iodine deficiency, China and Kazakhstan have instituted widespread iodization programs, whereas, as of 2006, Russia had not.[14]
Malnutrition is a common cause of reduced intelligence in parts of the world affected by famine, such as Ethiopia.[15]
Absence of the arcuate fasciculus.[16]

Diagnosis
According to the fifth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV), three criteria must be met for a diagnosis of intellectual disability: deficits in general mental abilities, significant limitations in one or more areas of adaptive behavior across multiple environments (as measured by an adaptive behavior rating scale, i.e. communication, self-help skills, interpersonal skills, and more), and evidence that the limitations became apparent in childhood or adolescence. In general, people with intellectual disability have an IQ below 70, but clinical discretion may be necessary for individuals who have a somewhat higher IQ but severe impairment in adaptive functioning.[8]
It is formally diagnosed by an assessment of IQ and adaptive behavior. A third condition requiring onset in childhood is used to distinguish intellectual disability from dementia such as Alzheimer's disease or due to traumatic brain injuries.
Intelligence quotient
The first English-language IQ test, the Stanford-Binet Intelligence Scales, was adapted from a test battery designed for school placement by Alfred Binet in France. Lewis Terman adapted Binet's test and promoted it as a test measuring "general intelligence." Terman's test was the first widely used mental test to report scores in "intelligence quotient" form ("mental age" divided by chronological age, multiplied by 100). Current tests are scored in "deviation IQ" form, with a performance level by a test-taker two standard deviations below the median score for the test-taker's age group defined as IQ 70. Until the most recent revision of diagnostic standards, an IQ of 70 or below was a primary factor for intellectual disability diagnosis, and IQ scores were used to categorize degrees of intellectual disability.
Since current diagnosis of intellectual disability is not based on IQ scores alone, but must also take into consideration a person's adaptive functioning, the diagnosis is not made rigidly. It encompasses intellectual scores, adaptive functioning scores from an adaptive behavior rating scale based on descriptions of known abilities provided by someone familiar with the person, and also the observations of the assessment examiner who is able to find out directly from the person what he or she can understand, communicate, and such like. IQ assessment must be based on a current test. This enables diagnosis to avoid the pitfall of the Flynn Effect, which is a consequence of changes in population IQ test performance changing IQ test norms over time.
Distinction from other disabilities
Clinically, intellectual disability is a subtype of cognitive deficit or disabilities affecting intellectual abilities, which is a broader concept and includes intellectual deficits that are too mild to properly qualify as intellectual disability, or too specific (as in specific learning disability), or acquired later in life through acquired brain injuries or neurodegenerative diseases like dementia. Cognitive deficits may appear at any age. Developmental disability is any disability that is due to problems with growth and development. This term encompasses many congenital medical conditions that have no mental or intellectual components, although it, too, is sometimes used as a euphemism for intellectual disability.[17]
Limitations in more than one area
Adaptive behavior, or adaptive functioning, refers to the skills needed to live independently (or at the minimally acceptable level for age). To assess adaptive behavior, professionals compare the functional abilities of a child to those of other children of similar age. To measure adaptive behavior, professionals use structured interviews, with which they systematically elicit information about persons' functioning in the community from people who know them well. There are many adaptive behavior scales, and accurate assessment of the quality of someone's adaptive behavior requires clinical judgment as well. Certain skills are important to adaptive behavior, such as:

Daily living skills, such as getting dressed, using the bathroom, and feeding oneself
Communication skills, such as understanding what is said and being able to answer
Social skills with peers, family members, spouses, adults, and others

Management
By most definitions, intellectual disability is more accurately considered a disability rather than a disease. Intellectual disability can be distinguished in many ways from mental illness, such as schizophrenia or depression. Currently, there is no "cure" for an established disability, though with appropriate support and teaching, most individuals can learn to do many things.
There are thousands of agencies around the world that provide assistance for people with developmental disabilities. They include state-run, for-profit, and non-profit, privately run agencies. Within one agency there could be departments that include fully staffed residential homes, day rehabilitation programs that approximate schools, workshops wherein people with disabilities can obtain jobs, programs that assist people with developmental disabilities in obtaining jobs in the community, programs that provide support for people with developmental disabilities who have their own apartments, programs that assist them with raising their children, and many more. There are also many agencies and programs for parents of children with developmental disabilities.
Beyond that, there are specific programs that people with developmental disabilities can take part in wherein they learn basic life skills. These "goals" may take a much longer amount of time for them to accomplish, but the ultimate goal is independence. This may be anything from independence in tooth brushing to an independent residence. People with developmental disabilities learn throughout their lives and can obtain many new skills even late in life with the help of their families, caregivers, clinicians and the people who coordinate the efforts of all of these people.
There are four broad areas of intervention that allow for active participation from caregivers, community members, clinicians, and of course, the individual(s) with an intellectual disability. These include psychosocial treatments, behavioral treatments, cognitive-behavioral treatments, and family-oriented strategies [18] Psychosocial treatments are intended primarily for children before and during the preschool years as this is the optimum time for intervention.[19] This early intervention should include encouragement of exploration, mentoring in basic skills, celebration of developmental advances, guided rehearsal and extension of newly acquired skills, protection from harmful displays of disapproval, teasing, or punishment, and exposure to a rich and responsive language environment.[20] A great example of a successful intervention is the Carolina Abecedarian Project that was conducted with over 100 children from low SES families beginning in infancy through pre-school years. Results indicated that by age 2, the children provided the intervention had higher test scores than control group children, and they remained approximately 5 points higher 10 years after the end of the program. By young adulthood, children from the intervention group had better educational attainment, employment opportunities, and fewer behavioral problems than their control-group counterparts.[21]
Core components of behavioral treatments include language and social skills acquisition. Typically, one-to-one training is offered in which a therapist uses a shaping procedure in combination with positive reinforcements to help the child pronounce syllables until words are completed. Sometimes involving pictures and visual aids, therapists aim at improving speech capacity so that short sentences about important daily tasks (e.g. bathroom use, eating, etc.) can be effectively communicated by the child.[22][23] In a similar fashion, older children benefit from this type of training as they learn to sharpen their social skills such as sharing, taking turns, following instruction, and smiling.[24] At the same time, a movement known as social inclusion attempts to increase valuable interactions between children with an intellectual disability and their non-disabled peers. [25] Cognitive-behavioral treatments, a combination of the previous two treatment types, involves a strategical-metastrategical learning technique[clarification needed] that teaches children math, language, and other basic skills pertaining to memory and learning. The first goal of the training is to teach the child to be a strategical thinker through making cognitive connections and plans. Then, the therapist teaches the child to be metastrategical by teaching them to discriminate among different tasks and determine which plan or strategy suits each task.[26] Finally, family-oriented strategies delve into empowering the family with the skill set they need to support and encourage their child or children with an intellectual disability. In general, this includes teaching assertiveness skills or behavior management techniques as well as how to ask for help from neighbors, extended family, or day-care staff.[27] As the child ages, parents are then taught how to approach topics such as housing/residential care, employment, and relationships. The ultimate goal for every intervention or technique is to give the child autonomy and a sense of independence using the acquired skills he/she has.
Although there is no specific medication for intellectual disability, many people with developmental disabilities have further medical complications and may be prescribed several medications. For example, autistic children with developmental delay may be prescribed antipsychotics or mood stabilizers to help with their behavior. Use of psychotropic medications such as benzodiazepines in people with intellectual disability requires monitoring and vigilance as side effects occur commonly and are often misdiagnosed as behavioral and psychiatric problems.[28]
Epidemiology
Intellectual disability affects about 2–3% of the general population. 75–90% of the affected people have mild intellectual disability. Non-syndromic or idiopathic ID accounts for 30–50% of cases. About a quarter of cases are caused by a genetic disorder.[5] Cases of unknown cause affect about 95 million people as of 2013.[6]
History
 Intellectual disabilities of all kinds have been documented under a variety of names throughout history. Throughout much of human history, society was unkind to those with any type of disability, and people with intellectual disabilities were commonly viewed as burdens on their families.
Greek and Roman philosophers, who valued reasoning abilities, disparaged people with intellectual disabilities as barely human.[29] The oldest physiological view of intellectual disability is in the writings of Hippocrates in the late fifth century BCE, who believed that it was caused by an imbalance in the four humors in the brain.
Until the Enlightenment in Europe, care and asylum was provided by families and the church (in monasteries and other religious communities), focusing on the provision of basic physical needs such as food, shelter and clothing. Negative stereotypes were prominent in social attitudes of the time.
In the 13th century, England declared people with intellectual disabilities to be incapable of making decisions or managing their affairs.[29] Guardianships were created to take over their financial affairs.
In the 17th century, Thomas Willis provided the first description of intellectual disabilities as a disease.[29] He believed that it was caused by structural problems in the brain. According to Willis, the anatomical problems could be either an inborn condition or acquired later in life.
In the 18th and 19th centuries, housing and care moved away from families and towards an asylum model. People were placed by, or removed from, their families (usually in infancy) and housed in large professional institutions, many of which were self-sufficient through the labor of the residents. Some of these institutions provided a very basic level of education (such as differentiation between colors and basic word recognition and numeracy), but most continued to focus solely on the provision of basic needs of food, clothing, and shelter. Conditions in such institutions varied widely, but the support provided was generally non-individualized, with aberrant behavior and low levels of economic productivity regarded as a burden to society. Individuals of higher wealth were often able to afford higher degrees of care such as home care or private asylums.[30] Heavy tranquilization and assembly line methods of support were the norm, and the medical model of disability prevailed. Services were provided based on the relative ease to the provider, not based on the needs of the individual. A survey taken in 1891 in Cape Town, South Africa shows the distribution between different facilities. Out of 2046 persons surveyed, 1,281 were in private dwellings, 120 in jails, and 645 in asylums, with men representing nearly two thirds of the number surveyed. In situations of scarcity of accommodation, preference was given to white men and black men (whose insanity threatened white society by disrupting employment relations and the tabooed sexual contact with white women).[30]
In the late 19th century, in response to Charles Darwin's On the Origin of Species, Francis Galton proposed selective breeding of humans to reduce intellectual disabilities.[29] Early in the 20th century the eugenics movement became popular throughout the world. This led to forced sterilization and prohibition of marriage in most of the developed world and was later used by Adolf Hitler as a rationale for the mass murder of intellectually challenged individuals during the holocaust. Eugenics was later abandoned as an evil violation of human rights, and the practice of forced sterilization and prohibition from marriage was discontinued by most of the developed world by the mid-20th century.
In 1905, Alfred Binet produced the first standardized test for measuring intelligence in children.[29]
Although ancient Roman law had declared people with intellectual disability to be incapable of the deliberate intent to harm that was necessary for a person to commit a crime, during the 1920s, Western society believed they were morally degenerate.[29]
Ignoring the prevailing attitude, Civitans adopted service to people with developmental disabilities as a major organizational emphasis in 1952. Their earliest efforts included workshops for special education teachers and daycamps for children with disabilities, all at a time when such training and programs were almost nonexistent.[31] The segregation of people with developmental disabilities was not widely questioned by academics or policy-makers until the 1969 publication of Wolf Wolfensberger's seminal work "The Origin and Nature of Our Institutional Models",[32] drawing on some of the ideas proposed by SG Howe 100 years earlier. This book posited that society characterizes people with disabilities as deviant, sub-human and burdens of charity, resulting in the adoption of that "deviant" role. Wolfensberger argued that this dehumanization, and the segregated institutions that result from it, ignored the potential productive contributions that all people can make to society. He pushed for a shift in policy and practice that recognized the human needs of those with intellectual disability and provided the same basic human rights as for the rest of the population.
The publication of this book may be regarded as the first move towards the widespread adoption of the social model of disability in regard to these types of disabilities, and was the impetus for the development of government strategies for desegregation. Successful lawsuits against governments and an increasing awareness of human rights and self-advocacy also contributed to this process, resulting in the passing in the U.S. of the Civil Rights of Institutionalized Persons Act in 1980.
From the 1960s to the present, most states have moved towards the elimination of segregated institutions. Normalization and deinstitutionalization are dominant.[29] Along with the work of Wolfensberger and others including Gunnar and Rosemary Dybwad,[33] a number of scandalous revelations around the horrific conditions within state institutions created public outrage that led to change to a more community-based method of providing services.[34]
By the mid-1970s, most governments had committed to de-institutionalization, and had started preparing for the wholesale movement of people into the general community, in line with the principles of normalization. In most countries, this was essentially complete by the late 1990s, although the debate over whether or not to close institutions persists in some states, including Massachusetts.[35]
In the past, lead poisoning and infectious diseases were significant causes of intellectual disabilities. Some causes of intellectual disability are decreasing, as medical advances, such as vaccination, increase. Other causes are increasing as a proportion of cases, perhaps due to rising maternal age, which is associated with several syndromic forms of intellectual disability.[citation needed]
Along with the changes in terminology, and the downward drift in acceptability of the old terms, institutions of all kinds have had to repeatedly change their names. This affects the names of schools, hospitals, societies, government departments, and academic journals. For example, the Midlands Institute of Mental Subnormality became the British Institute of Mental Handicap and is now the British Institute of Learning Disability. This phenomenon is shared with mental health and motor disabilities, and seen to a lesser degree in sensory disabilities.[citation needed]
Terminology
Terms that denote mental deficiency have been subjected to the euphemism treadmill. The several traditional terms that long predate psychiatry are simple forms of abuse in common usage today; they are often encountered in such old documents as books, academic papers, and census forms (for example, the British census of 1901 has a column heading including the terms imbecile and feeble-minded).
Negative connotations associated with these numerous terms for intellectual disability reflect society's attitude about the condition. Some elements of society seek neutral medical terms, while others want to use such terms as weapons of abuse.
Today, new words like special or challenged are replacing the term retarded. The term developmental delay is popular among caretakers and parents of individuals with intellectual disability because delay suggests that a person is slowly reaching his or her full potential rather than being disabled.[citation needed]
Usage has changed over the years and differed from country to country. For example, mental retardation in some contexts covers the whole field but previously applied to what is now the mild MR group. Feeble-minded used to mean mild MR in the UK, and once applied in the US to the whole field. "Borderline intellectual functioning" is not currently defined, but the term may be used to apply to people with IQs in the 70s. People with IQs of 70 to 85 used to be eligible for special consideration in the US public education system on grounds of intellectual disability.[citation needed]

Cretin is the oldest and comes from a dialectal French word for Christian.[36] The implication was that people with significant intellectual or developmental disabilities were "still human" (or "still Christian") and deserved to be treated with basic human dignity. Individuals with the condition were considered to be incapable of sinning, thus "christ-like" in their disposition. This term has not been used in scientific endeavors since the middle of the 20th century and is generally considered a term of abuse. Although cretin is no longer in use, the term cretinism is still used to refer to the mental and physical disability resulting from untreated congenital hypothyroidism.
Amentia has a long history, mostly associated with dementia. The difference between amentia and dementia was originally defined by time of onset. Amentia was the term used to denote an individual who developed deficits in mental functioning early in life, while dementia included individuals who develop mental deficiencies as adults. During the 1890s, amentia meant someone who was born with mental deficiencies. By 1912, ament was a classification lumping "idiots, imbeciles, and feeble minded" individuals in a category separate from a dement classification, in which the onset is later in life.
Idiot indicated the greatest degree of intellectual disability, where the mental age is two years or less, and the person cannot guard himself or herself against common physical dangers. The term was gradually replaced by the term profound mental retardation (which has itself since been replaced by other terms).
Imbecile indicated an intellectual disability less extreme than idiocy and not necessarily inherited. It is now usually subdivided into two categories, known as severe intellectual disability and moderate intellectual disability.
Moron was defined by the American Association for the Study of the Feeble-minded in 1910, following work by Henry H. Goddard, as the term for an adult with a mental age between eight and twelve; mild intellectual disability is now the term for this condition. Alternative definitions of these terms based on IQ were also used. This group was known in UK law from 1911 to 1959–60 as feeble-minded.
Mongolism and Mongoloid idiot were medical terms used to identify someone with Down syndrome, as the doctor who first described the syndrome, John Langdon Down, believed that children with Down syndrome shared facial similarities with Blumenbach's "Mongolian race." The Mongolian People's Republic requested that the medical community cease use of the term as a referent to intellectual disability. Their request was granted in the 1960s, when the World Health Organization agreed that the term should cease being used within the medical community.[37]
In the field of special education, educable (or "educable intellectual disability") refers to ID students with IQs of approximately 50–75 who can progress academically to a late elementary level. Trainable (or "trainable intellectual disability") refers to students whose IQs fall below 50 but who are still capable of learning personal hygiene and other living skills in a sheltered setting, such as a group home. In many areas, these terms have been replaced by use of "moderate" and "severe" intellectual disability. While the names change, the meaning stays roughly the same in practice.
Retarded comes from the Latin retardare, "to make slow, delay, keep back, or hinder," so mental retardation meant the same as mentally delayed. The term was recorded in 1426 as a "fact or action of making slower in movement or time." The first record of retarded in relation to being mentally slow was in 1895. The term mentally retarded was used to replace terms like idiot, moron, and imbecile because retarded was not then a derogatory term. By the 1960s, however, the term had taken on a partially derogatory meaning as well. The noun retard is particularly seen as pejorative; a BBC survey in 2003 ranked it as the most offensive disability-related word, ahead of terms such as spastic (or its abbreviation spaz) and mong.[38] The terms mentally retarded and mental retardation are still fairly common, but currently the Special Olympics, Best Buddies, and over 100 other organizations are striving to eliminate their by referring to the word retard and its variants as the "r-word", in an effort to equate it to the word nigger and the associated euphemism "n-word", in everyday conversation. These efforts have resulted in federal legislation, sometimes known as "Rosa's Law", to replace the term mentally retarded with the term intellectual disability in some federal statutes.[39][40]
The term mental retardation was a diagnostic term denoting the group of disconnected categories of mental functioning such as idiot, imbecile, and moron derived from early IQ tests, which acquired pejorative connotations in popular discourse. It acquired negative and shameful connotations over the last few decades due to the use of the words retarded and retard as insults. This may have contributed to its replacement with euphemisms such as mentally challenged or intellectually disabled. While developmental disability includes many other disorders, developmental disability and developmental delay (for people under the age of 18) are generally considered more polite terms than mental retardation.

United States

In North America, intellectual disability is subsumed into the broader term developmental disability, which also includes epilepsy, autism, cerebral palsy, and other disorders that develop during the developmental period (birth to age 18). Because service provision is tied to the designation 'developmental disability', it is used by many parents, direct support professionals, and physicians. In the United States, however, in school-based settings, the more specific term mental retardation or, more recently (and preferably), intellectual disability, is still typically used, and is one of 13 categories of disability under which children may be identified for special education services under Public Law 108-446.
The phrase intellectual disability is increasingly being used as a synonym for people with significantly below-average cognitive ability. These terms are sometimes used as a means of separating general intellectual limitations from specific, limited deficits as well as indicating that it is not an emotional or psychological disability. Intellectual disability may also refer to the outcome of traumatic brain injury, lead poisoning, or dementing conditions such as Alzheimer's disease. It is not specific to congenital disorders such as Down syndrome.

The "American Association on Mental Retardation" continued to use the term mental retardation until 2006.[41] In June 2006, its members voted to change the name of the organization to the "American Association on Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities", rejecting the options to become the AAID or AADD. Part of the rationale for the double name was that many members worked with people with pervasive developmental disorders, most of whom do not have intellectual disability.[42]
United Kingdom
In the UK, mental handicap had become the common medical term, replacing mental subnormality in Scotland and mental deficiency in England and Wales, until Stephen Dorrell, Secretary of State for Health for the United Kingdom from 1995–97, changed the NHS's designation to learning disability.[43] The new term is not yet widely understood, and is often taken to refer to problems affecting schoolwork (the American usage), which are known in the UK as "learning difficulties." British social workers may use "learning difficulty" to refer to both people with intellectual disability and those with conditions such as dyslexia.[44] In education, "learning difficulties" is applied to a wide range of conditions: "specific learning difficulty" may refer to dyslexia, dyscalculia or developmental coordination disorder, while "moderate learning difficulties", "severe learning difficulties" and "profound learning difficulties" refer to more significant impairments.[45][46]
In England and Wales between 1983 and 2008, the Mental Health Act 1983 defined "mental impairment" and "severe mental impairment" as "...a state of arrested or incomplete development of mind which includes significant/severe impairment of intelligence and social functioning and is associated with abnormally aggressive or seriously irresponsible conduct on the part of the person concerned."[47] As behavior was involved, these were not necessarily permanent conditions: they were defined for the purpose of authorizing detention in hospital or guardianship. The term mental impairment was removed from the Act in November 2008, but the grounds for detention remained. However, English statute law uses mental impairment elsewhere in a less well-defined manner—e.g. to allow exemption from taxes—implying that intellectual disability without any behavioral problems is what is meant.
A BBC poll conducted in the United Kingdom came to the conclusion that 'retard' was the most offensive disability-related word.[48] On the reverse side of that, when a contestant on Celebrity Big Brother live used the phrase "walking like a retard", despite complaints from the public and the charity Mencap, the communications regulator Ofcom did not uphold the complaint saying "it was not used in an offensive context [...] and had been used light-heartedly". It was, however, noted that two previous similar complaints from other shows were upheld.[49]
Australia
In the past, Australia has used British and American terms interchangeably, including "mental retardation" and "mental handicap". Today, "intellectual disability" is the preferred and more commonly used descriptor.[50]
Society and culture




Severely disabled girl in Bhutan


People with intellectual disabilities are often not seen as full citizens of society. Person-centered planning and approaches are seen as methods of addressing the continued labeling and exclusion of socially devalued people, such as people with disabilities, encouraging a focus on the person as someone with capacities and gifts as well as support needs. The self-advocacy movement promotes the right of self-determination and self-direction by people with intellectually disabilities, which means allowing them to make decisions about their own lives.
Until the middle of the 20th century, people with intellectual disabilities were routinely excluded from public education, or educated away from other typically developing children. Compared to peers who were segregated in special schools, students who are mainstreamed or included in regular classrooms report similar levels of stigma and social self-conception, but more ambitious plans for employment.[51] As adults, they may live independently, with family members, or in different types of institutions organized to support people with disabilities. About 8% currently live in an institution or a group home.[52]
In the United States, the average lifetime cost of a person with an intellectual disability amounts to $1,014,000 per person, in 2003 US dollars.[52] This is slightly more than the costs associated with cerebral palsy, and double that associated with serious vision or hearing impairments. About 14% is due to increased medical expenses (not including what is normally incurred by the typical person), 10% is due to direct non-medical expenses, such as the excess cost of special education compared to standard schooling, and 76% is indirect costs accounting for reduced productivity and shortened lifespans. Some expenses, such as costs associated with being a family caregiver or living in a group home, were excluded from this calculation.[52]
Health disparities
People with intellectual disabilities as a group have higher rates of adverse health conditions such as epilepsy and neurological disorders, gastrointestinal disorders, and behavioral and psychiatric problems compared to people without disabilities.[53] Adults also have a higher prevalence of poor social determinants of health, behavioral risk factors, depression, diabetes, and poor or fair health status than adults without intellectual disability.[54]
See also

Future planning
History of psychiatric institutions
IQ classification
Secondary handicap

References


^ Wilmshurst, Linda (2012). "general+learning+disability" Clinical and Educational Child Psychology an Ecological-Transactional Approach to Understanding Child Problems and Interventions. Hoboken: Wiley. p.&#160;168. ISBN&#160;9781118439982.&#160;
^ Tidy, Colin (25 January 2013). "General Learning Disability". Patient.info. The term general learning disability has now been recommended in the UK to replace terms such as mental handicap or mental retardation.&#160;
^ a b "Rosa's Law" (PDF). Washington, D.C.&#160;: U.S. G.P.O. 2010. Retrieved 13 September 2013.&#160;
^ a b Ansberry, Clare (20 November 2010). "Erasing a Hurtful Label From the Books". New York: Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 4 December 2010. Decades-long quest by disabilities advocates finally persuades state, federal governments to end official use of 'retarded'&#160;
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n Daily DK, Ardinger HH, Holmes GE (February 2000). "Identification and evaluation of mental retardation". Am Fam Physician 61 (4): 1059–67, 1070. PMID&#160;10706158.&#160;
^ a b Global Burden of Disease Study 2013, Collaborators (5 June 2015). "Global, regional, and national incidence, prevalence, and years lived with disability for 301 acute and chronic diseases and injuries in 188 countries, 1990-2013: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2013.". Lancet (London, England). PMID&#160;26063472.&#160;
^ Cummings, Nicholas A.; Rogers H. Wright (2005). "Chapter 1, Psychology's surrender to political correctness". Destructive trends in mental health: the well-intentioned path to harm. New York: Routledge. ISBN&#160;0-415-95086-4.&#160;
^ a b American Psychiatric Association (2013). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (Fifth ed.). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing. ISBN&#160;978-0-89042-555-8. Lay summary (15 July 2013).&#160;
^ Salvador-Carulla L, Reed GM, Vaez-Azizi LM, et al. (October 2011). "Intellectual developmental disorders: towards a new name, definition and framework for "mental retardation/intellectual disability" in ICD-11". World Psychiatry 3 (10): 175–180. PMC&#160;3188762. PMID&#160;21991267.&#160;
^ John Cook (5 July 2001). "The "R" Word". Slate Magazine.&#160;
^ Badano, Jose L.; Norimasa Mitsuma; Phil L. Beales; Nicholas Katsanis (September 2006). "The Ciliopathies&#160;: An Emerging Class of Human Genetic Disorders". Annual Review of Genomics and Human Genetics 7: 125–148. doi:10.1146/annurev.genom.7.080505.115610. PMID&#160;16722803. Retrieved 2008-06-15.&#160;
^ Siderius LE, Hamel BC, van Bokhoven H, et al. (2000). "X-linked mental retardation associated with cleft lip/palate maps to Xp11.3-q21.3". Am. J. Med. Genet. 85 (3): 216–220. doi:10.1002/(SICI)1096-8628(19990730)85:3&lt;216::AID-AJMG6&gt;3.0.CO;2-X. PMID&#160;10398231.&#160;
^ Laumonnier F, Holbert S, Ronce N, et al. (2005). "Mutations in PHF8 are associated with X linked mental retardation and cleft lip/cleft palate". J. Med. Genet. 42 (10): 780–786. doi:10.1136/jmg.2004.029439. PMC&#160;1735927. PMID&#160;16199551.&#160;
^ McNeil, Donald G., Jr. (2006-12-16). "In Raising the World's I.Q., the Secret's in the Salt". The New York Times. Retrieved 2009-07-21.&#160;
^ Wines, Michael (2006-12-28). "Malnutrition Is Cheating Its Survivors, and Africa's Future". The New York Times. Retrieved 2009-07-21.&#160;
^ Sundaram SK, Sivaswamy L, Makki MI, Behen ME, Chugani H (2008). "Absence of arcuate fasciculus in children with global developmental delay of unknown etiology: a diffusion tensor imaging study". J Pediatr 152 (2): 250–5. doi:10.1016/j.jpeds.2007.06.037. PMID&#160;18206698.&#160;
^ Lawyer, Liz (2010-11-26). "Rosa's Law to remove stigmatized language from law books". Ithaca, New York: The Ithaca Journal. Retrieved 2010-12-04. The resolution ... urges a change from the old term to "developmental disability"&#160;
^ Mash, E., &amp; Wolfe, D. (2013). Abnormal child psychology. (5th ed., pp. 308-313). Wadsworth Cengage Learning.
^ Hodapp, R.M., &amp; Burack, J.A. (2006). Developmental approaches to children with mental retardation: A second generation? In D. Cicchetti &amp; D. J. Cohen (Eds.), Developmental psychopathology, Vol. 3: Risk, disorder, and adaptation (2nd ed., pp. 235-267). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
^ Ramey, S.L., &amp; Ramey, C.T. (1992). Early educational intervention with disadvantaged children—To what effect? Applied and Preventive Psychology, 1, 131-140.
^ Campbell, F.A., Ramey, C.T., Pungello, E., Sparling, J., &amp; Miller-Johnson, S. (2002). Early childhood education: Young adult outcomes from the Abecedarian Project. Applied Developmental Science, 6, 42-57.
^ Matson J.L., Matson M.L., Rivet T.T. (2007). Social-skills treatments for children with autism spectrum disorders: an overview. Behavior Modification. 31(5), pp. 682-707.
^ Van der Schuit M, Segers E, van Balkom H, Verhoeven L. (2011). Early language intervention for children with intellectual disabilities: a neurocognitive perspective. Research in Developmental Disabilities 32(2):705-12.
^ Kemp, C., &amp; Carter, M. (2002). The social skills and social status of mainstreamed students with intellectual disabilities. Educational Psychology, 22, 391-411.
^ Siperstein, G.N., &amp; Glick, G.C., &amp; Parker, R. (2009). The social inclusion of children with intellectual disabilities in an out of school recreational setting. Intellectual and Developmental Diasbilities. 47(2), 97-107.
^ Hay, I., Elias, G., Fielding-Barnsley, R., Homel, R., &amp; Freiberg, K. (2007) Language delays, reading delays and learning difficulties: Interactive elements requiring multidimensional programming. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 40 (5), 400-409
^ Bagner, D.M., &amp; Eyberg, S.M. (2007). Parent-child interaction therapy for disruptive behavior in children with mental retardation: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychology, 36, 418-429.
^ Kalachnik, JE.; Hanzel, TE.; Sevenich, R.; Harder, SR. (Sep 2002). "Benzodiazepine behavioral side effects: review and implications for individuals with mental retardation". Am J Ment Retard 107 (5): 376–410. doi:10.1352/0895-8017(2002)107&lt;0376:BBSERA&gt;2.0.CO;2. ISSN&#160;0895-8017. PMID&#160;12186578.&#160;
^ a b c d e f g Wickham, Parnell. Encyclopedia of Children and Childhood in History and Society. Retrieved 8 October 2010.&#160;
^ a b Roy Porter; David Wright (7 August 2003). The Confinement of the Insane: International Perspectives, 1800-1965. Cambridge University Press. ISBN&#160;978-0-521-80206-2. Retrieved 11 August 2012.&#160;
^ Armbrester, Margaret E. (1992). The Civitan Story. Birmingham, AL: Ebsco Media. pp.&#160;74–75.&#160;
^ Wolf Wolfensberger (January 10, 1969). "The Origin and Nature of Our Institutional Models". Changing Patterns in Residential Services for the Mentally Retarded. President's Committee on Mental Retardation, Washington, D.C.&#160;
^ "The ARC Highlights&#160;— Beyond Affliction: Beyond Affliction Document". Disabilitymuseum.org. Retrieved 2010-06-29.&#160;
^ "Christmas in Purgatory &amp; Willowbrook". Arcmass.org. Retrieved 2010-06-29.&#160;
^ "Fernald School Closing and RICCI Class". Arcmass.org. Retrieved 2010-06-29.&#160;
^ "cretin". The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language, Fourth Edition. Houghton Mifflin Company. 2006. Retrieved 2008-08-04.&#160;
^ Howard-Jones, Norman (1979). "On the diagnostic term "Down's disease"". Medical History 23 (1): 102–04. doi:10.1017/s0025727300051048. PMC&#160;1082401. PMID&#160;153994.&#160;
^ "Worst Word Vote". Ouch. BBC. 2003. Archived from the original on 2007-03-20. Retrieved 2007-08-17.&#160;
^ "SpecialOlympics.org". SpecialOlympics.org. Retrieved 2010-06-29.&#160;
^ "R-Word.org". R-Word.org. 2010-06-18. Retrieved 2010-06-29.&#160;
^ "Frequently Asked Questions on Intellectual Disability". American Association on Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities (AAIDD). Retrieved 12 September 2013. The term intellectual disability covers the same population of individuals who were diagnosed previously with mental retardation in number, kind, level, type, duration of disability, and the need of people with this disability for individualized services and supports.&#160;
^ Chakrabarti S, Fombonne E (2001). "Pervasive developmental disorders in preschool children". JAMA 285 (24): 3093–9. doi:10.1001/jama.285.24.3093. PMID&#160;11427137.&#160;
^ "mencap". Retrieved 2010-12-07. Website of the UK's leading learning disability charity, which uses that term throughout.&#160;
^ "Learning Disabilities: Prevalence". Social Work, Alcohol &amp; Drugs. University of Bedfordshire. Retrieved 2014-10-18.&#160;
^ "Special Educational Needs and Disability: A. Cognition and Learning Needs". teachernet. Archived from the original on 2010-05-01. Retrieved 2010-12-08.&#160;
^ Vickerman, Philip (2009-07-08). "Severe Learning Difficulties". Teacher Training Resource Bank. Retrieved 2014-10-19. Extensive further references.&#160;
^ "Draft Illustrative Code of Practice" (PDF). Retrieved 2007-08-23.&#160;
^ Rohrer, Finlo (2008-09-22). "UK | Magazine | The path from cinema to playground". BBC News. Retrieved 2010-06-29.&#160;
^ Beckford, Martin (2010-03-11). "Ofcom says TV channels have 'human right' to broadcast offensive material". Telegraph. Retrieved 2010-06-29.&#160;
^ "Australian Psychological Society&#160;: Psychologists and intellectual disability". Psychology.org.au. Retrieved 2010-06-29.&#160;
^ Cooney G, Jahoda A, Gumley A, Knott F (June 2006). "Young people with intellectual disabilities attending mainstream and segregated schooling: perceived stigma, social comparison and future aspirations". J Intellect Disabil Res 50 (Pt 6): 432–44. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2788.2006.00789.x. PMID&#160;16672037.&#160;
^ a b c Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) (January 2004). "Economic costs associated with mental retardation, cerebral palsy, hearing loss, and vision impairment--United States, 2003". MMWR Morb. Mortal. Wkly. Rep. 53 (3): 57–9. PMID&#160;14749614.&#160;
^ Krahn GL, Fox MH. (2013). "Health disparities of adults with intellectual disabilities: what do we know? What do we do?". Journal of Applied Research in Intellectual Disability 27 (5): 431–446. doi:10.1111/jar.12067.&#160;
^ Haider SI, Ansari Z, Vaughan L, Matters H, Emerson E. (2013). "Health and wellbeing of Victorian adults with intellectual disability compared to the general Victorian population". Research in Developmental Disabilities 34 (11): 4034–4042. doi:10.1016/j.ridd.2013.08.017. PMID&#160;24036484.&#160;


External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Intellectual disability.



FAQ on intellectual disabilities from the US Centers for Disease Control's National Center on Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilities









v
t
e


Mental and behavioral disorders (F 290–319)










&#160;
Neurological/symptomatic











Dementia




Mild cognitive impairment
Alzheimer's disease
Vascular dementia
Pick's disease
Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease
Huntington's disease
Parkinson's disease
AIDS dementia complex
Frontotemporal dementia
Sundowning
Wandering









Autism spectrum




Autism
Asperger syndrome
Savant syndrome
PDD-NOS
High-functioning autism









Other




Delirium
Post-concussion syndrome
Organic brain syndrome


















&#160;
Psychoactive substances, substance abuse, drug abuse and substance-related disorders









Intoxication/Drug overdose
Physical dependence
Substance dependence
Rebound effect
Double rebound
Withdrawal















&#160;
Schizophrenia, schizotypal and delusional










Psychosis



Schizoaffective disorder
Schizophreniform disorder
Brief reactive psychosis








Schizophrenia



Disorganized schizophrenia
Delusional disorder
Folie à deux


















&#160;
Mood (affective)









Mania
Bipolar disorder
(Bipolar I
Bipolar II
Cyclothymia
Bipolar NOS)
Depression
(Major depressive disorder
Dysthymia
Seasonal affective disorder
Atypical depression
Melancholic depression)















&#160;
Neurotic, stress-related and somatoform











Anxiety disorder






Phobia




Agoraphobia
Social anxiety
Social phobia
(Anthropophobia)
Specific phobia
(Claustrophobia)
Specific social phobia









Other




Panic disorder
Panic attack
Generalized anxiety disorder
OCD
stress
(Acute stress reaction
PTSD)












Adjustment disorder




Adjustment disorder with depressed mood









Somatoform disorder




Somatization disorder
Body dysmorphic disorder
Hypochondriasis
Nosophobia
Da Costa's syndrome
Psychalgia
Conversion disorder
(Ganser syndrome
Globus pharyngis)
Neurasthenia
Mass psychogenic illness









Dissociative disorder




Dissociative identity disorder
Psychogenic amnesia
Fugue state
Depersonalization disorder


















&#160;
Physiological/physical behavioral











Eating disorder




Anorexia nervosa
Bulimia nervosa
Rumination syndrome
NOS









Nonorganic
sleep disorders




(Nonorganic hypersomnia
Nonorganic insomnia)
Parasomnia
(REM sleep behavior disorder
Night terror
Nightmare)









Sexual
dysfunction




sexual desire
(Hypoactive sexual desire disorder
Hypersexuality)


sexual arousal
(Female sexual arousal disorder)
Erectile dysfunction


orgasm
(Anorgasmia
Delayed ejaculation
Premature ejaculation
Sexual anhedonia)


pain
(Vaginismus
Dyspareunia)









Postnatal




Postpartum depression
Postnatal psychosis


















&#160;
Adult personality and behavior











Gender dysphoria




Sexual maturation disorder
Ego-dystonic sexual orientation
Sexual relationship disorder
Paraphilia
(Voyeurism
Fetishism)









Other




Personality disorder
Impulse control disorder
(Kleptomania
Trichotillomania
Pyromania
Dermatillomania)
Body-focused repetitive behavior
Factitious disorder
(Münchausen syndrome)


















&#160;
Disorders typically diagnosed in childhood











Intellectual disability




X-linked intellectual disability
(Lujan-Fryns syndrome)









Psychological development
(developmental disabilities)




Specific
Pervasive
Autism spectrum disorders









Emotional and behavioral




ADHD
Conduct disorder
(ODD)
Emotional/behavioral disorder
(Separation anxiety disorder)
social functioning
(Selective mutism
RAD
DAD)
Tic disorder
(Tourette syndrome)
Speech
(Stuttering
Cluttering)
Movement disorder
(Stereotypic)


















&#160;
Symptoms and uncategorized









Catatonia
False pregnancy
Intermittent explosive disorder
Psychomotor agitation
Stereotypy
Psychogenic non-epileptic seizures
Klüver-Bucy syndrome

















v
t
e


Index of psychology and psychiatry






Description



Mental processes








Disorders



Mental and behavioral

ADHD
OCD
Tourette's


Mood
Developmental

pervasive
dyslexia and specific


Substance-related

alcohol


Emotional and behavioral disorders
Symptoms and signs
Evaluation and testing








Treatment



Psychotherapy

CBT


Drugs

depression
antipsychotics
anxiety
dementia
hypnotics and sedatives


















Authority control



GND: 4019852-2
NDL: 00570417















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Intellectual_disability&amp;oldid=691028407"					
				Categories: Intellectual disabilityChildhood psychiatric disordersPsychiatric diagnosisLearning disabilitiesHidden categories: Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesArticles with contributors linkArticles containing potentially dated statements from 2015All articles containing potentially dated statementsWikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2014All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from October 2013Articles with unsourced statements from April 2010Commons category with page title same as on WikidataWikipedia articles with GND identifiers				
							
		
		
			