


		
		
		
			

							
						

			List (abstract data type)
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				This article is about sequential data structures.  For random-access data structures, see Array data type.
In computer science, a list or sequence is an abstract data type that represents an ordered sequence of values, where the same value may occur more than once. An instance of a list is a computer representation of the mathematical concept of a finite sequence; the (potentially) infinite analog of a list is a stream.[1]:§3.5 Lists are a basic example of containers, as they contain other values. If the same value occurs multiple times, each occurrence is considered a distinct item.




A singly linked list structure, implementing a list with 3 integer elements.


The name list is also used for several concrete data structures that can be used to implement abstract lists, especially linked lists.
Many programming languages provide support for list data types, and have special syntax and semantics for lists and list operations. A list can often be constructed by writing the items in sequence, separated by commas, semicolons, or spaces, within a pair of delimiters such as parentheses '()', brackets '[]', braces '{}', or angle brackets '&lt;&gt;'. Some languages may allow list types to be indexed or sliced like array types, in which case the data type is more accurately described as an array. In object-oriented programming languages, lists are usually provided as instances of subclasses of a generic "list" class, and traversed via separate iterators. List data types are often implemented using array data structures or linked lists of some sort, but other data structures may be more appropriate for some applications. In some contexts, such as in Lisp programming, the term list may refer specifically to a linked list rather than an array.
In type theory and functional programming, abstract lists are usually defined inductively by two operations: nil that yields the empty list, and cons, which adds an item at the beginning of a list.[2]



Contents


1 Operations
2 Implementations
3 Programming language support
4 Applications
5 Abstract definition

5.1 The list monad


6 References
7 See also



Operations[edit]
Implementation of the list data structure may provide some of the following operations:

a constructor for creating an empty list;
an operation for testing whether or not a list is empty;
an operation for prepending an entity to a list
an operation for appending an entity to a list
an operation for determining the first component (or the "head") of a list
an operation for referring to the list consisting of all the components of a list except for its first (this is called the "tail" of the list.)

Implementations[edit]
Lists are typically implemented either as linked lists (either singly or doubly linked) or as arrays, usually variable length or dynamic arrays.
The standard way of implementing lists, originating with the programming language Lisp, is to have each element of the list contain both its value and a pointer indicating the location of the next element in the list. This results in either a linked list or a tree, depending on whether the list has nested sublists. Some older Lisp implementations (such as the Lisp implementation of the Symbolics 3600) also supported "compressed lists" (using CDR coding) which had a special internal representation (invisible to the user). Lists can be manipulated using iteration or recursion. The former is often preferred in imperative programming languages, while the latter is the norm in functional languages.
Lists can be implemented as self-balancing binary search trees holding index-value pairs, providing equal-time access to any element (e.g. all residing in the fringe, and internal nodes storing the right-most child's index, used to guide the search), taking the time logarithmic in the list's size, but as long as it doesn't change much will provide the illusion of random access and enable swap, prefix and append operations in logarithmic time as well.[3]
Programming language support[edit]
Some languages do not offer a list data structure, but offer the use of associative arrays or some kind of table to emulate lists. For example, Lua provides tables. Although Lua stores lists that have numerical indices as arrays internally, they still appear as hash tables.[4]
In Lisp, lists are the fundamental data type and can represent both program code and data. In most dialects, the list of the first three prime numbers could be written as (list 2 3 5). In several dialects of Lisp, including Scheme, a list is a collection of pairs, consisting of a value and a pointer to the next pair (or null value), making a singly linked list.[5]
Applications[edit]
As the name implies, lists can be used to store a list of records.
Because in computing, lists are easier to realize than sets, a finite set in mathematical sense can be realized as a list with additional restrictions, that is, duplicate elements are disallowed and such that order is irrelevant. If the list is sorted, it speeds up determining if a given item is already in the set, but, in order to ensure the order, it requires more time to add new entry to the list. In efficient implementations, however, sets are implemented using self-balancing binary search trees or hash tables, rather than a list.
Abstract definition[edit]
The abstract list type L with elements of some type E (a monomorphic list) is defined by the following functions:

nil: () → L
cons: E × L → L
first: L → E
rest: L → L

with the axioms

first (cons (e, l)) = e
rest (cons (e, l)) = l

for any element e and any list l. It is implicit that

cons (e, l) ≠ l
cons (e, l) ≠ e
cons (e1, l1) = cons (e2, l2) if e1 = e2 and l1 = l2

Note that first (nil ()) and rest (nil ()) are not defined.
These axioms are equivalent to those of the abstract stack data type.
In type theory, the above definition is more simply regarded as an inductive type defined in terms of constructors: nil and cons. In algebraic terms, this can be represented as the transformation 1 + E × L → L. first and rest are then obtained by pattern matching on the cons constructor and separately handling the nil case.
The list monad[edit]
The list type forms a monad with the following functions (using E* rather than L to represent monomorphic lists with elements of type E):




where append is defined as:



Alternatively, the monad may be defined in terms of operations return, fmap and join, with:




Note that fmap, join, append and bind are well-defined, since they're applied to progressively deeper arguments at each recursive call.
The list type is an additive monad, with nil as the monadic zero and append as monadic sum.
Lists form a monoid under the append operation. The identity element of the monoid is the empty list, nil. In fact, this is the free monoid over the set of list elements.
References[edit]


^ Abelson, Harold; Sussman, Gerald Jay (1996). Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs. MIT Press.&#160;
^ Reingold, Edward; Nievergelt, Jurg; Narsingh, Deo (1977). Combinatorial Algorithms: Theory and Practice. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall. pp.&#160;38–41. ISBN&#160;0-13-152447-X.&#160;
^ Barnett, Granville; Del tonga, Luca (2008). "Data Structures and Algorithms" (PDF). mta.ca. Retrieved 12 November 2014.&#160;
^ Lerusalimschy, Roberto (December 2003). Programming in Lua (first edition) (First ed.). Lua.org. ISBN&#160;8590379817. Retrieved 12 November 2014.&#160;
^ Steele, Guy (1990). Common Lisp (Second ed.). Digital Press. pp.&#160;29–31. ISBN&#160;1-55558-041-6.&#160;


See also[edit]



Look up list in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



Array
Queue
Set
Stream









v
t
e


Data structures






Types



Collection
Container








Abstract



Associative array

Multimap


List
Stack
Queue

Double-ended queue


Priority queue

Double-ended priority queue


Set

Multiset
Disjoint-set










Arrays



Bit array
Circular buffer
Dynamic array
Hash table
Hashed array tree
Sparse array








Linked



Association list
Linked list
Skip list
Unrolled linked list
XOR linked list








Trees



B-tree
Binary search tree

AA tree
AVL tree
Red–black tree
Self-balancing tree
Splay tree


Heap

Binary heap
Binomial heap
Fibonacci heap


R-tree

R* tree
R+ tree
Hilbert R-tree


Trie

Hash tree










Graphs



Binary decision diagram
Directed acyclic graph
Directed acyclic word graph











List of data structures
















v
t
e


Data types






Uninterpreted



Bit
Byte
Trit
Tryte
Word








Numeric



Bignum
Complex
Decimal
Fixed point
Floating point

Double precision
Extended precision
Half precision
Minifloat
Octuple precision
Quadruple precision
Single precision


Integer

signedness


Interval
Rational








Text



Character
String

null-terminated










Pointer



Address

physical
virtual


Reference








Composite



Algebraic data type

generalized


Array
Associative array
Class
Dependent
Equality
Inductive
List
Object

metaobject


Option type
Product
Record
Set
Union

tagged










Other



Boolean
Bottom type
Collection
Enumerated type
Exception
Function type
Opaque data type
Recursive data type
Semaphore
Stream
Top type
Type class
Unit type
Void








Related topics



Abstract data type
Data structure
Generic
Kind

metaclass


Parametric polymorphism
Primitive data type
Protocol

interface


Subtyping
Type constructor
Type conversion
Type system















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_(abstract_data_type)&amp;oldid=676857211"					
				Categories: Data typesComposite data typesAbstract data types				
							
		
		
			