


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Party game
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				For the Canadian television game show, see Party Game (game show).  For the Yes Minister Christmas special, see Party Games (Yes Minister).





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2009)


Party games are games that are played as a part of a party, to facilitate interaction and provide entertainment and recreation at social gatherings. Categories include (explicit) icebreakers, parlour (indoor), picnic (outdoor), and large group games.[1][2] Other types include pairing off (partnered) games, and parlour races.[2] Different games will generate different atmospheres so the party game may merely be intended as an icebreaker, or the sole purpose for or structure of the party. As such, party games aim to include players of various skill levels and player-elimination is rare.[3] Party games are intended to be played socially, and are designed to be easy for new players to learn.[4]



Contents


1 Characteristics
2 Common party games
3 Children's party games
4 Video games
5 Large group games
6 See also
7 References
8 External links



Characteristics[edit]
The characteristics of party games tend to include:

A game can support a relatively large or undefined number of players, compared to more traditional board games or card games that require a small, set number of players. Some games, especially commercial games, have a set limit based on available equipment; others are limited by other mechanics of the game like time for each turn, while still others have no practical limit.
Team-based play in party games is common, but not required. Games that divide players into two, three, or four roughly equal teams, such as Cranium, Who's Got Game? by Neil Strauss, Charades or Pictionary tend to allow for larger total numbers of players. By contrast, other games such as Werewolf and How to Host a Murder are role-based, with each player being given a character or other role to play in the course of the game. The number of players is limited to the number of roles, but in many such games there are "generic" roles allowing for a high degree of flexibility.
Cooperation and interaction between players is encouraged. Both team and role-based play generally encourage this social aspect to the game; games that do not encourage this interaction generally make poor party games.
Multiple ways to play and contribute. For example, in Fictionary not everyone needs to create plausible dictionary definitions; humorous submissions are welcome. In Charades, players can actively participate in guessing without taking a turn at acting. Sports often make poor party games as limitations in a player's physical abilities may preclude participation though some party games, such as: relay racing and Red light/Green light, involve a significant physical aspect and are especially suitable for groups similar in age and ability.
Players participate in gameplay frequently, sometimes on an impromptu basis. Games in which each player has their own independent turn generally make poor party games, especially if a turn takes a long time.
A game should also have entertainment value for spectators. Many party games involve at least some level of humor, whether inherent in the game or introduced by players. In this way, players not taking a turn can still enjoy the gameplay, whilst party favors can embellish the party atmosphere.
Player elimination is rare. Monopoly makes a poor party game, because bankrupt players must sit out while the remaining players continue to the game's conclusion, which can take several hours. In contrast, no matter how far behind a team is in Pictionary, all players can participate until the end.
The amount of specialized equipment needed is not dependent on the number of players. Games such as Liar's Dice make poor party games because each player needs a cup and five dice to start the game. By contrast, Yahtzee needs only one cup and set of dice regardless of the number of players (the basic Yahtzee game does have other practical limitations).
The game usually does not involve spending real money as a prerequisite or consequence of playing. Games that require each player to purchase consumable items or specialized equipment are usually poor party games. Casino games are a notable exception. Examples include "casino nights" with a token door charge or buy-in for charity or to defray costs and poker tournaments with a similar small buy-in.

Common party games[edit]




Musical Chairs



1000 Blank White Cards
30 Seconds
Apples to Apples
Articulate
Bat a rat
Balderdash
Bingo
Beer Pong
Botticelli
Buck buck
Cards Against Humanity
Catch Phrase
Celebrity
Charades
Chinese whispers
Consequences
Couch of Power
Drinking games
Cranium
Fictionary (related to the commercial Balderdash)
Gift Trap
Mafia (also known as Vampire or Werewolf)
Murder mystery games
Musical statues
Nerf War
Never Have I Ever
Ninja (playground game)
Outburst (game)
Pictionary
Psychiatrist
Scattergories
Scissors
Scruples
Seven minutes in heaven
Shout about movies
Silent football
Spin the bottle
Strip games
Squeak Piggy Squeak
Taboo
The Metagame
The Priest of the Parish
The Resistance
Time's Up! (game)
Treasure Hunt
Truth or Dare? and related games such as "Strip or Dare?" and "Drink or Dare?"
Trip to Jerusalem
Trivial Pursuit
Twenty Questions
Utter Nonsense!
What?
White Elephant Gift Exchange
Would you rather
Zip and bong
Zip Zap Zop
Zoom Schwartz Profigliano

Children's party games[edit]




A nine-pointed star piñata


Traditional children's party games include:

Forty forty
Blind Man's Bluff
The Chocolate Game
The Farmer's In His Den
Hunt the Thimble (or slipper, or other object)
Hide and seek
Musical Bumps
Musical Chairs
Musical Statues
Oranges and Lemons
Pass the parcel
Pin the Tail on the Donkey
Post Office (game)
Sardines
Piñata
Poor Pussy
Wink Murder
Duck Duck Goose
Sleeping Lions
Mother May I?
Rock-Paper-Scissors

Video games[edit]
See also: List of party video games




Mario Party 7, a party game for the GameCube, allows many established Mario characters to compete in minigames together.


The party game has become a genre of video games — arguably dating back to 1983, with Starpath's Party Mix. These games are usually best played in multiplayer mode. Party video games are commonly designed as a collection of simple minigames, designed to be intuitive and easy to control. Some of the games (most notably the Mario Party series) are played out on boardgame boards.
Large group games[edit]
Large group games are played by a large number of participants and are often used as planned activities in structured environments, especially as educational activities. They are similar to party games, except that large group games are typically planned for larger numbers (perhaps even hundreds) as part of an event.
Large group games can take a variety of forms and formats.
Some are physical games such as Buck buck.
Some are modeled on the TV game show format, offering points for teams who can answer questions the fastest. Trivia-type games might have questions posed from the stage and each tabletop writing their answers to be collected and scored. Others may take on some of the qualities of Open Space environments and allow participants to wander in a less structured way.
Some are modeled on TV reality shows such as The Amazing Race or Survivor. Participants compete as individuals or in teams to complete challenges that move them towards victory in a competition spanning the entire party. The TV shows on which such parties are based are normally competitions involving elimination, so such events require significant planning to avoid exclusion or boredom.
Group board games can take on the design of small groups of players, seated at tables of 4 to 6 people, who work together on a problem. There can be large numbers of people (and thus many tables). If properly designed, these scalable exercises can be used for small groups (12 to 20 people) as well as very large events (600 people or 100 tables).
Generally, for these larger exercises, multimedia projectors, large screens and microphones are required for instructions, communications and debriefing.
A search for team building events can turn up millions of links to exercises, companies, and all kinds of offerings ranging from paintball competitions to fire walks to outdoor climbing or whitewater adventures. The impact on actual team building can vary widely - a golf outing for corporate executives does not generally accomplish much in the way of organizational improvement while a business simulation might be directly focused on linking the play of the game to issues for corporate improvement.
Holiday groups use a gift exchange party game such as white elephant gift exchange for socializing and sharing gifts. New online party games, based on these holiday games, allow larger groups to gather on the internet to save travel expenses.
See also[edit]

Drinking game
Conversation games
Parlour game
Minigame
Casual game
Cuddle party

References[edit]


^ Frankel, Lillian; Frankel, Godfrey; and Anderson, Doug (2007). Party Games for Adults, p.7. Sterling. ISBN 9781402746864.
^ a b Sheila Anne Barry (1987). The World's Best Party Games, p.3. Sterling. ISBN 9780806964843.
^ Meyer, Ben (2009). "Fort Ancient: Ohio", Proceedings of the 3rd European Conference on Game Based Learning, p.259. Academic Conferences. ISBN 9781906638474.
^ McGonigal, Jane (2011). Reality Is Broken: Why Games Make Us Better and How They Can Change the World, unpaginated. Penguin. ISBN 9781101475492.


External links[edit]

PartyGames.Guide Instructions to various party games.









v
t
e


Children's games









Guessing games
Hand games

Clapping games


Party games
Singing games
Street games








Ball games



Butts Up
Catch
Dodgeball
Funnel ball
Half-rubber
Keep away
Kickball
Paper football
Patball
Punchball
Stickball
Stoop ball








Other



Children's culture and street culture
Video games
















v
t
e


Party games









Apple bobbing
Chinese whispers
Hot potato
Murder mystery
Musical chairs
Pin the tail on the donkey
Piñata
Post Office
Seven minutes in heaven
Spin the bottle
Truth or Dare?








Guessing games



Button, button, who's got the button?
Charades
















v
t
e


Types of games









Chance
Guessing
Party
Skill
Sport
Strategy
Street
Tabletop
Video









List of types of games














v
t
e


Video game genres









List








Action



Beat 'em up

Hack and slash


Fighting
Maze

Pac-Man clone


Platform
Shooter

First-person
Third-person
Light gun
Shoot 'em up
Tactical


Survival








Action-adventure



Grand Theft Auto clone
Metroidvania
Stealth
Survival horror








Adventure



Dating sim

Bishōjo
Eroge
Otome


Graphic adventure

Escape the room


Interactive fiction
Interactive movie
Visual novel








MMOs



MMOFPS
MMORPG
MMORTS








Role-playing game



Action role-playing
Dungeon crawl
MUD
Roguelike
Tactical role-playing








Simulation



Construction and management

Business
City
Government


Life simulation

Dating sim
Digital pet
God
Social simulation


Sports








Strategy



4X
Real-time strategy

MOBA
Tower defense
Time management


Real-time tactics
Turn-based strategy
Turn-based tactics

Artillery


Wargame








Vehicle simulation



Flight simulator

Amateur
Combat
Space


Racing

Kart racing
Sim racing


Submarine simulator
Train simulator








Other genres



Breakout clone
Exergame
Music

Rhythm


Non-game
Party
Programming
Puzzle

Sokoban
Tile-matching










Related concepts



Arcade game
Art game
Audio game
Casual game
Christian game
Clone game
Crossover game
Cult game
FMV
Indie game
Nonlinear gameplay

Open world


Online game

Browser game
MMOG
Social network game


Serious game

Advergame
Edugame


Toys-to-life
Traditional game













Authority control



GND: 4020650-6















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Party_game&amp;oldid=691559243"					
				Categories: Party gamesSports entertainmentHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from July 2009All articles needing additional referencesWikipedia articles with GND identifiers				
							
		
		
			