


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Sports equipment
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				Further information: Equipment (disambiguation)





This article does not cite any references (sources). Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2009)






Rock-climbing equipment: Rope and climber's shoes






1990–2005 style official NFL ball






Adidas Telstar-style ball, with the familiar black and white truncated icosahedron pattern.


Sports equipment is any object used for sport or exercise. Examples of sports are listed below.



Contents


1 Balls
2 Exercise equipment
3 Flying discs
4 Footwear
5 Goals
6 Nets
7 Protective equipment
8 Racquets
9 Rods and tackle
10 Sticks, bats and clubs
11 Vehicles
12 Wickets and bases
13 Various sports
14 See also
15 References



Balls[edit]
Balls are used for ball games, including footballs.
Exercise equipment[edit]
Examples for exercise include swiss balls, weights, chin-up bars, equipment for the gym. Also protective equipment such as weight lifting belts and bench shirts for weight training and powerlifting.
Flying discs[edit]




Flying disc


Flying discs are used for various games such as freestyle, disc golf and ultimate.
Footwear[edit]




Cleats


Footwear for sports includes:

Boards for surfing, skateboarding, wakeboarding and snowboarding
Skates for sports like roller skating, ice skating
Skis for skiing and water skiing
Football boots and separate Soccer cleats (Outdoor soccer cleats have studs but indoor soccer shoes have a flat bottom)
Cricket spikes
Golf shoes
Track cleats
Prosthetics like the Cheetah Flex-Foot running blade
Running shoes

Goals[edit]




A soccer goal


In many games, goals are at each end of the playing field, there are two vertical posts (or uprights) supporting a horizontal crossbar. In some games, such as association football or hockey, the object is to pass the ball or puck between the posts below the crossbar, while in others, such as those based on Rugby, the ball must pass over the crossbar instead.
Nets[edit]
Nets are used for tennis, volleyball, football, basketball and badminton. A different type of net is used for various forms of fishing.
Protective equipment[edit]
Protective equipment is often worn for sports including motor sport and contact sports, such as ice hockey and American football or sports where there is a danger of injury through collision of players or other objects. Protective equipment includes:

Football helmet
Jock strap
Mouthguards
Shin pads
Ski suits

Racquets[edit]
Racquets are used for racquet sports such as tennis, squash, and badminton.
Rods and tackle[edit]




An angler on the Kennet and Avon Canal, England, surrounded by his tackle


Fishing rods and fishing tackle are primarily used for fishing and sport fishing.
Sticks, bats and clubs[edit]
Sticks are used for sports such as hockey and lacrosse. Bats are used for sports such as baseball and cricket. Clubs are used mainly for golf (Golf club)
Vehicles[edit]
Vehicles (sometimes specialized) are used as equipment for some sports, including motor sport, cycling, aeronautics, sailing and hot air ballooning.
Wickets and bases[edit]
Wickets and bails for cricket. Bases are for baseball.
Various sports[edit]




Category:Sports equipment (various sports)
Athletics
Association football clothing and equipment
Baseball clothing and equipment
Climbing equipment
Cricket equipment




Golf equipment
Ice hockey equipment
Snowboarding equipment
Triathlon equipment
"Top Baseball Equipment"




See also[edit]

Outdoor gym
Protective equipment
Chin-up bar

References[edit]









v
t
e


Sport









History
Clubs
Equipment
Law
Medicine
Regulation
Science
Sociology


Outline of sports











 Portal
 Category
 Commons















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sports_equipment&amp;oldid=666474538"					
				Categories: Sports equipmentHidden categories: Articles lacking sources from December 2009All articles lacking sources				
							
		
		
			