


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Sports medicine
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				
Sports medicine


Orthopaedics is a large part of sports medicine, and knee injuries a common theme. Here a subject is having the anterior-posterior laxity of his knee tested.



System
Musculoskeletal, Cardiovascular


Focus

Sports
especially athletics



Significant diseases



Trauma
Muscle strain
Sports injuries





Significant tests
Musculoskeletal tests


Specialist
Sports physician


Sports medicine, also known as sport and exercise medicine (SEM), is a branch of medicine that deals with physical fitness and the treatment and prevention of injuries related to sports and exercise. Although most sports teams have employed team physicians for many years, it is only since the late 20th century that sports medicine has emerged as a distinct field of health care.



Contents


1 Scope

1.1 Exercise medicine
1.2 Public health
1.3 Common sports injuries


2 History
3 Organizations
4 See also
5 References



Scope[edit]
Sport and exercise medicine doctors are specialist physicians who have completed medical school, appropriate residency training and then specialize further in sports medicine or 'sports and exercise medicine' (the preferred term). Specialization in sports medicine may be a doctor's first specialty (as in Australia, Netherlands, Norway, Italy). It may also be a sub-specialty or second specialisation following a specialisation such as physiatry or orthopedic surgery. The various approaches reflect the medical culture in different countries.
Specializing in the treatment of athletes and other physically active individuals, sports and exercise medicine physicians have extensive education in musculoskeletal medicine. SEM doctors treat injuries such as muscle, ligament, tendon and bone problems, but may also treat chronic illnesses that can affect physical performance, such as asthma and diabetes. SEM doctors also advise on managing and preventing injuries.
Specialists in SEM diagnose and treat any medical conditions which regular exercisers or sports persons encounter. The majority of a SEM physicians' time is therefore spent treating musculoskeletal injuries, however other conditions include sports cardiology issues, unexplained underperformance syndrome, exercise-induced asthma, screening for cardiac abnormalities and diabetes in sports. In addition team physicians working in elite sports often play a role in performance medicine, whereby an athletes' physiology is monitored, and aberrations corrected, in order to achieve peak physical performance.
SEM consultants also deliver clinical physical activity interventions, negating the burden of disease directly attributable to physical inactivity and the compelling evidence for the effectiveness of exercise in the primary, secondary and tertiary prevention of disease.







Exercise medicine[edit]
The Foresight Report[1] issued by the Government Office for Science, 17 October 2007, highlighted the unsustainable health and economic costs of a nation that continues to be largely sedentary. It forecasts that the incremental costs of this inactivity will be £10 billion per year by 2050 and the wider costs to society and businesses £49.9billion. Physical inactivity inevitably leads to ill-health and it forecasts the cost of paying for this impact will be unsustainable in the future. No existing group of medical specialists is equipped with the skills and training to deal with this challenge.
The concept of Exercise as Health tool or [2] is becoming increasingly important. SEM Physicians are able to evaluate medical patients co-morbidities, perform exercise testing and provide an exercise prescription, together with a motivational programme and exercise classes.
Public health[edit]
SEM physicians are frequently involved in promoting the therapeutic benefits of physical activity, exercise and sport for the individuals and communities. SEM Physicians in the UK spend a period of their training in public health, and advise public health physicians on matters relating to physical activity promotion. An example of published work includes the Royal College of [3] publication – [4]
Common sports injuries[edit]
Main article: Sports injury
Concussion- caused by severe head injury where the brain moves violently within the skull so that brain cells all fire at once, much like a seizure
Muscle Cramps- a sudden tight, intense pain caused by a muscle locked in spasm. Muscle cramps are also recognized as an involuntary and forcibly contracted muscle that does not relax
ACL Sprains- The anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) is a ligament involved in knee stabilization. An ACL rupture can occur when the foot is planted and the knee twists to change direction.
ACL Tears- The anterior cruciate ligament; one of four major knee ligament necessary for comfortable knee movement, tears, causing major pain and causes the knee to "give out". The knee ACL can tear for a number of reasons.
Ankle Sprain- The ligaments that hold the ankle bones in place can easily be overstretched.
Shin Splints- The tissue that attaches the muscles of your lower leg to the shin bone may be pulling away from the bone, or it may be inflamed from overuse. [5]
Muscle Strains- tears in muscle that cause pain and loss of function
History[edit]
In recent years Western society has increasingly recognized the dangers of physical inactivity, and significant efforts have been made within the public health community to encourage the nation to become more physically active. To reflect this paradigm shift BASM has renamed itself BASEM (British Association of Sport and Exercise Medicine) and the speciality itself has rebranded from Sports Medicine to Sport &amp; Exercise Medicine.[6] Since 2007 several deaneries across the UK have established training programmes in SEM, and recurrent funding for 50 National Training Numbers (NTN's) is available.
Organizations[edit]

American College of Sports Medicine (ACSM) Founded in 1954, the American College of Sports Medicine is the largest and most prominent sports medicine and exercise science organization in the world. ACSM has more than 45,000 International, National and Regional Chapter members.[7]
American Orthopaedic Society for Sports Medicine (AOSSM) The American Orthopaedic Society for Sports Medicine is a world leader in sports medicine education, research, communication, and fellowship. Founded in 1972, AOSSM is an international organization of orthopaedic surgeons and other allied health professionals dedicated to sports medicine. Essentially every professional and collegiate team has a team physician who is a member of the AOSSM.
American Medical Society for Sports Medicine (AMSSM) Founded in 1991, AMSSM is a multi-disciplinary organization of physicians whose members are dedicated to education, research, collaboration and fellowship within the field of Sports Medicine. It now comprises over 2100 Sports Medicine Physicians whose goal is to provide a link between the rapidly expanding core of knowledge related to sports medicine and its application to patients in a clinical setting.
National Athletic Trainers' Association(NATA) Founded in 1950, the mission of the National Athletic Trainers Association is to enhance the quality of health care provided by certified athletic trainers and to advance the athletic training profession.
Canadian Athletic Therapists' Association(CATA) Founded in 1965.[8] The Canadian Athletic Therapists Association (CATA) is an organization devoted to the comprehensive health care of an individual at any level of physical ability by Certified Athletic Therapists.
American Medical Association(AMA) The American Medical Association recognized Athletic Training(AT) as an allied health profession in 1990.[9]

See also[edit]






Athletic trainer
Canadian Athletic Therapists Association
Exercise
Exercise physiology
Ice bath
Nutrition
Overtraining
Dan Tunstall Pedoe
Physical fitness






Physical therapy
Physiatry
Sports Chiropractic
Sports injuries
Sports nutrition
Sports science
Sports training
Augustus Thorndike
Tommy John surgery
Ventricular hypertrophy









Wikimedia Commons has media related to Sports medicine.


References[edit]


^ Government Office for Science - GOV.UK
^ Exercise is Medicine™
^ http://www.rcplondon.ac.uk/Pages/index.aspx
^ http://sportandexercisemedicine.vpweb.co.uk/Journal-papers--amp--Publications.html
^ Common Sports Injuries." Common Sports Injuries. Union Memorial Hospital. Web. 10 Dec. 2009.&lt;http://www.unionmemorial.org/npt.cfm?id=878&gt;.
^ Health through sport and exercise. Faculty of Sport and Exercise Medicine.
^ "Why ACSM?". American College of Sports Medicine. Retrieved 19 September 2013.&#160;
^ De Conde, C. (1990). The CATA - A Historical Perspective. The Journal of the Canadian Athletic Therapists' Association, 6-10.
^ "Athletic Trainers". Explore Health Careers. Retrieved 20 September 2013.&#160;










v
t
e


Sport









History
Clubs
Equipment
Law
Medicine
Regulation
Science
Sociology


Outline of sports











 Portal
 Category
 Commons
















v
t
e


Medicine






Specialties
and
subspecialties





Surgery









Cardiac surgery
Cardiothoracic surgery
Colorectal surgery
Eye surgery
General surgery
Neurosurgery
Oral and maxillofacial surgery
Orthopedic surgery
Hand surgery
Otolaryngology (ENT)
Pediatric surgery
Plastic surgery
Reproductive surgery
Surgical oncology
Thoracic surgery
Transplant surgery
Trauma surgery
Urology

Andrology


Vascular surgery








Internal medicine









Allergy / Immunology
Angiology
Cardiology
Endocrinology
Gastroenterology

Hepatology


Geriatrics
Hematology
Hospital medicine
Infectious disease
Nephrology
Oncology
Pulmonology
Rheumatology








Obstetrics and gynaecology









Gynaecology
Gynecologic oncology
Maternal-fetal medicine
Obstetrics
Reproductive endocrinology and infertility
Urogynecology








Diagnostic









Radiology

Interventional radiology, Nuclear medicine


Pathology

Anatomical pathology, Clinical pathology, Clinical chemistry, Clinical immunology, Cytopathology, Medical microbiology, Transfusion medicine










Specialties









Addiction medicine
Adolescent medicine
Anesthesiology
Dermatology
Disaster medicine
Diving medicine
Emergency medicine

Mass-gathering medicine


Family medicine
General practice
Hospital medicine
Intensive-care medicine
Medical genetics
Neurology

Clinical neurophysiology


Occupational medicine
Ophthalmology
Oral medicine
Pain management
Palliative care
Pediatrics

Neonatology


Physical medicine and rehabilitation
Preventive medicine
Psychiatry
Radiation oncology
Reproductive medicine
Sexual medicine
Sleep medicine
Sports medicine
Transplantation medicine
Tropical medicine

Travel medicine













Medical education



Medical school
Bachelor of Medicine, Bachelor of Surgery
Bachelor of Medical Sciences
Master of Medicine
Master of Surgery
Doctor of Medicine
Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine
MD-PhD








Related topics



Allied health

Dentistry
Podiatry


Nanomedicine
Molecular oncology
Personalized medicine
Veterinary medicine
Physician
History of medicine











Category
Portal













Authority control



NDL: 00574004















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sports_medicine&amp;oldid=691594821"					
				Categories: Sports medicineOrthopedic surgical proceduresHidden categories: Commons category with page title same as on Wikidata				
							
		
		
			