


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Sports law
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				




The examples and perspective in this article deal primarily with the United States and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject. Please improve this article and discuss the issue on the talk page. (October 2013)


Sports law is the body of legal issues at work in the world of both amateur and professional sports. Sports law overlaps substantially with labor law, contract law, competition or antitrust law, and tort law. Issues like defamation and privacy rights are also integral aspects of sports law. This area of law was established as a separate and important entity only a few decades ago, coinciding with the rise of player-agents and increased media scrutiny of sports law topics.



Contents


1 Amateur sports law
2 Labor issues in sports
3 Antitrust issues in sports
4 Tort law issues
5 Academic aspects of sports law
6 References
7 Further reading
8 External links



Amateur sports law[edit]
Membership is voluntary. The NCAA operates along a series of bylaws that govern the areas of ethical conduct, amateur eligibility, financial aid, recruiting, gender equity, championship events, and academic standards. The NCAA has enforcement power and can introduce a series of punishments up to the death penalty, the company term for the full shut-down of a sporting activity at an offending college. Coaches are offered contracts and if any contractual agreement is violated NCAA has the right to hold any person(s) under the contract liable.[1]
Title IX is an increasingly important issue in college sports law.[2] The act, passed in 1972, makes it illegal for a federally-funded institution to discriminate on the basis of sex or gender. In sports law, the piece of legislation often refers to the effort to achieve equality for women's sports in colleges. The Office of Civil Rights (OCR) is charged with enforcing this legislation. This agency implemented a three-prong test for schools to adhere to:

Are the opportunities for female and male athletes proportionate to their enrollment?
Does the school have a history of expanding athletic opportunities for women?
Has the school demonstrated success in meeting the needs of its students?

In 1995 the Gender in Equity Disclosure Act was passed to require schools to make an annual, public report on male-female athletic participation rates, recruiting by gender, and financial support. The U.S. Supreme Court's decision in Brown University v. Cohen, is an important aspect of litigation for women sports.
Unlike intercollegiate sports, international amateur sports are run by a variety of organizations. The International Olympic Committee (IOC) is made up of each country's Olympic Committee, which in turn recognizes a national governing body (NGB) for each Olympic related sport. The United States Olympic Committee (USOC) is the national governing body for all U.S. athletes in the Olympic and Pan-American Games. The IOC is the international governing body for the summer and winter Olympic Games.
A critical piece of federal legislation, the Amateur Sports Act of 1978 guarantees certain due process rights including hearings and appeals for U.S. athletes under the governance of the USOC and its NGBs. The subject of drug testing, especially in international sports like cycling and track and field, is under the jurisdiction of each sport's NGB and international federation, the USOC, the IOC, and the World Anti-Doping Agency. The final arbitrator in resolving drug related disputes is the Court of Arbitration for Sports.
Labor issues in sports[edit]
In 1967, the National Labor Relations Board accepted that players have the right to form unions or players' associations. It is now common for professional athletes to organize into associations or unions in order to negotiate collective bargaining agreements' (CBAs) with their sport's owners. Under federal labor law, players and owners must negotiate mandatory issues, those relating to hours, wages, and working conditions, in good faith. All other issues are deemed "permissive," and do not have to be negotiated. Once a CBA is in place, players agree not to strike and owners promise not to lock out players. By way of example, the 2005 National Hockey League season was cancelled because of an owners' lockout after the parties' CBA had expired. In 1994, Major League Baseball lost half its season and the playoffs because ballplayers went on strike over the issue of a salary cap. Historically, the most controversial issues subject to CBA negotiation are free agency, minimum salary, squad size, draft, salary cap, grounds for termination, and suspension.
In nearly all professional sports, the issue of limits on the use of performance-enhancing drugs has become an integral aspect of CBA negotiations. Drug policies are not uniform for all professional sports. Typically, each CBA explains the policy regarding drug testing, list of banned drugs, violations, penalties, privacy issues, and rights of appeal. Drug violations may lead to suspensions and loss of salary. The BALCO controversy involving high-profile professional athletes and coaches highlights the allegedly widespread use of performance-enhancing drugs in different sports.
Player agents, made famous by the famous line from a player to his agent ("Show me the money!") in the movie Jerry Maguire, are generally certified by each sport's players' association. Once certified, player agents or contract advisors may negotiate individual player contracts. Agents who are entrusted to conduct business on a player's behalf owe a fiduciary duty, i.e., a duty to remain loyal, act honestly, behave ethically, and act in the player's best interest when negotiating. More than half the states in the United States currently regulate the activities of player agents in addition to union regulation for bad acts. Super agents like baseball's Scott Boras and football's Drew Rosenhaus are frequently the subject of media profiles.
The first body to assist player agents in learning the ins and outs of contract negotiations, endorsements and media relations was the Association for Representatives of Athletes. The co-founders and leaders of ARPA, since absorbed into the NFL Players Association, were Professor William Weston (University of Baltimore Law School) and Professor Michael E. Jones (University of Massachusetts Lowell). The late Bob Woolf is acknowledged[by whom?] as being one of the first player agents for assisting Boston Red Sox pitcher Earl Wilson to negotiate his player contract.
Labor issues are not unique to United States law. The European Union has dealt with countless sports-related legal issues. The most important development in this area was the Bosman ruling, in which the European Court of Justice invalidated restrictions imposed by EU member countries and UEFA (the governing body for football within Europe) on foreign EU nationals. Bosman was extended to countries with associate trading relationships with the EU by the Kolpak ruling. The 6+5 rule was a proposed rule by FIFA that sought to limit the effects of Bosman and its offshoots on football clubs; it sparked considerable legal controversy in Europe and was abandoned in 2010.
Antitrust issues in sports[edit]
Until a few decades ago, most United States professional sports leagues' contracts retained clauses contracts that essentially prevented players from leaving their original teams by their own choice. These "reserve clauses" were upheld because courts found that these sports leagues did not operate in interstate trade or commerce, meaning they did not fall under antitrust laws. See Federal Baseball Club v. National League. This interpretation has largely been eroded today. However, Major League Baseball may still retain limited anti-trust exemptions (it is unclear whether the entire exemption has been overruled by Flood Act because the true extent of the exemption was vague). It is important to note that the formation of players unions for the purpose of negotiating contracts with management is exempt from anti-trust scrutiny under labor law. The by-product of good faith negotiations between management and players unions in the form of a CBA is also exempt from anti-trust scrutiny.
Tort law issues[edit]
Until recently, torts were never part of the landscape of sports law. A tort can be defined as an actionable wrong [3] However, in 1975 an Illinois appeals court established that players can be found guilty of negligence if their actions are "deliberate, willful or with a reckless disregard for the safety of another player so as cause injury to that player." See Nabozny v. Barnhill. The Australian case McCracken v Melbourne Storm &amp; Orcs discussed the notion and legalities of when an athlete purposefully aims to intentionally injure another during play.[4] Negligence torts are typically harder to prove in contact sports, where violent actions and injuries are more common and thus more expected ("assumption of risk" or "self-defense"). Spectators can also sue for negligence if their injuries could not have been expected (not "foreseeable") given the nature of the sporting event they were attending. A baseball fan sitting in the bleachers could reasonably expect a baseball might come toward the seat, but a wrestling fan sitting courtside would not reasonably expect a wrestler to come flying his or her way.
Sports' tort law extends into other less obvious areas. Team doctors could be liable for medical malpractice, a form of negligence, for giving a player a false clean bill of health so the player may continue to perform. A player who purposefully causes bodily harm to another athlete, coach, or spectator may be guilty of committing an intentional tort along with a criminal act of assault and battery.[5] The law of defamation protects a person's good character or reputation. The publication of false information about a well-known athlete ("public figure") may be actionable if it was published with a reckless disregard for the truth or actual malice. The growth of non-traditional media outlets, e.g. web pages, instant messaging, cable, etc. has added a new dynamic to this area of the law.
Closely related to the subject of torts in some ways, is the area of publicity rights. While the tort of defamation protects a person's reputation, the right of publicity permits a person to commercially exploit his or her likeness, name, and image. This area of sports law includes trademarks, tradenames, domain names, and copyrights.
Academic aspects of sports law[edit]

Marquette University Law School offers the nation’s most comprehensive sports law program, which provides students with the opportunity to earn a Sports Law Certificate[6] from its National Sports Law Institute,[7] and publishes the Marquette Sports Law Review.[8] The NSLI is one of the leading national educational and research institutes for the study of legal, ethical, and business issues affecting amateur and professional sports. Marquette's Sports Law Program and the NSLI combine to host an annual sports law conference, guest speakers, and other events, as well as sponsor student internships with several sports organizations in the greater Milwaukee area.[9]
The Tulane University Law School offers a certificate in sports law[10] and runs the Sports Lawyers Journal, a student-run law journal funded by the Sports Lawyers Association.[11]
The University of Florida - Levin College of Law has an Entertainment and Sports Law Society which hosts an annual Sports Law Symposium.[12]
Villanova University School of Law's Jeffrey S. Moorad Center is one of the premier sports law Programs in the country. The Center aims to be a thought leader not only in sports law but also in topical issues and the changing dynamics in sports news, sports business, sports media, sports policy, and more. The Center takes students, alumni, and patrons behind the games to broader issues that lead to discourse and provide thoughtful and experienced analysis.[13] Villanova School of Law also boasts the biannual Jeffrey S. Moorad Sports Law Journal, which publishes scholarly articles on topics of importance in the field of sports law.[14]

References[edit]


^ "Shibboleth Authentication Request". site.ebrary.com.libezp.lib.lsu.edu. Retrieved 2015-10-26.&#160;
^ "Shibboleth Authentication Request". libezp.lib.lsu.edu. Retrieved 2015-10-26.&#160;
^ chester, nolte (1979). Sports Law [microform]&#160;: Tort Liability of the College and University Athletic Department Administrator. Washington D.C.: ERIC clearinghouse. pp.&#160;1–2.&#160;
^ McCracken v Melbourne Storm &amp; Ors [2005] NSWSC 107; see also Canterbury Bankstown Rugby League Football Club Ltd v Rogers; Bugden v Rogers [1993] NSWCA 49
^ R v Tevaga [1990] 1 NZLR 296
^ https://law.marquette.edu/national-sports-law-institute/sports-law-certificate
^ https://law.marquette.edu/national-sports-law-institute/welcome
^ anderson, paul (Spring 2015). "marquette sports law review". marquette sports law review. Retrieved 2015-10-26.&#160;
^ Sports Law Marquette University Law School
^ Tulane Law School Adacemics
^ Tulane Law School
^ 2014 UF Law Sports Law Symposium Levin College of Law
^ Mission The Jeffrey S. Moorad
^ villanova







This article includes a list of references, but its sources remain unclear because it has insufficient inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (August 2009)



Champion, Walter, Sports Law. 2nd edition, St. Paul, MN: West Publishing Co. 2000. ISBN 0314238891
Dudley, William, Drugs and Sports. San Diego, CA: Greenhaven Press, 2001. ISBN 1565106970
Epstein, Adam, Sports Law. Clifton Park, NY: Thomson Press, 2003. ISBN 0766823245
Jones, Michael. Sports Law. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1999. ISBN 0136765459
Weiler, Paul and Roberts, Gary. Sports and the Law. St. Paul, MN: West Publishing, 1993. ISBN 0-314-02162-0
Wong, Glenn. Essentials of Amateur Sports Law. Westport, CN: Praeger, 1994.
Yasser, Raymond, et al. Sports Law: Cases and Materials, 5th edition, Cincinnati, OH: Anderson Publishing Co., 2003 ISBN 1583607994

Further reading[edit]

Gardiner, Simon; et al. (2005-12-13). Sports Law (3rd ed.). London: Routledge-Cavendish. ISBN&#160;978-1-85941-894-9.&#160;
Panagiotopoulos, Dimitrios (2011). Sports Law Lex Sportiva &amp; Lex Olympica. Athens: Sakoulas. p.&#160;740. ISBN&#160;978-960-15-2486-3.&#160;

External links[edit]

Sports related legal forms.
Court of Arbitration for Sport
ASSER International Sports Law Centre
Sports Law Institute at Vermont Law School
International Academy of Sportslaw Practitioners and Executives
International Association of Sports Law
British Association for Sport and the Law
Sport and the Law Journal
Entertainment and Sports Law Journal
Australian and New Zealand Sports Law Association
Australian and New Zealand Sports Law Journal - http://www.anzsla.com.au/anzslj/
American Bar Association - Forum on the Entertainment and Sports Industries
Marquette Sports Law Review
Derecho Deportivo en Línea
http://www.the-aasl.org/en/index.php Asian Association of Sports Law
LawinSport - The International Sports Law Publication
SportsNLaw - Sports News Through A Legal Lens









v
t
e


Sport









History
Clubs
Equipment
Law
Medicine
Regulation
Science
Sociology


Outline of sports











 Portal
 Category
 Commons
















v
t
e


Law






Core subjects



Administrative law
Constitutional law
Contract
Criminal law
Deed
Equity
Evidence
International law
Law of obligations
Procedure

Civil
Criminal


Property law
Public law
Restitution
Statutory law
Tort











Other subjects



Agricultural law
Aviation law
Banking law
Bankruptcy
Commercial law
Competition law
Conflict of laws
Construction law
Consumer protection
Corporate law
Cyberlaw
Election law
Energy law
Entertainment law
Environmental law
Family law
Financial regulation
Health law
Immigration law
Intellectual property
International criminal law
International human rights
International slavery laws
Labour law
Law of war
Legal archaeology
Legal fiction
Maritime law
Media law
Military law
Probate

Estate
Will and testament


Product liability
Public international law
Space law
Sports law
Tax law
Trust law








Sources of law



Charter
Constitution
Custom
Divine right
Human rights
Natural and legal rights
Precedent

Case law










Law making



Ballot measure
Codification
Decree

Edict
Executive order
Proclamation


Legislation

Delegated legislation
Regulation
Rulemaking


Promulgation
Repeal
Statutory law

Statute
Act of Parliament
Act of Congress


Treaty








Legal systems



Civil law
Common law
Chinese law
Legal pluralism
Natural law
Religious law

Canon law
Hindu law
Jewish law
Sharia


Roman law
Socialist law
Statutory law
Xeer
Yassa








Legal theory



Critical legal studies
Comparative law
Feminist
Law and economics
Legal formalism
History
International legal theory
Principle of legality
Rule of law
Sociology








Jurisprudence



Adjudication
Administration of justice
Criminal justice
Court-martial
Dispute resolution
Fiqh
Lawsuit/Litigation
Legal opinion
Legal remedy
Judge

Justice of the peace
Magistrate


Judgment
Judicial review
Jurisdiction
Jury
Justice
Practice of law

Attorney
Barrister
Counsel
Lawyer
Legal representation
Prosecutor
Solicitor


Question of fact
Question of law
Trial
Trial advocacy
Trier of fact
Verdict








Legal institutions



Bureaucracy
The bar
The bench
Civil society
Court
Election commission
Executive
Judiciary
Law enforcement
Legal education

Law school


Legislature
Military
Police
Tribunal











Category
Index
Outline
Portal















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sports_law&amp;oldid=688963917"					
				Categories: Sports lawHidden categories: Articles with limited geographic scope from October 2013USA-centricArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from February 2010Articles lacking in-text citations from August 2009All articles lacking in-text citations				
							
		
		
			