


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Wage
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				For other uses, see Wage (disambiguation).





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2009)




Personal finance





Credit&#160;· Debt




Mortgage
Car loan
Credit card
Unsecured personal loan
Rent-to-own
Student loan
Pawn
Title loan
Payday loan
Refund anticipation loan
Refinancing
Debt consolidation
Bankruptcy




Employment contract




Salary
Wage
Salary packaging
Employee stock option
Employee benefit




Retirement





Pension




Defined benefit
Defined contribution
Social security
Business plan
Corporate action





Personal budget




Financial planner
Financial adviser
Stockbroker
Financial independence
Estate planning




See also




Bank
Cooperative
Credit union







v
t
e





A wage is monetary compensation (or remuneration, personnel expenses, labor) paid by an employer to an employee in exchange for work done. Payment may be calculated as a fixed amount for each task completed (a task wage or piece rate), or at an hourly or daily rate, or based on an easily measured quantity of work done.
Wages are an example of expenses that are involved in running a business.
Payment by wage contrasts with salaried work, in which the employer pays an arranged amount at steady intervals (such as a week or month) regardless of hours worked, with commission which conditions pay on individual performance, and with compensation based on the performance of the company as a whole. Waged employees may also receive tips or gratuity paid directly by clients and employee benefits which are non-monetary forms of compensation. Since wage labour is the predominant form of work, the term "wage" sometimes refers to all forms (or all monetary forms) of employee compensation.



Contents


1 Origins and necessary components
2 Determinants of wage rates

2.1 Wage Differences


3 Wages in the United States

3.1 U.S. Federal income tax withholding


4 See also
5 References
6 Further reading
7 External links



Origins and necessary components[edit]
Wage labour involves the exchange of money for time spent at work (the latter quantity is termed labor power by Marx and subsequent economists). As Moses I. Finley lays out the issue in The Ancient Economy:

The very idea of wage-labour requires two difficult conceptual steps. First it requires the abstraction of a man's labour from both his person and the product of his work. When one purchases an object from an independent craftsman … one has not bought his labour but the object, which he had produced in his own time and under his own conditions of work. But when one hires labour, one purchases an abstraction, labour-power, which the purchaser then uses at a time and under conditions which he, the purchaser, not the "owner" of the labour-power, determines (and for which he normally pays after he has consumed it). Second, the wage labour system requires the establishment of a method of measuring the labour one has purchased, for purposes of payment, commonly by introducing a second abstraction, namely labour-time.[1]

The wage is the monetary measure corresponding to the standard units of working time (or to a standard amount of accomplished work, defined as a piece rate). The earliest such unit of time, still frequently used, is the day of work. The invention of clocks coincided with the elaborating of subdivisions of time for work, of which the hour became the most common, underlying the concept of an hourly wage.[2][3] GEIA SAS RE KOPELIA

Wages were paid in the Middle Kingdom of Ancient Egypt,[4] Ancient Greece,[5] and Ancient Rome.[5]
Determinants of wage rates[edit]
Depending on the structure and traditions of different economies around the world, wage rates will be influenced by market forces (supply and demand), legislation, and tradition. Market forces are perhaps more dominant in the United States, while tradition, social structure and seniority, perhaps play a greater role in Japan.[6]
See also: Efficiency wage
Wage Differences[edit]
See also: Racial wage gap in the United States and Gender pay gap
Even in countries where market forces primarily set wage rates, studies show that there are still differences in remuneration for work based on sex and race. For example, according to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, in 2007 women of all races made approximately 80% of the median wage of their male counterparts. This is likely due to the supply and demand for women in the market because of family obligations. [7]Similarly, white men made about 84% the wage of Asian men, and black men 64%.[8] These are overall averages and are not adjusted for the type, amount, and quality of work done.
Wages in the United States[edit]




Historical graph of real wages in the US from 1964 to 2005.


See also: Minimum wage and Minimum wage in the United States
Seventy-five million workers earned hourly wages in the United States in 2012, making up 59% of employees.[9] In the United States, wages for most workers are set by market forces, or else by collective bargaining, where a labor union negotiates on the workers' behalf. The Fair Labor Standards Act establishes a minimum wage at the federal level that all states must abide by, among other provisions. Fourteen states and a number of cities have set their own minimum wage rates that are higher than the federal level. For certain federal or state government contacts, employers must pay the so-called prevailing wage as determined according to the Davis-Bacon Act or its state equivalent. Activists have undertaken to promote the idea of a living wage rate which account for living expenses and other basic necessities, setting the living wage rate much higher than current minimum wage laws require. The minimum wage rate is there to protect the well being of the working class. [10]
U.S. Federal income tax withholding[edit]
For purposes of federal income tax withholding, 26 U.S.C. § 3401(a) defines the term "wages" specifically for chapter 24 of the Internal Revenue Code:
"For purposes of this chapter, the term “wages” means all remuneration (other than fees paid to a public official) for services performed by an employee for his employer, including the cash value of all remuneration (including benefits) paid in any medium other than cash;" In addition to requiring that the remuneration must be for "services performed by an employee for his employer," the definition goes on to list 23 exclusions that must also be applied.[11]
See also[edit]

Compensation of employees
Employee benefit (non-monetary compensation in exchange for labor)
Employment
Labour in Economics
List of countries by average wage
Performance-related pay
Wage labour
Wage share
Real wage
List of sovereign states in Europe by net average wage
Marginal factor cost

Political science:

Labour power
Proletarian
Working class
Wage slavery

References[edit]


^ Finley, Moses I. (1973). The ancient economy. Berkeley: University of California Press. p.&#160;65. ISBN&#160;9780520024366.&#160;
^ Thompson, E. P. (1967). "Time, Work-Discipline, and Industrial Capitalism". Past and Present 38: 56–97. doi:10.1093/past/38.1.56. JSTOR&#160;649749.&#160;
^ Dohrn-van Rossum, Gerhard,, (1996). History of the hour: Clocks and modern temporal orders. Thomas Dunlap (trans.). Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ISBN&#160;9780226155104.&#160;
^ Ezzamel, Mahmoud (July 2004). "Work Organization in the Middle Kingdom, Ancient Egypt". Organization 11 (4): 497–537. doi:10.1177/1350508404044060. ISSN&#160;1350-5084. Retrieved 2014-02-13.&#160;
^ a b Finley, Moses I. (1973). The ancient economy. Berkeley: University of California Press. ISBN&#160;9780520024366.&#160;
^ [1] – Education 2020 Homeschool console, Vocabulary Assignment, definition entry for "wage rate" (may require login to view)
^ Magnusson, Charlotta. "Why Is There A Gender Wage Gap According To Occupational Prestige?." Acta Sociologica (Sage Publications, Ltd.) 53.2 (2010): 99-117. Academic Search Complete. Web. 26 Feb. 2015.
^ U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. "Earnings of Women and Men by Race and Ethnicity, 2007" Accessed June 29, 2012
^ "Employees" as a category excludes all those who are self-employed, and this statistics only considers workers over the age of 16. U.S. Department of Labor. Bureau of Labor Statistics (2013-02-26), Characteristics of Minimum Wage Workers: 2012&#160;
^ Tennant, Michael. "Minimum Wage The Ups &amp; Downs." New American (08856540) 30.12 (2014): 10-16. Academic Search Complete. Web. 26 Feb. 2015.
^ USC 26 § 3401(a)


Further reading[edit]

Galbraith, James Kenneth. Created Unequal: the Crisis in American Pay, in series, Twentieth Century Fund Book[s]. New York: Free Press, 1998. ISBN 0-684-84988-7

External links[edit]



Look up wage in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Wages.





Wikiquote has quotations related to: Wage



Lebergott, Stanley (2002). "Wages and Working Conditions". In David R. Henderson (ed.). Concise Encyclopedia of Economics (1st ed.). Library of Economics and Liberty.&#160; OCLC&#160;317650570, 50016270 and 163149563
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics
Wealth of Nations – click Chapter 8
Understanding Capitalism Part III: Wages and Labor Markets – Critical of capitalism
U.S. Department of Labor: Minimum Wage Laws – Different laws by State
Average U.S. farm and non-farm wage
LaborFair Resources – Link to Fair Labor Practices
The Truth Behind Wages in Mining – How Wages are measured and Current Standards for Mining Professionals
Database Central Europe – Data on average wages in Central Europe and in Emerging Markets
Salary and wages data collection – Salary and wages data collection
Prices and Wages library guide - Prices and Wages research guide at the University of Missouri libraries









v
t
e


Employment






Classifications



Casual
Contingent
Full-time
Part-time
Self-employed
Skilled
Independent contractor
Temporary
Tenure
Unskilled
Wage labour








Hiring



Application
Background check
Business networking
Contract
Cover letter
Curriculum Vitæ (CV)
Drug testing
e-recruitment
Employment counsellor
Executive search
Induction programme
Job fair
Job fraud
Job hunting
Job interview
Labour brokering
Overqualification
Onboarding
Personality-Job Fit Theory
Person-environment fit
Probation
Reference
Résumé
Simultaneous recruiting of new graduates
Underemployment
Work-at-home scheme








Roles



Co-op
Employee
Employer
Internship
Job
Numerary
Permanent
Permatemp
Supernumerary
Supervisor
Volunteer








Worker class



Blue-collar
Gold-collar
Green-collar
Grey-collar
Pink-collar
White-collar








Career and training



Apprenticeship
Avocation
Career assessment
Career counseling
Career development
Coaching
Creative class
Education

Continuing education
Continuing professional development
E-learning
Employability
Further education
Graduate school
Induction training
Initial Professional Development
Knowledge worker
Licensure
Lifelong learning
Practice-based professional learning
Professional association
Professional certification
Professional development
Professional school
Reflective practice
Retraining
Vocational education
Vocational school
Vocational university


Mentorship
Occupational Outlook Handbook
Practice firm
Profession
Tradesman
Vocation








Attendance



Break
Career break
Furlough
Gap year
Leave of absence
Long service leave
No call, no show
Sabbatical
Sick leave
Time clock








Schedules



35-hour workweek
Eight-hour day
Flextime
Four-day week
Overtime
Retroactive overtime
Shift work
Telecommuting
Working time
Workweek and weekend








Wages and salaries



Income bracket
Income tax
Living wage
Maximum wage
National average salary

World
Europe


Minimum wage

Canada
Hong Kong
Europe
USA


Progressive wage

Singapore


Overtime rate
Paid time off
Performance-related pay
Salary
Salary cap
Working poor








Benefits



Annual leave
Casual Friday
Day care
Disability insurance
Health insurance
Life insurance
Parental leave
Pension
Sick leave
Take-home vehicle








Safety and health



Epilepsy and employment
Human factors and ergonomics
Industrial noise
Protective clothing
Occupational burnout
Occupational disease
Occupational exposure limit
Occupational health psychology
Occupational injury
Occupational stress
Repetitive strain injury
Sick building syndrome
Work accident

Occupational fatality


Workers' compensation
Workplace phobia
Workplace wellness








Equality



Affirmative action
Equal pay for women








Infractions



Corporate abuse

Accounting scandals
Corporate behaviour
Corporate crime
Control fraud
Corporate scandals


Discrimination
Dress code
Employee handbook
Employee monitoring
Evaluation
Labour law
Sexual harassment
Sleeping while on duty
Wage theft
Whistleblower
Workplace bullying
Workplace harassment
Workplace incivility








Willingness



Civil conscription
Conscription
Dead-end job
Extreme careerism
Job satisfaction
Organizational commitment
McJob
Refusal of work
Slavery

Bonded labor
Human trafficking
Labor camp
Penal labour
Peonage
Truck system
Unfree labour
Wage slavery


Workaholic
Work aversion
Work ethic
Work–life balance

Downshifting
Slow living










Termination



At-will employment
Dismissal

Banishment room
Constructive dismissal
Wrongful dismissal


Employee exit management
Exit interview
Layoff
Notice period
Pink slip
Resignation

Letter of resignation


Restructuring
Retirement

Mandatory retirement
Retirement age


Severance package

Golden handshake
Golden parachute


Turnover








Unemployment



Barriers to Employment
Depression

Great Depression
Long Depression


Discouraged worker
Frictional unemployment
Full employment
Graduate unemployment
Involuntary unemployment
Jobless recovery
Phillips curve
Recession

Great Recession
Great Recession job losses
List of recessions
Recession-proof job


Types of unemployment
Unemployment Convention
Unemployment benefits
Unemployment extension
Unemployment insurance
Unemployment rates

Employment rates
Employment-to-population ratio


Reserve army of labour
Structural unemployment
Technological unemployment
Wage curve
Youth unemployment











 See also templates


Aspects of corporations
Aspects of jobs
Aspects of occupations
Aspects of organizations
Aspects of workplaces
Corporate titles
Organized labor















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wage&amp;oldid=690908628"					
				Categories: Employment compensationLabor economicsNational accountsHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from October 2009All articles needing additional referencesCommons category with local link same as on Wikidata				
							
		
		
			