


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Winter sport
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				



Ski resort Jasná in Central Slovakia


A winter sport is a sport which is played in winter.[1] Most such sports are variations of skiing, ice skating and sledding. Traditionally such sports were only played in cold areas during winter, but artificial snow and ice allow more flexibility.
Common individual sports include cross-country skiing, Alpine skiing, snowboarding, ski jumping, speed skating, figure skating, luge, skeleton, bobsleigh and snowmobiling. Common team sports include ice hockey, curling and bandy. Based on the number of participants, ice hockey is the world's most popular winter sport, followed by bandy.[2] Winter sports often have their own multi-sport tournaments, such as the Winter Olympic Games.



Contents


1 History
2 List of winter sports

2.1 Ice skating
2.2 Skiing
2.3 Sledding
2.4 Snowboarding
2.5 Snowmobiling
2.6 Team sports
2.7 Other Sports
2.8 Recreational sports


3 Notable winter sporting events
4 See also
5 References
6 External links



History[edit]
Snow and ice during the winter time has led to other means of transportation, such as sledges, skis and skates. This also led to different pastimes and sports being developed in the winter season as compared to other times of the year. Naturally, winter sports are more popular in countries with longer winter seasons.
While most wintersports are played outside, ice hockey, speed skating and to some extent bandy have moved indoors starting in the mid-20th Century.
List of winter sports[edit]
Note: the Olympic rings next to a sport indicates that this particular sport is included in the Winter Olympic Games, as of the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi. The Paralympic logo indicates the same for a sport not in the Olympics but in the Winter Paralympic Games.
Ice skating[edit]

Figure skating 
Short-track speed skating 
Speed skating 

Skiing[edit]




Skiing






United States biathlete Jeremy Teela at the 2002 Winter Olympics.



Acroski
Alpine skiing 
Biathlon 
Cross-country skiing 
Freestyle skiing 
Kite skiing
Mogul skiing 
Monoskiing
Newschool skiing
Nordic combined 
Ski archery
Skiboarding
Skibob
Skijoring
Ski jumping 
Snowkiting
Speed skiing
Speed riding
Telemark skiing
Winter pentathlon

Sledding[edit]




An East German bobsleigh in 1951, Oberhof track, Germany


Sports that use sleds going down ice tracks or pulled by something:

Bobsled 
Dogsled racing
Ice blocking
Luge 
Skeleton 
Wok racing

Snowboarding[edit]

Alpine snowboarding 
Boardercross 
Slalom 
Snowskating
Slopestyle 

Snowmobiling[edit]




A snowmobile tour at Yellowstone National Park.



Free style
Snocross
Recreation
Cross-country
Hill climbing

Team sports[edit]




The Soviet Union hosted many Bandy World Championships.



Bandy
Broomball
Curling 
Ice hockey 
Ice stock sport
Military patrol
Ringette
Rink bandy
Sledge hockey 
Snowball fight - (last one standing)
Snowman building - highest one
Snow rugby
Snow snake
Synchronized skating

Other Sports[edit]

Ice Climbing
Ice speedway
Snowbiking
Snow Drifting

Recreational sports[edit]




Snowman


Some 'sports' are competed (or simply enjoyed) on a more casual basis, often by children:

Building snowmen
Building snow fortresses or digging snow caves
Ice boating or sailing
Ice fishing
Ice swimming
Shinny
Snowball fight
Tobogganing
Snowshoeing

Notable winter sporting events[edit]




A postage stamp issued by East Germany in 1968 in commemoration of their first Winter Olympics as an independent country



Winter Olympic Games
Nordic Games
World Cup
Arctic Winter Games
Asian Winter Games
Winter Paralympic Games
Winter Universiade
Winter Dew Tour
Winter X Games
Winter X Games Europe

See also[edit]

Winter carnival
Outline of sports
Outdoor activity

References[edit]


^ "winter sports, noun". Chambers 21st Century Dictionary. Retrieved Feb 22, 2010.&#160;
^ "Bandyn är världens näst största vinteridrott" (in Swedish). Bandyworld. 6 October 2015. Retrieved 18 November 2015.&#160;



Syers, Edgar; Syers, Madge (eds.) (1908) The Book of Winter Sports London: Edward Arnold OCLC 4531800
Dier, J. C. (ed.) (1912) The Book of Winter Sports, an attempt to catch the spirit of the keen joys of the winter season The Macmillan Company
Jessup, Elon Huntington (1923) Snow and ice sports: a winter manual E. P. Dutton &amp; company
Cereghini (1955) Five Thousand Years of Winter Sports Edizioni del Milione
Liebers, Arthur (1971) The Complete Book of Winter Sports NY: Coward, McCann &amp; Geoghegan
"Winter Sports: Sport guides". BBC Online. 2010-02-20. Retrieved Feb 22, 2010.&#160;

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Winter sports.





Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Winter sport.





Look up winter sport in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.









					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Winter_sport&amp;oldid=691350778"					
				Categories: Winter sportsHidden categories: CS1 Swedish-language sources (sv)Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata				
							
		
		
			