


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Al-Kindi
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				"Alkindus" redirects here. For the insect (bug), see Alkindus (genus).
For the surname, see Al-Kindi (surname).


al-Kindī


Born
c. 801
Basra, Mesopotamia


Died
c. 873 (aged approx. 72)
Baghdad, Mesopotamia





Era
Medieval era (Islamic Golden Age)


Region
Middle East, Arab world, Muslim world


School
Islamic theology, philosophy



Main interests

Philosophy, logic, ethics, mathematics, physics, chemistry, psychology, pharmacology, medicine, metaphysics, cosmology, astrology, music theory, Islamic theology (kalam)




Influences


Ancient Greek philosophy








Influenced


Abu Zayd al-Balkhi, Ahmad ibn al-Tayyib al-Sarakhsi, Isaac Israeli ben Solomon, Abu Ma'shar al-Balkhi, Miskawayh,[1] Robert Grosseteste






Abu Yūsuf Yaʻqūb ibn ʼIsḥāq aṣ-Ṣabbāḥ al-Kindī (Arabic: أبو يوسف يعقوب بن إسحاق الصبّاح الكندي‎, Latin: Alkindus) (c. 801–873 AD), known as "the Philosopher of the Arabs", was a Muslim Arab philosopher, polymath, mathematician, physician and musician. Al-Kindi was the first of the Muslim peripatetic philosophers, and is unanimously hailed as the "father of Islamic or Arabic philosophy"[2][3][4] for his synthesis, adaptation and promotion of Greek and Hellenistic philosophy in the Muslim world.[5]
Al-Kindi was a descendant of the Kinda tribe. He was born in Basra and educated in Baghdad.[6] Al-Kindi became a prominent figure in the House of Wisdom, and a number of Abbasid Caliphs appointed him to oversee the translation of Greek scientific and philosophical texts into the Arabic language. This contact with "the philosophy of the ancients" (as Greek philosophy was often referred to by Muslim scholars) had a profound effect on his intellectual development, and led him to write hundreds of original treatises of his own on a range of subjects ranging from metaphysics, ethics, logic and psychology, to medicine, pharmacology,[7] mathematics, astronomy, astrology and optics, and further afield to more practical topics like perfumes, swords, jewels, glass, dyes, zoology, tides, mirrors, meteorology and earthquakes.[8][9]
In the field of mathematics, al-Kindi played an important role in introducing Indian numerals to the Islamic and Christian world.[10] He was a pioneer in cryptanalysis and devised several new methods of breaking ciphers.[11] Using his mathematical and medical expertise, he was able to develop a scale that would allow doctors to quantify the potency of their medication.[12]
The central theme underpinning al-Kindi's philosophical writings is the compatibility between philosophy and other "orthodox" Islamic sciences, particularly theology. And many of his works deal with subjects that theology had an immediate interest in. These include the nature of God, the soul and prophetic knowledge.[13] But despite the important role he played in making philosophy accessible to Muslim intellectuals, his own philosophical output was largely overshadowed by that of al-Farabi and very few of his texts are available for modern scholars to examine.



Contents


1 Life
2 Accomplishments

2.1 Philosophy
2.2 Astronomy
2.3 Optics
2.4 Medicine
2.5 Chemistry
2.6 Mathematics
2.7 Cryptography
2.8 Music theory


3 Philosophical thought

3.1 Influences
3.2 Metaphysics
3.3 Epistemology
3.4 The soul and the afterlife
3.5 The relationship between revelation and philosophy
3.6 Critics and patrons


4 References
5 Bibliography

5.1 English translations
5.2 Studies


6 External links



Life[edit]
Al-Kindi was born in Kufa to an aristocratic family of the Kinda tribe, descended from the chieftain al-Ash'ath ibn Qays, a contemporary of Muhammad. The family belonged to the most prominent families of the tribal nobility of Kufa in the early Islamic period, until it lost much of its power following the revolt of Abd al-Rahman ibn Muhammad ibn al-Ash'ath.[14] His father Ishaq was the governor of Kufa, and al-Kindi received his preliminary education there. He later went to complete his studies in Baghdad, where he was patronized by the Abbasid caliphs al-Ma'mun (ruled 813–833) and al-Mu'tasim (r. 833–842). On account of his learning and aptitude for study, al-Ma'mun appointed him to the House of Wisdom, a recently established centre for the translation of Greek philosophical and scientific texts, in Baghdad. He was also well known for his beautiful calligraphy, and at one point was employed as a calligrapher by al-Mutawakkil.[15]
When al-Ma'mun died, his brother, al-Mu'tasim became Caliph. Al-Kindi's position would be enhanced under al-Mu'tasim, who appointed him as a tutor to his son. But on the accession of al-Wathiq (r. 842–847), and especially of al-Mutawakkil (r. 847–861), al-Kindi's star waned. There are various theories concerning this: some attribute al-Kindi's downfall to scholarly rivalries at the House of Wisdom; others refer to al-Mutawakkil’s often violent persecution of unorthodox Muslims (as well as of non-Muslims); at one point al-Kindi was beaten and his library temporarily confiscated. Henry Corbin, an authority on Islamic studies, says that in 873, al-Kindi died "a lonely man", in Baghdad during the reign of al-Mu'tamid (r. 870–892).[15]
After his death, al-Kindi's philosophical works quickly fell into obscurity and many of them were lost even to later Islamic scholars and historians. Felix Klein-Franke suggests a number of reasons for this: aside from the militant orthodoxy of al-Mutawakkil, the Mongols also destroyed countless libraries during their invasion. However, he says the most probable cause of this was that his writings never found popularity amongst subsequent influential philosophers such as al-Farabi and Avicenna, who ultimately overshadowed him.[16]
Accomplishments[edit]
Al-Kindi was a master of many different areas of thought and was held to be one of the greatest Islamic philosophers of his time.
The Italian Renaissance scholar Geralomo Cardano (1501–1575) considered him one of the twelve greatest minds of the Middle Ages.[17] According to Ibn al-Nadim, al-Kindi wrote at least two hundred and sixty books, contributing heavily to geometry (thirty-two books), medicine and philosophy (twenty-two books each), logic (nine books), and physics (twelve books).[18] His influence in the fields of physics, mathematics, medicine, philosophy and music were far-reaching and lasted for several centuries. Although most of his books have been lost over the centuries, a few have survived in the form of Latin translations by Gerard of Cremona, and others have been rediscovered in Arabic manuscripts; most importantly, twenty-four of his lost works were located in the mid-twentieth century in a Turkish library.[19]
Philosophy[edit]
His greatest contribution to the development of Islamic philosophy was his efforts to make Greek thought both accessible and acceptable to a Muslim audience. Al-Kindi carried out this mission from the House of Wisdom (Bayt al-Hikma), an institute of translation and learning patronized by the Abbasid Caliphs, in Baghdad.[15] As well as translating many important texts, much of what was to become standard Arabic philosophical vocabulary originated with al-Kindi; indeed, if it had not been for him, the work of philosophers like Al-Farabi, Avicenna, and al-Ghazali might not have been possible.[20]
In his writings, one of al-Kindi's central concerns was to demonstrate the compatibility between philosophy and natural theology on the one hand, and revealed or speculative theology on the other (though in fact he rejected speculative theology). Despite this, he did make clear that he believed revelation was a superior source of knowledge to reason because it guaranteed matters of faith that reason could not uncover. And while his philosophical approach was not always original, and was even considered clumsy by later thinkers (mainly because he was the first philosopher writing in the Arabic language), he successfully incorporated Aristotelian and (especially) neo-Platonist thought into an Islamic philosophical framework. This was an important factor in the introduction and popularization of Greek philosophy in the Muslim intellectual world.[21]
Astronomy[edit]
Al-Kindi took his view of the solar system from Ptolemy, who placed the Earth at the centre of a series of concentric spheres, in which the known heavenly bodies (the Moon, Mercury, Venus, the Sun, Mars, Jupiter, and the stars) are embedded. In one of his treatises on the subject, he says that these bodies are rational entities, whose circular motion is in obedience to and worship of God. Their role, al-Kindi believes, is to act as instruments for divine providence. He furnishes empirical evidence as proof for this assertion; different seasons are marked by particular arrangements of the planets and stars (most notably the sun); the appearance and manner of people varies according to the arrangement of heavenly bodies situated above their homeland.[22]
However, he is ambiguous when it comes to the actual process by which the heavenly bodies affect the material world. One theory he posits in his works is from Aristotle, who conceived that the movement of these bodies causes friction in the sub-lunar region, which stirs up the primary elements of earth, fire, air and water, and these combine to produce everything in the material world. An alternative view found his treatise On Rays is that the planets exercise their influence in straight lines. In each of these, he presents two fundamentally different views of physical interaction; action by contact and action at a distance. This dichotomy is duplicated in his writings on optics.[23]
Some of the notable astrological works by al-Kindi include:[24]

The Book of the Judgement of the Stars, including The Forty Chapters, on questions and elections.
On the Stellar Rays.
Several epistles on weather and meteorology, including De mutatione temporum, ("On the Changing of the Weather").
Treatise on the Judgement of Eclipses.
Treatise on the Dominion of the Arabs and its Duration (used to predict the end of Arab rule).
The Choices of Days (on elections).
On the Revolutions of the Years (on mundane astrology and natal revolutions).
De Signis Astronomiae Applicitis as Mediciam ‘On the Signs of Astronomy as applied to Medicine’
Treatise on the Spirituality of the Planets.

Optics[edit]
Two major theories of optics appear in the writings of al-Kindi; Aristotelian and Euclidian. Aristotle had believed that in order for the eye to perceive an object, both the eye and the object must be in contact with a transparent medium (such as air) that is filled with light. When these criteria are met, the "sensible form" of the object is transmitted through the medium to the eye. On the other hand, Euclid proposed that vision occurred in straight lines when "rays" from the eye reached an illuminated object and were reflected back. As with his theories on Astrology, the dichotomy of contact and distance is present in al-Kindi's writings on this subject as well.
The factor which al-Kindi relied upon to determine which of these theories was most correct was how adequately each one explained the experience of seeing. For example, Aristotle's theory was unable to account for why the angle at which an individual sees an object affects his perception of it. For example, why a circle viewed from the side will appear as a line. According to Aristotle, the complete sensible form of a circle should be transmitted to the eye and it should appear as a circle. On the other hand, Euclidean optics provided a geometric model that was able to account for this, as well as the length of shadows and reflections in mirrors, because Euclid believed that the visual "rays" could only travel in straight lines (something which is commonly accepted in modern science). For this reason, al-Kindi considered the latter preponderant.[25]
Through the Latin version of the De Aspectibus, Al-Kindi partly influenced the optical investigations of Robert Grosseteste[26] and Roger Bacon.
Medicine[edit]
There are more than thirty treatises attributed to al-Kindi in the field of medicine, in which he was chiefly influenced by the ideas of Galen.[27] His most important work in this field is probably De Gradibus, in which he demonstrates the application of mathematics to medicine, particularly in the field of pharmacology. For example, he developed a mathematical scale to quantify the strength of drug and a system, based the phases of the moon, that would allow a doctor to determine in advance the most critical days of a patient's illness.[12]
Chemistry[edit]
As an advanced chemist, he was also an opponent of alchemy; he debunked the myth that simple, base metals could be transformed into precious metals such as gold or silver.[28] He is also credited as the first distillers of alcohol, creating the "Alkindus distiller" which was used for the distillation of alcohol.
Mathematics[edit]
Al-Kindi authored works on a number of important mathematical subjects, including arithmetic, geometry, the Indian numbers, the harmony of numbers, lines and multiplication with numbers, relative quantities, measuring proportion and time, and numerical procedures and cancellation.[10] He also wrote four volumes, On the Use of the Indian Numerals (Ketab fi Isti'mal al-'Adad al-Hindi) which contributed greatly to diffusion of the Indian system of numeration in the Middle-East and the West. In geometry, among other works, he wrote on the theory of parallels. Also related to geometry were two works on optics. One of the ways in which he made use of mathematics as a philosopher was to attempt to disprove the eternity of the world by demonstrating that actual infinity is a mathematical and logical absurdity.[29]




The first page of al-Kindi's manuscript "On Deciphering Cryptographic Messages", containing the oldest known description of cryptanalysis by frequency analysis.


Cryptography[edit]
Al-Kindi is credited with developing a method whereby variations in the frequency of the occurrence of letters could be analyzed and exploited to break ciphers (i.e. cryptanalysis by frequency analysis).[11]
Music theory[edit]
Al-Kindi was the first great theoretician of music in the Arab-Islamic world. He is known to have written fifteen treatises on music theory, but only five have survived. He added a fifth string to the 'ud.[30] His works included discussions on the therapeutic value of music[31] and what he regarded as "cosmological connections" of music.[32]
Philosophical thought[edit]
Influences[edit]
While Muslim intellectuals were already acquainted with Greek philosophy (especially logic), al-Kindi is credited with being the first real Muslim philosopher.[33] His own thought was largely influenced by the Neo-Platonic philosophy of Proclus, Plotinus and John Philoponus, amongst others, although he does appear to have borrowed ideas from other Hellenistic schools as well.[34] He makes many references to Aristotle in his writings, but these are often unwittingly re-interpreted in a Neo-Platonic framework. This trend is most obvious in areas such as metaphysics and the nature of God as a causal entity.[35] Earlier experts had suggested that he was influenced by the Mutazilite school of theology, because of the mutual concern both he and they demonstrated for maintaining the singularity (tawhid) of God. However, such agreements are now considered incidental, as further study has shown that they disagreed on a number of equally important topics.[36]
Metaphysics[edit]
According to al-Kindi, the goal of metaphysics is the knowledge of God. For this reason, he does not make a clear distinction between philosophy and theology, because he believes they are both concerned with the same subject. Later philosophers, particularly al-Farabi and Avicenna, would strongly disagree with him on this issue, by saying that metaphysics is actually concerned with being qua being, and as such, the nature of God is purely incidental.[13]
Central to al-Kindi's understanding of metaphysics is God's absolute oneness, which he considers an attribute uniquely associated with God (and therefore not shared with anything else). By this he means that while we may think of any existent thing as being "one", it is in fact both "one" and many". For example, he says that while a body is one, it is also composed of many different parts. A person might say "I see an elephant", by which he means "I see one elephant", but the term 'elephant' refers to a species of animal that contains many. Therefore, only God is absolutely one, both in being and in concept, lacking any multiplicity whatsoever. Some feel this understanding entails a very rigorous negative theology because it implies that any description which can be predicated to anything else, cannot be said about God.[36][37]
In addition to absolute oneness, al-Kindi also described God as the Creator. This means that He acts as both a final and efficient cause. Unlike later Muslim Neo-Platonic philosophers (who asserted that the universe existed as a result of God's existence "overflowing", which is a passive act), al-Kindi conceived of God as an active agent. In fact, of God as the agent, because all other intermediary agencies are contingent upon Him.[38] The key idea here is that God "acts" through created intermediaries, which in turn "act" on one another – through a chain of cause and effect – to produce the desired result. In reality, these intermediary agents do not "act" at all, they are merely a conduit for God's own action.[35] This is especially significant in the development of Islamic philosophy, as it portrayed the "first cause" and "unmoved mover" of Aristotelian philosophy as compatible with the concept of God according to Islamic revelation.[39]
Epistemology[edit]




Ancient Greek philosophers such as Plato and Aristotle would become highly revered in the medieval Islamic world.


Al-Kindi theorized that there was a separate, incorporeal and universal intellect (known as the "First Intellect"). It was the first of God's creation and the intermediary through which all other things came into creation. Aside from its obvious metaphysical importance, it was also crucial to al-Kindi's epistemology, which was influenced by Platonic realism.[40]
According to Plato, everything that exists in the material world corresponds to certain universal forms in the heavenly realm. These forms are really abstract concepts such as a species, quality or relation, which apply to all physical objects and beings. For example, a red apple has the quality of "redness" derived from the appropriate universal. However, al-Kindi says that human intellects are only potentially able to comprehend these. This potential is actualized by the First Intellect, which is perpetually thinking about all of the universals. He argues that the external agency of this intellect is necessary by saying that human beings cannot arrive at a universal concept merely through perception. In other words, an intellect cannot understand the species of a thing simply by examining one or more of its instances. According to him, this will only yield an inferior "sensible form", and not the universal form which we desire. The universal form can only be attained through contemplation and actualization by the First Intellect.[41]
The analogy he provides to explain his theory is that of wood and fire. Wood, he argues, is potentially hot (just as a human is potentially thinking about a universal), and therefore requires something else which is already hot (such as fire) to actualize this. This means that for the human intellect to think about something, the First Intellect must already be thinking about it. Therefore he says that the First Intellect must always be thinking about everything. Once the human intellect comprehends a universal by this process, it becomes part of the individual's "acquired intellect" and can be thought about whenever he or she wishes.[42]
The soul and the afterlife[edit]
Al-Kindi says that the soul is a simple, immaterial substance, which is related to the material world only because of its faculties which operate through the physical body. To explain the nature of our worldly existence, he (borrowing from Epictetus) compares it to a ship which has, during the course of its ocean voyage, temporarily anchored itself at an island and allowed its passengers to disembark. The implicit warning is that those passengers who linger too long on the island may be left behind when the ship sets sail again. Here, al-Kindi displays a stoic concept, that we must not become attached to material things (represented by the island), as they will invariably be taken away from us (when the ship sets sail again). He then connects this with a Neo-Platonist idea, by saying that our soul can be directed towards the pursuit of desire or the pursuit of intellect; the former will tie it to the body, so that when the body dies, it will also die, but the latter will free it from the body and allow it to survive "in the light of the Creator" in a realm of pure intelligence.[43]
The relationship between revelation and philosophy[edit]
In the view of al-Kindi, prophecy and philosophy were two different routes to arrive at the truth. He contrasts the two positions in four ways. Firstly, while a person must undergo a long period of training and study to become a philosopher, prophecy is bestowed upon someone by God. Secondly, the philosopher must arrive at the truth by his own devices (and with great difficulty), whereas the prophet has the truth revealed to him by God. Thirdly, the understanding of the prophet – being divinely revealed – is clearer and more comprehensive than that of the philosopher. Fourthly, the way in which the prophet is able to express this understanding to the ordinary people is superior. Therefore al-Kindi says the prophet is superior in two fields: the ease and certainty with which he receives the truth, and the way in which he presents it. However, the crucial implication is that the content of the prophet's and the philosopher's knowledge is the same. This, says Adamson, demonstrates how limited the superiority al-Kindi afforded to prophecy was.[44][45]
In addition to this, al-Kindi adopted a naturalistic view of prophetic visions. He argued that, through the faculty of "imagination" as conceived of in Aristotelian philosophy, certain "pure" and well-prepared souls, were able to receive information about future events. Significantly, he does not attribute such visions or dreams to revelation from God, but instead explains that imagination enables human beings to receive the "form" of something without needing to perceive the physical entity to which it refers. Therefore, it would seem to imply that anyone who has purified themselves would be able to receive such visions. It is precisely this idea, amongst other naturalistic explanations of prophetic miracles that al-Ghazali attacks in his Incoherence of the Philosophers.[46]
Critics and patrons[edit]
While al-Kindi appreciated the usefulness of philosophy in answering questions of a religious nature, there would be many Islamic thinkers who were not as enthusiastic about its potential. But it would be incorrect to assume that they opposed philosophy simply because it was a "foreign science". Oliver Leaman, an expert on Islamic philosophy, points out that the objections of notable theologians are rarely directed at philosophy itself, but rather at the conclusions the philosophers arrived at. Even al-Ghazali, who is famous for his critique of the philosophers, was himself an expert in philosophy and logic. And his criticism was that they arrived at theologically erroneous conclusions. The three most serious of these, in his view, were believing in the co-eternity of the universe with God, denying the bodily resurrection, and asserting that God only has knowledge of abstract universals, not of particular things (not all philosophers subscribed to these same views).[47]
During his life, al-Kindi was fortunate enough to enjoy the patronage of the pro-Mutazilite Caliphs al-Ma'mun and al-Mu'tasim, which meant he could carry out his philosophical speculations with relative ease. In his own time, al-Kindi would be criticized for extolling the "intellect" as being the most immanent creation in proximity to God, which was commonly held to be the position of the angels.[48] He also engaged in disputations with the Mutazilites, whom he attacked for their belief in atoms.[49] But the real role of al-Kindi in the conflict between philosophers and theologians would be to prepare the ground for debate. His works, says Deborah Black, contained all the seeds of future controversy that would be fully realized in al-Ghazali's Incoherence of the Philosophers.[50]
References[edit]


^ Adamson, pp.12–13
^ Nasr, Seyyed Hossein (2006). Islamic philosophy from its origin to the present&#160;: philosophy in the land of prophecy. State Univ. of New York Press. pp.&#160;137–138. ISBN&#160;0-7914-6799-6.&#160;
^ Abboud, Tony (2006). Al-Kindi&#160;: the father of Arab philosophy. Rosen Pub. Group. ISBN&#160;1-4042-0511-X.&#160;
^ Greenberg, Yudit Kornberg (2008). Encyclopedia of love in world religions 1. ABC-CLIO. p.&#160;405. ISBN&#160;1-85109-980-8.&#160;
^ Klein-Frank, F. Al-Kindi. In Leaman, O &amp; Nasr, H (2001). History of Islamic Philosophy. London: Routledge. p 165
^ http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/al-kindi/
^ Corbin, Henry (1993). History of Islamic philosophy. Kegan Paul International. p.&#160;155. ISBN&#160;0-7103-0416-1.&#160;
^ Adamson, Peter (2006). "Al-Kindı¯ and the reception of Greek philosophy". In Adamson, Peter; Taylor, R. The Cambridge companion to Arabic philosophy. Cambridge University Press. p.&#160;33. ISBN&#160;978-0-521-52069-0.&#160;
^ Adamson, p7
^ a b "Abu Yusuf Yaqub ibn Ishaq al-Sabbah Al-Kindi". Retrieved 2007-01-12.&#160;
^ a b Simon Singh, The Code Book, pgs. 14–20. New York City: Anchor Books, 2000. ISBN 9780385495325
^ a b Klein-Franke, p172
^ a b Adamson, p34
^ Crone, Patricia (1980). Slaves on Horses: The Evolution of the Islamic Polity. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press. pp.&#160;110–111. ISBN&#160;0-521-52940-9.&#160;
^ a b c Corbin, p154
^ Klein-Franke, p166
^ George Satron. Introduction to the History of Science.
^ Corbin, p154-155
^ Klein-Franke, p172-173
^ Adamson, p32-33
^ Klein-Franke, p166-167
^ Adamson, p42
^ Adamson, p43
^ Dykes, B., (2011) The Forty Chapters. Minnesota: Cazimi Press, 2011; pp.5–6
^ Adamson, p45
^ Hendrix, John Shannon; Carman, Charles H., eds. (2010). Renaissance Theories of Vision. Visual Culture in Early Modernity. Ashgate. p.&#160;13. ISBN&#160;1409400247.&#160;
^ P. Prioreschi. Al-Kindi, A Precursor of the Scientific Revolution
^ Klein-Franke, p174
^ Al-Allaf, M. "Al-Kindi's Mathematical Metaphysics" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 January 2007. Retrieved 2007-01-12.&#160;
^ Andrea L. Stanton, Peter J. Seybolt, Edward Ramsamy, Carolyn M. Elliott, eds. (2012). Cultural Sociology of the Middle East, Asia, and Africa: An Encyclopedia. SAGE Publications. p.&#160;87. ISBN&#160;141298176X.&#160;
^ Shehadi, Fadlou (1995). Philosophies of Music in Medieval Islam. Leiden: Brill. p.&#160;35. ISBN&#160;9004101284.&#160;
^ Turner, Howard R. (1997). Science in Medieval Islam: An Illustrated Introduction (3rd pbk. print. ed.). University of Texas Press. p.&#160;49. ISBN&#160;0292781490.&#160;
^ Klein-Frank, p 165
^ Adamson, p37
^ a b Adamson, p36
^ a b Corbin, p155
^ Adamson, p35
^ Klein-Frank, p167
^ Adamson, p39
^ Klein-Frank, p168
^ Adamson, p40-41
^ Adamson, p40
^ Adamson, p41-42
^ Adamson, p46-47
^ Corbin, p156
^ Adamson, p47
^ Leaman, O. (1999). A Brief Introduction to Islamic Philosophy Polity Press. p21. ISBN 0-7456-1961-4
^ Black, p168
^ Black, p169
^ Black, p171


Bibliography[edit]
English translations[edit]

Peter Adamson &amp; Peter E. Pormann (eds.), (2012) The Philosophical Works of al-Kindī, New York: Oxford University Press.

Studies[edit]

Peter Adamson (2007) Al-Kindi, New York: Oxford University Press.
Adamson, Peter; Taylor, Richard C. (10 January 2005). The Cambridge Companion to Arabic Philosophy. Cambridge University Press. ISBN&#160;978-0-521-81743-1. Retrieved 22 May 2011.&#160;
Adamson, Peter (2007). Al-Kindī. Oxford University Press US. ISBN&#160;978-0-19-518142-5. Retrieved 22 May 2011.&#160;
Robert L. Arrington (2001) [ed.] A Companion to the Philosophers. Oxford: Blackwell. ISBN 0-631-22967-1
Henry Corbin (1993). History of Islamic Philosophy. London: Keagan Paul.
Felix Klein-Frank (2001) Al-Kindi. In Oliver Leaman &amp; Hossein Nasr. History of Islamic Philosophy. London: Routledge.

External links[edit]

Al-Kindi entry by Peter Adamson in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
Cooper, Glen M. (2007). "Kindī: Abū Yūsuf Yaʿqūb ibn Isḥāq al‐Kindī". In Thomas Hockey; et al. The Biographical Encyclopedia of Astronomers. New York: Springer. pp.&#160;635–6. ISBN&#160;978-0-387-31022-0.&#160; (PDF version)
Alkindus (Bibliotheca Augustana)
O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Abu Yusuf Yaqub ibn Ishaq al-Sabbah Al-Kindi", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews&#160;.
Al-Kindi – Famous Muslims
Al-Kindi's website – Islamic Philosophy Online
Dr. Mashhad Al-Allaf DOC – Three texts by Al Kindi in the Islamic Philosophy section
Benjamnin N. Dyke's translation of Al-Kindi's Forty Chapters with PDF extracts from the Introduction and main text
 Texts on Wikisource:

"al-Kindi, Abu Yusuf Ya'ḳub ibn Isḥak". New International Encyclopedia. 1905.&#160;
"Kindī". Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). 1911.&#160;
"Kindi, Abu Yusuf Ya'kub Ibn Ishak Al-". Encyclopedia Americana. 1920.&#160;











v
t
e


Islamic philosophy










Fields



Alchemy
Aqidah (theology)
'Aql (intellect)
Cosmology

astrology
medieval astronomy


Eschatology
Ethics
Kalam (dialectic)
Fiqh (jurisprudence)
Logic
Metaphysics
Natural philosophy (physics)
Peace
Madrasah (education)
Medieval science
Medieval psychology
Sufism (mysticism)








Schools



Early
Farabism
Avicennism
Averroism
Illuminationism
Sufi

cosmology
metaphysics


Transcendent theosophy
Traditionalist
Contemporary








Concepts



ʻAṣabīya
Ḥāl
Iʻjaz
ʼIjtihād
ʻlm
ʻIrfān
Ijmāʿ
Maslaha
Nafs
Qadar
Qiyās
Shūrā
Tawḥīd
Ummah















&#160;
Philosophers by century (CE)










9th–10th



Al-Kindi
Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari
Abu al-Abbas Iranshahri
Zakariya Razi
Apharabius
Abu Hatim al-Razi
Al Amiri
Ikhwan al-Safa
Abu Sulayman Sijistani
Ibn Masarrah
Abu Yaqub al-Sijistani








11th



Al-Ghazali
Ibn Miskawayh
Avicenna
Ibn Hazm
Bahmanyār
Mu'ayyad fi'l-Din al-Shirazi
Nasir Khusraw








12th



Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī
Afdal al-Din Kashani
Ahi Evren
Ahmad Yasavi
Ayn-al-Quzat
Averroes
Ibn Tufail
Omar Khayyám
Suhrawardi
Shams Tabrizi








13th



Hajji Bektash Wali
Jalal ad-Din Muhammad Rumi
Ibn Sab’in
Ibn Arabi
al-Abharī
Nasir al-Din Tusi
Fakhr ad-Din ar-Razi
Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi
Sadr al-Din al-Qunawi








14th–16th



Ibn Khaldun
Yunus Emre
Hajji Bayram
Jalaladdin Davani
Sadr ad-Din Dashtaki
Aziz Mahmud Hudayi
Qadi Mir Husayn al-Maybudi
Mahmud Shabistari
Sayyid Haydar Amuli
Dawūd al-Qayṣarī
Jami








17th–19th



Mir Damad
Mir Fendereski
Mulla Sadra
Mohsen Fayz Kashani
Abd al-Razzaq Lahiji
Mujaddid Alf-i-Sani
Rajab Ali Tabrizi
Qazi Sa’id Qumi
Shah Waliullah
Hādī Sabzavārī








20th–present



Muhammad Husayn Tabatabaei
Muhammad Iqbal
Gohar Shahi
Mohammad Baqir al-Sadr
René Guénon
Frithjof Schuon
Martin Lings
Hossein Nasr
Naquib al-Attas
Abdolkarim Soroush
Gholamhossein Ebrahimi Dinani
Taha Abdurrahman
Mohammed Abed al-Jabri
Mohammed Arkoun
Fouad Zakariyya
Reza Davari Ardakani
Ahmad Fardid
Mostafa Malekian
Hasanzadeh Amoli
Javadi Amoli
Partawi Shah






















v
t
e


Mathematics in medieval Islam






Mathematicians





9th century




'Abd al-Hamīd ibn Turk
Sind ibn Ali
Al-Abbās ibn Said al-Jawharī
Al-Ḥajjāj ibn Yūsuf ibn Maṭar
Al-Kindi
Al-Mahani
Banū Mūsā
Hunayn ibn Ishaq
Muḥammad ibn Mūsā al-Khwārizmī
Thābit ibn Qurra
Na'im ibn Musa
Sahl ibn Bishr
Habash al-Hasib al-Marwazi









10th century




Abd al-Rahman al-Sufi
Abū al-Wafā' al-Būzjānī
Abū Ja'far al-Khāzin
Abū Kāmil Shujāʿ ibn Aslam
Abu'l-Hasan al-Uqlidisi
Abu-Mahmud Khojandi
Ahmad ibn Yusuf
Al-Nayrizi
Al-Saghani
Brethren of Purity
Ibn Sahl
Ibn Yunus
Ibrahim ibn Sinan
Muhammad ibn Jābir al-Harrānī al-Battānī
Sinan ibn Thabit
Al-Isfahani
Abu-Mahmud Khojandi
Nazif ibn Yumn
Abū Sahl al-Qūhī









11th century




Abū Ishāq Ibrāhīm al-Zarqālī
Abu Nasr Mansur
Abū Rayḥān al-Bīrūnī
Alhazen
Ibn Muʿādh al-Jayyānī
Al-Karaji
Al-Sijzi
Alī ibn Ahmad al-Nasawī
Avicenna
Ibn Tahir al-Baghdadi
Kushyar ibn Labban
Yusuf al-Mu'taman ibn Hud









12th century




Al-Khazini
Ibn Yahyā al-Maghribī al-Samaw'al
Omar Khayyám
Jabir ibn Aflah
Abu Bakr al-Hassar









13th century




Muhyi al-Dīn al-Maghribī
Nasīr al-Dīn al-Tūsī
Shams al-Dīn al-Samarqandī
Sharaf al-Dīn al-Tūsī
Ibn al‐Ha'im al‐Ishbili
Ibn Abi al-Shukr









14th century




Yaʿīsh ibn Ibrāhīm al-Umawī
Ibn al-Banna' al-Marrakushi
Ibn al-Shatir
Kamāl al-Dīn Fārisī
Al-Khalili
Qotb al-Din Shirazi
Ahmad al-Qalqashandi









15th century




Abū al-Ḥasan ibn ʿAlī al-Qalaṣādī
Ali Qushji
Jamshīd al-Kāshī
Qāḍī Zāda al-Rūmī
Ulugh Beg
Ibn al-Majdi









16th century




Al-Birjandi
Muhammad Baqir Yazdi
Taqi al-Din
Ibn Hamza al-Maghribi
Ibn Ghazi al-Miknasi











Treatises



Almanac
Book of Fixed Stars
Book of Optics
De Gradibus
Encyclopedia of the Brethren of Purity
Tables of Toledo
Tabula Rogeriana
The Compendious Book on Calculation by Completion and Balancing
The Book of Healing
Zij
Zij-i Ilkhani
Zij-i-Sultani








Concepts



Alhazen's problem
Islamic geometric patterns








Centers



Al-Azhar University
Al-Mustansiriya University
House of Knowledge
House of Wisdom
Istanbul observatory of Taqi al-Din
Madrasah
Maktab
Maragheh observatory
University of Al-Karaouine








Influences



Babylonian mathematics
Greek mathematics
Indian mathematics








Influenced



Byzantine mathematics
European mathematics
Indian mathematics
















v
t
e


Astronomy in medieval Islam










&#160;
Topics










Works







Arabic star names
Islamic calendar
ʿAjā'ib al-makhlūqāt wa gharā'ib al-mawjūdāt
Encyclopedia of the Brethren of Purity
Tabula Rogeriana
The Book of Healing








Zij



Alfonsine tables
Huihui Lifa
Book of Fixed Stars
Toledan Tables
Zij-i Ilkhani
Zij-i Sultani
Sullam al-sama'











Instruments



Alidade
Analog computer
Aperture
Armillary sphere
Astrolabe
Astronomical clock
Celestial globe
Compass
Compass rose
Dioptra
Equatorial ring
Equatorium
Globe
Graph paper
Magnifying glass
Mural instrument
Navigational astrolabe
Nebula
Planisphere
Quadrant
Sextant
Shadow square
Sundial
Schema for horizontal sundials
Telescope
Triquetrum








Concepts



Almucantar
Apogee
Astrology in medieval Islam
Astrophysics
Axial tilt
Azimuth
Celestial mechanics
Celestial spheres
Circular orbit
Deferent and epicycle
Earth's rotation
Eccentricity
Ecliptic
Elliptic orbit
Equant
Galaxy
Geocentrism
Gravitational potential energy
Gravity
Heliocentrism
Inertia
Islamic cosmology
Moonlight
Multiverse
Obliquity
Parallax
Precession
Qibla
Salat times
Specific gravity
Spherical Earth
Starlight
Sublunary sphere
Sunlight
Supernova
Temporal finitism
Trepidation
Triangulation
Tusi-couple
Universe








Institutions



Al-Azhar University
House of Knowledge
House of Wisdom
University of al-Karaouine
Observatories

Istanbul (Taqi al-Din)
Maragheh
Samarkand (Ulugh Beg)










Influences



Babylonian astronomy
Egyptian astronomy
Hellenistic astronomy
Indian astronomy








Influenced



Byzantine science
Chinese astronomy
Medieval European science
Indian astronomy


















&#160;
Astronomers













by century (CE
AD)








8th



Ahmad Nahavandi
Al-Fadl ibn Naubakht
Muḥammad ibn
Ibrāhīm al-Fazārī
Mashallah ibn Athari
Yaʿqūb ibn Ṭāriq








9th



Abu Ma'shar al-Balkhi
Abu Said Gorgani
Al-Farghānī
Al-Kindi
Al-Mahani
Al-Ḥajjāj ibn Yūsuf ibn Maṭar
Al-Marwazi
Ali ibn Isa al-Asturlabi
Banu Musa
Iranshahri
Khālid ibn ʿAbd al‐Malik
Al-Khwārizmī
Sahl ibn Bishr
Thābit ibn Qurra








10th



Abd al-Rahman al-Sufi
Ibn
Al-Adami
Abu-Mahmud Khojandi
Abū Ja'far al-Khāzin
Abū Sahl al-Qūhī
Abū al-Wafā' Būzjānī
Ahmad ibn Yusuf
al-Battani
Alchabitius
Al-Nayrizi
Al-Saghani
Ibn Yunus
Ibrahim ibn Sinan
Ma Yize








11th



Abu Nasr Mansur
Al-Bīrūnī
Al-Zarqālī
Alhazen
Avicenna
Ibn al-Saffar
Kushyar ibn Labban
Said Al-Andalusi
Sijzi








12th



Al-Bitruji
Al-Kharaqī
Al-Khazini
Al-Samawal al-Maghribi
Abu al-Salt
Anvari
Ibn al-Kammad
Jabir ibn Aflah
Omar Khayyám
Sharaf al-Dīn al-Ṭūsī








13th



Ibn al-Banna' al-Marrakushi
Ibn al‐Ha'im al‐Ishbili
Jamal ad-Din
Muhyi al-Dīn al-Maghribī
Nasir al-Din al-Tusi
Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi
Shams al-Dīn al-Samarqandī
Zakariya al-Qazwini
Ibn Abi al-Shukr
Mu'ayyad al-Din al-'Urdi
Athīr al-Dīn al-Abharī
Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr al‐Farisi








14th



Ibn al-Shatir
Shams al-Dīn Abū Abd Allāh al-Khalīlī
Abū al‐ʿUqūl
Nizam al-Din Nishapuri








15th



Ali Kuşçu
ʿAbd al‐Wājid
Jamshīd al-Kāshī
Kadızade Rumi
Ulugh Beg
Sibt al-Maridini
Ibn al-Majdi
'Abd al-'Aziz al-Wafa'i








16th



Al-Birjandi
Bahāʾ al-dīn al-ʿĀmilī
Piri Reis
Takiyüddin








17th



Yang Guangxian






















v
t
e


Medicine in the medieval Islamic world






Physicians





7th century




Al-Harith ibn Kalada and his son
Abu Hafsa Yazid
Bukhtishu
Masarjawaih
Ibn Abi Ramtha al-Tamimi
Rufaida Al-Aslamia
Ibn Uthal









8th century




Bukhtishu family
Ja'far al-Sadiq









9th century




Ali al-Ridha
Albubather
Bukhtishu family
Jabril ibn Bukhtishu
Jābir ibn Hayyān
Hunayn ibn Ishaq and his son
Yahya ibn Sarafyun
Al-Kindi
Masawaiyh
Shapur ibn Sahl
Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari
Al-Ruhawi
Yuhanna ibn Bukhtishu
Salmawaih ibn Bunan









10th century




Qusta ibn Luqa
Abu ul-Ala Shirazi
Abul Hasan al-Tabari
Al-Natili
Qumri
Abu Zayd al-Balkhi
Isaac Israeli ben Solomon
'Ali ibn al-'Abbas al-Majusi
Abu Sahl 'Isa ibn Yahya al-Masihi
Muvaffak
Muhammad ibn Zakariya al-Razi
Ibn Juljul
Abu al-Qasim al-Zahrawi
Ibn al-Jazzar
Al-Kaŝkarī
Ibn Abi al-Ashʿath
Ibn al-Batriq
Ibrahim ibn Baks









11th century




Abu 'Ubayd al-Juzjani
Alhazen
Ali ibn Ridwan
Avicenna
Ephraim ibn al-Za'faran
Ibn al-Wafid
Abdollah ibn Bukhtishu
Ibn Butlan
Ibn al-Kattani
Ibn Jazla
Masawaih al-Mardini
Ali ibn Yusuf al-Ilaqi
Ibn Al-Thahabi
Ibn Abi Sadiq
Ali ibn Isa al-Kahhal









12th century




Abu al-Bayan ibn al-Mudawwar
Ahmad ibn Farrokh
Ibn Hubal
Zayn al-Din Gorgani
Maimonides
Serapion the Younger
Ibn Zuhr
Ya'qub ibn Ishaq al-Israili
Abu Jafar ibn Harun al-Turjali
Averroes
Ibn Tufail
Al-Ghafiqi
Ibn Abi al-Hakam
Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī
Al-Samawal al-Maghribi
Ibn al-Tilmīdh
Ibn Jumay‘









13th century




Sa'ad al-Dawla
Al-Shahrazuri
Rashidun al-Suri
Amin al-Din Rashid al-Din Vatvat
Abraham ben Moses ben Maimon
Da'ud Abu al-Fadl
Al-Dakhwar
Ibn Abi Usaibia
Joseph ben Judah of Ceuta
Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi (medieval writer)
Ibn al-Nafis
Zakariya al-Qazwini
Najib ad-Din-e-Samarqandi
Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi
Ibn al-Quff









14th century




Muhammad ibn Mahmud Amuli
Al-Nagawri
Aqsara'i
Zayn-e-Attar
Mansur ibn Ilyas
Jaghmini
Mas‘ud ibn Muhammad Sijzi
Najm al-Din Mahmud ibn Ilyas al-Shirazi
Nakhshabi
Sadid al-Din al-Kazaruni
Yusuf ibn Ismail al-Kutubi
Ibn al-Khatib
Rashid-al-Din Hamadani









15th century




Abu Sa'id al-Afif
Muhammad Ali Astarabadi
Husayni Isfahani
Burhan-ud-din Kermani
Şerafeddin Sabuncuoğlu
Muhammad ibn Yusuf al-Harawi
Nurbakhshi
Shaykh Muhammad ibn Thaleb









16th century




Hakim-e-Gilani
Abul Qasim ibn Mohammed al-Ghassani
Taqi ad-Din Muhammad ibn Ma'ruf
Dawud al-Antaki











Concepts



Psychology
Ophthalmology








Works



Al-Risalah al-Dhahabiah
The Canon of Medicine
Anatomy Charts of the Arabs
The Book of Healing
Book of the Ten Treatises of the Eye
De Gradibus
Al-Tasrif
Zakhireye Khwarazmshahi
Adab al-Tabib
Kamel al-Sanaat al-Tibbyya
Al-Hawi








Centers



Bimaristan
Nur al-Din Bimaristan
Al-'Adudi








Influences



Ancient Greek medicine








Influenced



Medical Renaissance
Ibn Sina Academy of Medieval Medicine and Sciences
















v
t
e


Perso-Arab musicology






Music theorists‎



Al-Kindi
Al-Sarakhsi
Al-Farabi
Avicenna
Ikhwan al-Safa
Safi al-Din al-Urmawi
Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi
Ibn Kurr








Works



Kitab al-Musiqa al-Kabir













Authority control



WorldCat
VIAF: 90634457
LCCN: n79138789
ISNI: 0000 0001 1684 0731
GND: 118887947
SELIBR: 33144
SUDOC: 027658228
BNF: cb12109766n (data)
NKC: jn19990210331
ICCU: IT\ICCU\BVEV\019792
BNE: XX4660229















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Al-Kindi&amp;oldid=688106101"					
				Categories: 801 births873 deaths9th-century mathematicians9th-century philosophers9th-century physicians9th-century Iraqi people9th-century astrologers9th-century Arab peopleArab scientistsArabic commentators on AristotleAstrologers of medieval IslamAstronomers of medieval IslamIraqi scientistsIraqi philosophersMedieval Arab astrologersMedieval Arab astronomersMedieval Arab mathematiciansMedieval Arab physiciansMedieval Arab philosophersMedieval Iraqi astronomersMedieval Iraqi mathematiciansMedieval Iraqi physiciansMedieval Iraqi astrologersMathematicians of medieval IslamMusical theorists of medieval IslamMuslim philosophersPharmacologistsPhysicians of medieval IslamPre-19th-century cryptographersPeople from KufaHidden categories: Use dmy dates from July 2014Articles with hCardsNo local image but image on WikidataArticles containing Arabic-language textArticles containing Latin-language textWikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the New International EncyclopediaWikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource referenceWikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the Encyclopedia Americana with a Wikisource referenceWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with SBN identifiersWorld Digital Library related				
							
		
		
			