


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Ancient Greek
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				This article is about the language.  For Ancient Greek culture in general, see Ancient Greece.  For Ancient Greek population groups, see List of ancient Greek tribes.
"Classical Greek" redirects here. For the culture, see Classical Greece.


Ancient Greek


Ἑλληνική
Hellēnikḗ



Inscription about the construction of the statue of Athena Parthenos in the Parthenon, 440/439 BC



Region
eastern Mediterranean


Era
developed into Koiné Greek by the 4th century BC



Language family


Indo-European

Hellenic

Ancient Greek








Writing system

Greek alphabet


Language codes


ISO 639-2
grc


ISO 639-3
grc (includes all pre-modern stages)


Glottolog
anci1242[1]




Map of Ancient (Homeric) Greece








Beginning of Homer's Odyssey


Ancient Greek includes the forms of Greek used in ancient Greece and the ancient world from around the 9th century BC to the 6th century AD. It is often roughly divided into the Archaic period (9th to 6th centuries BC), Classical period (5th and 4th centuries BC), and Hellenistic period (3rd century BC to 6th century AD). It is antedated in the second millennium BC by Mycenaean Greek.
The language of the Hellenistic phase is known as Koine (common), while the language from the late period onward features no considerable differences from Medieval Greek. Koine is regarded as a separate historical stage of its own, although in its earlier form, it closely resembled the Classical. Prior to the Koine period, Greek of the classic and earlier periods included several regional dialects.
Ancient Greek was the language of Homer and of classical Athenian historians, playwrights, and philosophers. It has contributed many words to English vocabulary and has been a standard subject of study in educational institutions of the West since the Renaissance. This article primarily contains information about the Epic and Classical phases of the language.



Contents


1 Dialects

1.1 History
1.2 Other languages


2 Phonology

2.1 Differences from Proto-Indo-European
2.2 Phonemic inventory

2.2.1 Consonants
2.2.2 Vowels




3 Morphology

3.1 Augment
3.2 Reduplication


4 Writing system
5 Example text
6 Modern use
7 See also
8 References
9 Further reading
10 External links

10.1 Grammar learning
10.2 Classical texts





Dialects[edit]
Main article: Ancient Greek dialects
Ancient Greek was a pluricentric language, divided into many dialects. The main dialect groups are Attic and Ionic, Aeolic, Arcadocypriot, and Doric, many of them with several subdivisions. Some dialects are found in standardized literary forms used in literature, while others are attested only in inscriptions.
There are also several historical forms. Homeric Greek is a literary form of Archaic Greek (derived primarily from Ionic and Aeolic) used in the epic poems, the "Iliad" and "Odyssey", and in later poems by other authors. Homeric Greek had significant differences in grammar and pronunciation from Classical Attic and other Classical-era dialects.
History[edit]
The origins, early form and development of the Hellenic language family are not well understood because of a lack of contemporaneous evidence. Several theories exist about what Hellenic dialect groups may have existed between the divergence of early Greek-like speech from the common Proto-Indo-European language. They have the same general outline, but differ in some of the detail. The only attested dialect from this period[2] is Mycenaean, but its relationship to the historical dialects and the historical circumstances of the times imply that the overall groups already existed in some form.
Scholars assume that major Ancient Greek period dialect groups developed not later than 1120 BC, at the time of the Dorian invasion(s)—and that their first appearances as precise alphabetic writing began in the 8th century BC. The invasion would not be "Dorian" unless the invaders had some cultural relationship to the historical Dorians. The invasion is known to have displaced population to the later Attic-Ionic regions, who regarded themselves as descendants of the population displaced by or contending with the Dorians.
The Greeks of this period believed there were three major divisions of all Greek people—Dorians, Aeolians, and Ionians (including Athenians), each with their own defining and distinctive dialects. Allowing for their oversight of Arcadian, an obscure mountain dialect, and Cypriot, far from the center of Greek scholarship, this division of people and language is quite similar to the results of modern archaeological-linguistic investigation.
One standard formulation for the dialects is:[3]







Distribution of Greek dialects in the classical period.[4]


Western group:
&#160;&#160;Doric proper
&#160;&#160;Northwest Doric
&#160;&#160;Achaean Doric

Central group:
&#160;&#160;Aeolic
&#160;&#160;Arcado-Cypriot

Eastern group:
&#160;&#160;Attic
&#160;&#160;Ionic












West Group

Northwest Greek
Doric


Aeolic Group

Aegean/Asiatic Aeolic
Thessalian
Boeotian


Ionic-Attic Group

Attica
Euboea and colonies in Italy
Cyclades
Asiatic Ionia


Arcadocypriot Greek

Arcadian
Cypriot






West vs. non-west Greek is the strongest marked and earliest division, with non-west in subsets of Ionic-Attic (or Attic-Ionic) and Aeolic vs. Arcado-Cypriot, or Aeolic and Arcado-Cypriot vs. Ionic-Attic. Often non-west is called East Greek.
The Arcado-Cypriot group apparently descended more closely from the Mycenaean Greek of the Bronze Age.
Boeotian had come under a strong Northwest Greek influence, and can in some respects be considered a transitional dialect. Thessalian likewise had come under Northwest Greek influence, though to a lesser degree.
Pamphylian, spoken in a small area on the south-western coast of Asia Minor and little preserved in inscriptions, may be either a fifth major dialect group, or it is Mycenaean Greek overlaid by Doric, with a non-Greek native influence.
Most of the dialect sub-groups listed above had further subdivisions, generally equivalent to a city-state and its surrounding territory, or to an island. Doric notably had several intermediate divisions as well, into Island Doric (including Cretan Doric), Southern Peloponnesus Doric (including Laconian, the dialect of Sparta), and Northern Peloponnesus Doric (including Corinthian).
The Lesbian dialect was a member of the Aegean/Asiatic Aeolic sub-group.
All the groups were represented by colonies beyond Greece proper as well, and these colonies generally developed local characteristics, often under the influence of settlers or neighbors speaking different Greek dialects.
The dialects outside the Ionic group are known mainly from inscriptions, notable exceptions being fragments of the works of the poetess Sappho from the island of Lesbos and the poems of the Boeotian poet, Pindar.
After the conquests of Alexander the Great in the late 4th century BC, a new international dialect known as Koine or Common Greek developed, largely based on Attic Greek, but with influence from other dialects. This dialect slowly replaced most of the older dialects, although Doric dialect has survived to the present in the form of the Tsakonian dialect of Modern Greek, spoken in the region of modern Sparta. Doric has also passed down its aorist terminations into most verbs of Demotic Greek. By about the 6th century AD, the Koine had slowly metamorphosized into Medieval Greek.
Other languages[edit]
Ancient Macedonian was an Indo-European language closely related to Greek, but its exact relationship is unclear because of insufficient data: possibly a dialect of Greek; a sibling language to Greek; or a close cousin to Greek, and perhaps related to some extent, to Thracian and Phrygian languages. The Pella curse tablet is one of many finds that support the idea that the Ancient Macedonian language is closely related to the Doric Greek dialect. However, Ancient Macedonian was definitely not a Slavic language; Slavs migrated in Eastern Europe nine centuries later.
Phonology[edit]
Differences from Proto-Indo-European[edit]
Main article: Proto-Greek language
Ancient Greek differs from Proto-Indo-European and other Indo-European languages in certain ways. In phonotactics, Ancient Greek words could only end in a vowel or /n s r/; final stops were lost, as in γάλα "milk", compared with γάλακτος "of milk" (genitive). Ancient Greek of the classical period also differed in phonemic inventory:

PIE *s became /h/ at the beginning of a word (debuccalization): Latin sex, English six, Ancient Greek ἕξ /héks/.
PIE *s was lost between vowels via an intermediate step of debuccalization: Sanskrit janasas, Latin generis (where s &gt; r by rhotacism), Greek *genesos &gt; *genehos &gt; Ancient Greek γένεος (/géneos/), Attic γένους (/génoːs/) "of a kind".
PIE *y /j/ became /h/ (debuccalization) or /(d)z/ (fortition): Sanskrit yas, Ancient Greek ὅς "who" (relative pronoun); Latin iugum, English yoke, Ancient Greek ζυγός /zygós/.
PIE *w, which occurred in Mycenaean and some non-Attic dialects, was lost: early Doric ϝέργον, English work, Attic Greek ἔργον /érgon/.
PIE and Mycenaean labiovelars changed to plain stops (labials, dentals, and velars) in the later Greek dialects: for instance, PIE *kʷ became /p/ or /t/ in Attic: Attic Greek ποῦ /pôː/ "where?", Latin quō; Attic Greek τίς /tís/, Latin quis "who?".
PIE "voiced aspirated" stops *bʰ dʰ ǵʰ gʰ gʷʰ were devoiced and became the aspirated stops φ θ χ /pʰ tʰ kʰ/ in Ancient Greek.

Phonemic inventory[edit]
Main article: Ancient Greek phonology
The pronunciation of Ancient Greek was very different from that of Modern Greek. Ancient Greek had long and short vowels; many diphthongs; double and single consonants; voiced, voiceless, and aspirated stops; and a pitch accent. In Modern Greek, all vowels and consonants are short—many vowels and diphthongs once pronounced distinctly are pronounced as /i/ (iotacism). Some of the stops and glides in diphthongs have become fricatives, and the pitch accent has changed to a stress accent. Many of these changes took place in the Koine Greek period. The writing system of Modern Greek, however, does not reflect all pronunciation changes.
The examples below represent Attic Greek in the 5th century BC. Ancient pronunciation can never be reconstructed with certainty, but Greek from this period is well documented and there is little disagreement among linguists as to the general nature of the sounds that the letters represent.
Consonants[edit]



Bilabial
Dental
Velar
Glottal


Nasal
μ
m
ν
n
γ
(ŋ)



Plosive
voiced
β
b
δ
d
γ
ɡ



voiceless
π
p
τ
t
κ
k



aspirated
φ
pʰ
θ
tʰ
χ
kʰ



Fricative

σ
s

h


Trill

ρ
r




Lateral

λ
l




[ŋ] occurred as an allophone of /n/ used before velars and as an allophone of /ɡ/ before nasals. /r/ was probably voiceless when word-initial (written ῥ). /s/ was assimilated to [z] before voiced consonants.
Vowels[edit]



Front
Back



unrounded
rounded


Close
ι
i iː
υ
y yː



Close-mid
ε ει
e eː

ο ου
o oː


Open-mid
η
ɛː

ω
ɔː


Open
α
a aː


/oː/ raised to [uː], probably by the 4th century BC.
Morphology[edit]
Main article: Ancient Greek grammar




Ostracon bearing the name of Cimon, Stoa of Attalos


Greek, like all of the older Indo-European languages, is highly inflected. It is highly archaic in its preservation of Proto-Indo-European forms. In Ancient Greek, nouns (including proper nouns) have five cases (nominative, genitive, dative, accusative, and vocative), three genders (masculine, feminine, and neuter), and three numbers (singular, dual, and plural). Verbs have four moods (indicative, imperative, subjunctive, and optative) and three voices (active, middle, and passive), as well as three persons (first, second, and third) and various other forms. Verbs are conjugated through seven combinations of tenses and aspect (generally simply called "tenses"): the present, future, and imperfect are imperfective in aspect; the aorist (perfective aspect); a present perfect, pluperfect and future perfect. Most tenses display all four moods and three voices, although there is no future subjunctive or imperative. Also, there is no imperfect subjunctive, optative or imperative. The infinitives and participles correspond to the finite combinations of tense, aspect, and voice.
Augment[edit]
The indicative of past tenses adds (conceptually, at least) a prefix /e-/, called the augment. This was probably originally a separate word, meaning something like "then", added because tenses in PIE had primarily aspectual meaning. The augment is added to the indicative of the aorist, imperfect, and pluperfect, but not to any of the other forms of the aorist (no other forms of the imperfect and pluperfect exist).
The two kinds of augment in Greek are syllabic and quantitative. The syllabic augment is added to stems beginning with consonants, and simply prefixes e (stems beginning with r, however, add er). The quantitative augment is added to stems beginning with vowels, and involves lengthening the vowel:

a, ā, e, ē → ē
i, ī → ī
o, ō → ō
u, ū → ū
ai → ēi
ei → ēi or ei
oi → ōi
au → ēu or au
eu → ēu or eu
ou → ou

Some verbs augment irregularly; the most common variation is e → ei. The irregularity can be explained diachronically by the loss of s between vowels. In verbs with a prefix, the augment is placed not at the start of the word, but between the prefix and the original verb. For example, προσ(-)βάλλω (I attack) goes to προσέβαλoν in the aorist.
Following Homer's practice, the augment is sometimes not made in poetry, especially epic poetry.
The augment sometimes substitutes for reduplication; see below.
Reduplication[edit]
Almost all forms of the perfect, pluperfect, and future perfect reduplicate the initial syllable of the verb stem. (Note that a few irregular forms of perfect do not reduplicate, whereas a handful of irregular aorists reduplicate.) The three types of reduplication are:

Syllabic reduplication: Most verbs beginning with a single consonant, or a cluster of a stop with a sonorant, add a syllable consisting of the initial consonant followed by e. An aspirated consonant, however, reduplicates in its unaspirated equivalent: Grassmann's law.
Augment: Verbs beginning with a vowel, as well as those beginning with a cluster other than those indicated previously (and occasionally for a few other verbs) reduplicate in the same fashion as the augment. This remains in all forms of the perfect, not just the indicative.
Attic reduplication: Some verbs beginning with an a, e or o, followed by a sonorant (or occasionally d or g), reduplicate by adding a syllable consisting of the initial vowel and following consonant, and lengthening the following vowel. Hence er → erēr, an → anēn, ol → olōl, ed → edēd. This is not actually specific to Attic Greek, despite its name, but it was generalized in Attic. This originally involved reduplicating a cluster consisting of a laryngeal and sonorant, hence h₃l → h₃leh₃l → olōl with normal Greek development of laryngeals. (Forms with a stop were analogous.)

Irregular duplication can be understood diachronically. For example, lambanō (root lab) has the perfect stem eilēpha (not *lelēpha) because it was originally slambanō, with perfect seslēpha, becoming eilēpha through compensatory lengthening.
Reduplication is also visible in the present tense stems of certain verbs. These stems add a syllable consisting of the root's initial consonant followed by i. A nasal stop appears after the reduplication in some verbs.[5]
Writing system[edit]





Greek alphabet





Αα
Alpha
Νν
Nu


Ββ
Beta
Ξξ
Xi


Γγ
Gamma
Οο
Omicron


Δδ
Delta
Ππ
Pi


Εε
Epsilon
Ρρ
Rho


Ζζ
Zeta
Σσς
Sigma


Ηη
Eta
Ττ
Tau


Θθ
Theta
Υυ
Upsilon


Ιι
Iota
Φφ
Phi


Κκ
Kappa
Χχ
Chi


Λλ
Lambda
Ψψ
Psi


Μμ
Mu
Ωω
Omega





History



Archaic local variants












Diacritics
Ligatures

Numerals


ϛ (6)
ϟ (90)
ϡ (900)






Use in other languages




Bactrian
Coptic
Albanian




Related topics




Use as scientific symbols







 Book
 Category



 Commons







v
t
e





Main article: Greek orthography
Ancient Greek was written in the Greek alphabet, with some variation among dialects. Early texts are written in boustrophedon style, but left-to-right became standard during the classic period. Modern editions of Ancient Greek texts are usually written with accents and breathing marks, interword spacing, modern punctuation, and sometimes mixed case, but these were all introduced later.
Example text[edit]
The beginning of Homer's Iliad exemplifies the Archaic period of Ancient Greek (see Homeric Greek for more details):

Μῆνιν ἄειδε, θεά, Πηληϊάδεω Ἀχιλῆος
οὐλομένην, ἣ μυρί’ Ἀχαιοῖς ἄλγε’ ἔθηκε,
πολλὰς δ’ ἰφθίμους ψυχὰς Ἄϊδι προΐαψεν
ἡρώων, αὐτοὺς δὲ ἑλώρια τεῦχε κύνεσσιν
οἰωνοῖσί τε πᾶσι· Διὸς δ’ ἐτελείετο βουλή·
ἐξ οὗ δὴ τὰ πρῶτα διαστήτην ἐρίσαντε
Ἀτρεΐδης τε ἄναξ ἀνδρῶν καὶ δῖος Ἀχιλλεύς.

The beginning of Apology by Plato exemplifies Attic Greek from the Classical period of Ancient Greek:

Ὅτι μὲν ὑμεῖς, ὦ ἄνδρες Ἀθηναῖοι, πεπόνθατε ὑπὸ τῶν ἐμῶν κατηγόρων, οὐκ οἶδα: ἐγὼ δ' οὖν καὶ αὐτὸς ὑπ' αὐτῶν ὀλίγου ἐμαυτοῦ ἐπελαθόμην, οὕτω πιθανῶς ἔλεγον. Καίτοι ἀληθές γε ὡς ἔπος εἰπεῖν οὐδὲν εἰρήκασιν.

Transliterated into the Latin alphabet using a modern version of the Erasmian scheme:

Hóti mèn hūmeîs, ô ándres Athēnaîoi, pepónthate hupò tôn emôn katēgórōn, ouk oîda: egṑ d' oûn kaì autòs hup' autōn olígou emautoû epelathómēn, hoútō pithanôs élegon. Kaítoi alēthés ge hōs épos eipeîn oudèn eirḗkāsin.

Using the IPA:

/hóti men hyːmêːs | ɔ̂ː ándres atʰɛːnaî̯i̯oi | pepóntʰate | hypo tɔ̂ːn emɔ̂ːn katɛːɡórɔːn | uːk oî̯da ‖ éɡɔː dûːn kai̯ au̯tos | hyp au̯tɔ̂ːn olíɡuː emau̯tûː | epelatʰómɛːn | hǔːtɔː pitʰanɔ̂ːs éleɡon ‖ kaí̯toi̯ alɛːtʰéz ɡe | hɔːs épos eːpêːn | uːden eːrɛ̌ːkaːsin ‖/

Translated into English:

What you, men of Athens, have learned from my accusers, I do not know: but I, for my part, nearly forgot who I was thanks to them, since they spoke so persuasively. And yet, of the truth, they have spoken, one might say, nothing at all.

Modern use[edit]
See also: Classical compound




The words ΜΟΛΩΝ ΛΑΒΕ as they are inscribed on the marble of the 1955 Leonidas Monument at Thermopylae


The study of Ancient Greek in European countries in addition to Latin occupied an important place in the syllabus from the Renaissance until the beginning of the 20th century. Ancient Greek is still taught as a compulsory or optional subject especially at traditional or elite schools throughout Europe, such as public schools and grammar schools in the United Kingdom. It is compulsory in the Liceo classico in Italy, in the gymnasium in the Netherlands, in some classes in Austria, in Croatia in klasična gimnazija and it is optional in the Humanistisches Gymnasium in Germany (usually as a third language after Latin and English, from the age of 14 to 18). In 2006/07, 15,000 pupils studied Ancient Greek in Germany according to the Federal Statistical Office of Germany, and 280,000 pupils studied it in Italy.[6] It is a compulsory subject alongside Latin in the Humanities branch of Spanish Bachillerato. Ancient Greek is also taught at most major universities worldwide, often combined with Latin as part of Classics. It will also be taught in state primary schools in the UK, to boost children’s language skills,[7][8][9] and will be offered as a foreign language to pupils in all primary schools from 2014 as part of a major drive to boost education standards, together with Latin, Mandarin, French, German, Spanish, and Italian.[10] Ancient Greek is also taught as a compulsory subject in Gymnasia and Lykia in Greece.[11][12]
Modern authors rarely write in Ancient Greek, though Jan Křesadlo wrote some poetry and prose in the language, and some volumes of Asterix[13] and Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone[14] have been translated into Ancient Greek. Oνόματα Kεχιασμένα (Onomata Kechiasmena) is the first magazine of crosswords and puzzles in Ancient Greek.[15] Its first issue appeared in April 2015 as an annex to Hebdomada Aenigmatum. Alfred Rahlfs included a preface, a short history of the Septuagint text, and other front matter translated into Ancient Greek in his 1935 edition of the Septuagint; Robert Hanhart also included the introductory remarks to the 2006 revised Rahlfs–Hanhart edition in the language as well.[16]
Ancient Greek is also used by organizations and individuals, mainly Greek, who wish to denote their respect, admiration or preference for the use of this language. This use is sometimes considered graphical, nationalistic or funny. In any case, the fact that modern Greeks can still wholly or partly understand texts written in non-archaic forms of ancient Greek shows the affinity of modern Greek language to its ancestral predecessor.[17]
An isolated community near Trabzon, Turkey, an area where Pontic Greek is spoken, has been found to speak a variety of Greek that has parallels, both structurally and in its vocabulary, to Ancient Greek not present in other varieties.[18] As few as 5,000 people speak the dialect but linguists believe that it is the closest living language to Ancient Greek.[19][20]
Ancient Greek is often used in the coinage of modern technical terms in the European languages: see English words of Greek origin. Latinized forms of Ancient Greek roots are used in many of the scientific names of species and in scientific terminology.
See also[edit]

Ancient Greek grammar
Proto-Greek language
Ancient Greek dialects
Mycenaean Greek
Koine Greek
Medieval Greek
Modern Greek
Varieties of Modern Greek
Greek language
Hellenic languages
Exploring the Ancient Greek Language and Culture (competition)
Greek alphabet
Greek diacritics
List of Greek phrases (mostly Ancient Greek)
List of Greek words with English derivatives

References[edit]


^ Nordhoff, Sebastian; Hammarström, Harald; Forkel, Robert; Haspelmath, Martin, eds. (2013). "Ancient Greek (to 1453)". Glottolog. Leipzig: Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology.&#160;
^ Imprecisely attested and somewhat reconstructive due to its being written in an ill-fitting syllabary (Linear B).
^ This one appears in recent versions of the Encyclopædia Britannica, which also lists the major works that define the subject.[page&#160;needed]
^ Roger D. Woodard (2008), "Greek dialects", in: The Ancient Languages of Europe, ed. R. D. Woodard, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, p. 51.
^ Palmer, Leonard (1996). The Greek Language. Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press. p.&#160;262. ISBN&#160;0-8061-2844-5.&#160;
^ [1]
^ "Ancient Greek 'to be taught in state schools'". Telegraph.co.uk. 30 July 2010. Retrieved 3 May 2015.&#160;
^ "Primaries go Greek to help teach English" - Education News - 30 July 2010.
^ "Now look, Latin's fine, but Greek might be even Beta" TES Editorial © 2010 - TSL Education Ltd.
^ More primary schools to offer Latin and ancient Greek, The Telegraph, 26 November 2012
^ "Ωρολόγιο Πρόγραμμα των μαθημάτων των Α, Β, Γ τάξεων του Hμερησίου Γυμνασίου". Retrieved 3 May 2015.&#160;
^ "ΩΡΟΛΟΓΙΟ ΠΡΟΓΡΑΜΜΑ ΓΕΝΙΚΟΥ ΛΥΚΕΙΟΥ". Retrieved 3 May 2015.&#160;
^ "Asterix around the World - the many Languages of Asterix". Retrieved 3 May 2015.&#160;
^ Areios Potēr kai ē tu philosophu lithos, Bloomsbury 2004, ISBN 1-58234-826-X
^ , http://www.repubblica.it/ultimora/24ore/nazionale/news-dettaglio/4581488 Enigmistica: nasce prima rivista in greco antico 2015).
^ Rahlfs, Alfred, and Hanhart, Robert (eds.), Septuaginta, editio altera (Deutsche Bibelgesellschaft, 2006).
^ "Akropolis World News". Retrieved 3 May 2015.&#160;
^ Jason and the argot: land where Greek's ancient language survives, The Independent, 3 January 2011
^ Against all odds: archaic Greek in a modern world, University of Cambridge
^ Archaic Greek in a modern world video from Cambridge University, on YouTube


Further reading[edit]

P. Chantraine (1968), Dictionnaire étymologique de la langue grecque, Klincksieck, Paris.
Athenaze A series of textbooks on Ancient Greek published for school use
Hansen, Hardy and Quinn, Gerald M. (1992) Greek: An Intensive Course, Fordham University Press
Easterling, P &amp; Handley, C. Greek Scripts: An illustrated introduction. London: Society for the Promotion of Hellenic Studies, 2001. ISBN 0-902984-17-9

External links[edit]



Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Ancient Greek





Ancient Greek test of Wikipedia at Wikimedia Incubator





Ancient Greek repository of Wikisource, the free library





For a list of words relating to Ancient Greek, see the Ancient Greek language category of words in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.





Greek Wikisource has original text related to this article:
Texts in Ancient Greek




Online Greek resources – Dictionaries, grammar, virtual libraries, fonts, etc.
Alpheios – Combines LSJ, Autenrieth, Smyth's grammar and inflection tables in a browser add-on for use on any web site
Ancient Greek basic lexicon at the Global Lexicostatistical Database
Ancient Greek Swadesh list of basic vocabulary words (from Wiktionary's Swadesh list appendix)

Grammar learning[edit]

A more extensive grammar of the Ancient Greek language written by J. Rietveld
Recitation of classics books
Perseus Greek dictionaries
Greek-Language.com – Information on the history of the Greek language, application of modern Linguistics to the study of Greek, and tools for learning Greek
Free Lessons in Ancient Greek, Bilingual Libraries, Forum
A critical survey of websites devoted to Ancient Greek
Ancient Greek Tutorials – Berkeley Language Center of the University of California
A Digital Tutorial For Ancient Greek Based on White's First Greek Book
New Testament Greek
Acropolis World News – A summary of the latest world news in Ancient Greek, Juan Coderch, University of St Andrews

Classical texts[edit]

Perseus – Greek and Roman Materials
Ancient Greek Texts









v
t
e


Ancient Greece









Outline
Timeline












&#160;



History
Geography













Periods



Cycladic civilization
Minoan civilization
Mycenaean civilization
Greek Dark Ages
Archaic period
Classical Greece
Hellenistic Greece
Roman Greece








Geography



Aegean Sea
Aeolis
Alexandria
Antioch
Cappadocia
Crete
Cyprus
Doris
Ephesus
Epirus
Hellespont
Ionia
Ionian Sea
Macedonia
Magna Graecia
Miletus
Peloponnesus
Pergamon
Pontus
Ancient Greek colonies


















&#160;



City states
Politics
Military













City states



Argos
Athens
Byzantium
Chalkis
Corinth
Megalopolis
Rhodes
Sparta
Syracuse
Thebes








Politics







Boeotarch
Boule
Koinon
Proxeny
Strategos
Synedrion
Tagus
Tyrant
Amphictyonic League








Athenian



Agora
Areopagus
Ecclesia
Graphē paranómōn
Heliaia
Ostracism








Spartan



Apella
Ephor
Gerousia
Harmost











Military



Wars
Athenian military
Antigonid Macedonian army
Army of Macedon
Ballista
Cretan archers
Hellenistic armies
Hippeis
Hoplite
Hetairoi
Macedonian phalanx
Phalanx
Peltast
Pezhetairos
Sarissa
Sacred Band of Thebes
Sciritae
Seleucid army
Spartan army
Toxotai
Xiphos
Xyston


















&#160;
People











List of ancient Greeks






Rulers



Kings of Argos
Archons of Athens
Kings of Athens
Kings of Commagene
Diadochi
Kings of Lydia
Kings of Macedonia
Kings of Paionia
Attalid kings of Pergamon
Kings of Pontus
Kings of Sparta
Tyrants of Syracuse








Philosophers



Anaxagoras
Anaximander
Anaximenes
Antisthenes
Aristotle
Democritus
Diogenes of Sinope
Empedocles
Epicurus
Gorgias
Heraclitus
Hypatia
Leucippus
Parmenides
Plato
Protagoras
Pythagoras
Socrates
Thales
Zeno








Authors



Aeschylus
Aesop
Alcaeus
Archilochus
Aristophanes
Bacchylides
Euripides
Herodotus
Hesiod
Hipponax
Homer
Ibycus
Lucian
Menander
Mimnermus
Pindar
Plutarch
Polybius
Sappho
Simonides
Sophocles
Stesichorus
Theognis
Thucydides
Timocreon
Tyrtaeus
Xenophon








Others



Agesilaus II
Agis II
Alcibiades
Alexander the Great
Aratus
Archimedes
Aspasia
Demosthenes
Epaminondas
Euclid
Hipparchus
Hippocrates
Leonidas
Lycurgus
Lysander
Milo of Croton
Miltiades
Pausanias
Pericles
Philip of Macedon
Philopoemen
Praxiteles
Ptolemy
Pyrrhus
Solon
Themistocles








Groups



Philosophers
Playwrights
Poets
Tyrants








By culture



Ancient Greek tribes
Thracian Greeks
Ancient Macedonians


















&#160;



Society
Culture













Society



Agriculture
Calendar
Clothing
Coinage
Cuisine
Economy
Education
Festivals
Funeral and burial practices
Homosexuality
Law
Olympic Games
Pederasty
Philosophy
Prostitution
Religion
Slavery
Warfare
Wedding customs
Wine











Arts
Sciences






Architecture (Greek Revival architecture)
Astronomy
Literature
Mathematics
Medicine
Music (Musical system)
Pottery
Sculpture
Technology
Theatre








Religion







Funeral and burial practices
Mythology

mythological figures


Temple
Twelve Olympians
Underworld








Sacred places



Eleusis
Delphi
Delos
Dodona
Mount Olympus
Olympia











Structures







Athenian Treasury
Lion Gate
Long Walls
Philippeion
Theatre of Dionysus
Tunnel of Eupalinos








Temples



Aphaea
Artemis
Athena Nike
Erechtheion
Hephaestus
Hera (Olympia)
Parthenon
Samothrace
Zeus (Olympia)











Language



Proto-Greek
Mycenaean
Homeric
Dialects

Aeolic
Arcadocypriot
Attic
Doric
Ionic
Locrian
Macedonian
Pamphylian


Koine








Writing



Linear A
Linear B
Cypriot syllabary
Greek alphabet
Greek numerals
Attic numerals


















&#160;
Lists









Cities

in Epirus


People
Place names
Stoae
Temples
Theatres














 Category
 Portal
 WikiProject
















v
t
e


Greek language






Origin and genealogy



Proto-Greek
Pre-Greek substrate
Graeco-Armenian
Graeco-Aryan
Graeco-Phrygian
Hellenic languages








Periods



Mycenaean Greek (c. 1600–1100 BC)
Ancient Greek (c. 800–300 BC)
Koine Greek (c. 300 BC–AD 330)
Medieval Greek (c. 330–1453)
Modern Greek (since 1453)








Varieties





Ancient




Aeolic
Arcadocypriot
Attic and Ionic
Doric
Homeric
Locrian
Pamphylian
Macedonian









Modern




Cappadocian

Misthiotika


Cretan
Cypriot
Demotic
Himariote
Italiot

Greco/Calabrian
Griko/Apulian


Katharevousa
Maniot
Mariupolitan
Pontic
Tsakonian
Yevanic











Phonology



Ancient (accent/teaching)
Koine
Standard Modern








Grammar



Ancient (tables)
Standard Modern








Writing systems



Cypriot syllabary
Linear B
Greek alphabet

History
Archaic forms
Numerals
Orthography
Diacritics
Braille
Cyrillization and Romanization


Greeklish








Literature



Ancient
Byzantine
Modern








Promotion and study



Hellenic Foundation for Culture
Center for the Greek Language








Other



Exonyms
Morphemes in English
Terms of endearment
Place names
Proverbs
Greek language question
















v
t
e


 Languages of Tunisia






Official language



Standard Arabic

Tunisian Arabic










Minority languages



Berber

Jerba
Matmata


Judeo-Tunisian Arabic








Historical languages



African Romance†
Mediterranean Lingua Franca†
Greek†
Latin†
Punic language†
Phoenician language†
Numidian language†








Main liturgical languages



Classical Arabic
Hebrew








Main foreign languages



French
English
Italian
Spanish
Turkish
















v
t
e


Ages of Greek










c. 1600–1100 BC
c. 800–300 BC
c. 300 BC – AD 330
c. 330–1453
since 1453







Mycenaean




Ancient




Koine




Medieval




Modern
















Authority control



GND: 4113791-7















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ancient_Greek&amp;oldid=691540767"					
				Categories: Ancient GreeceAncient Greek languageAncient languages9th-century BC establishments in Europe6th-century disestablishments in EuropeHidden categories: Articles containing Ancient Greek-language textWikipedia articles needing page number citations from April 2010Languages with ISO 639-2 codeLanguage articles with unreferenced extinction dateArticles containing Latin-language textUse dmy dates from December 2011Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers				
							
		
		
			