


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Applied ethics
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				




This article includes a list of references, but its sources remain unclear because it has insufficient inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (September 2011)


Applied ethics is the philosophical examination, from a moral standpoint, of particular issues in private and public life that are matters of moral judgment. It is thus the attempts to use philosophical methods to identify the morally correct course of action in various fields of human life. Bioethics, for example, is concerned with identifying the correct approach to matters such as euthanasia, or the allocation of scarce health resources, or the use of human embryos in research. Environmental ethics is concerned with questions such as the duties or duty of 'whistleblowers' to the general public as opposed to their loyalty to their employers. As such, it is an area of professional philosophy that is relatively well paid and highly valued both within and outside of academia.[1]
Applied ethics is distinguished from normative ethics, which concerns what people should believe to be right and wrong, and from meta-ethics, which concerns the nature of moral statements.
An emerging typology for applied ethics (Porter, 2006) uses six domains to help improve organizations and social issues at the national and global level:

Decision ethics, or ethical theories and ethical decision processes
Professional ethics, or ethics to improve professionalism
Clinical ethics, or ethics to improve our basic health needs
Business ethics, or individual based morals to improve ethics in a business environment
Organizational ethics, or ethics among organizations
Social ethics, or ethics among nations and as one global unit




Contents


1 Modern approach
2 See also
3 Bibliography
4 External links



Modern approach[edit]
Much of applied ethics is concerned with just three theories:

Utilitarianism, where the practical consequences of various policies are evaluated on the assumption that the right policy will be the one which results in the greatest happiness. This theories main developments came from Jeremy Bentham and John Stuart Mill who distinguished between an act and rule utilitarianist morality. Later developments have also adjusted the theory, most notably Henry Sidgwick who introduced the idea of motive or intent in morality, and Peter Singer who introduced the idea of preference in to moral decision making.
Deontological ethics, notions based on 'rules' i.e. that there is an obligation to perform the 'right' action, regardless of actual consequences (epitomized by Immanuel Kant's notion of the Categorical Imperative which was the centre to Kant's ethical theory based on duty). Another key deontological theory is Natural Law, which was heavily developed by Thomas Aquinas and is the basis of the Roman Catholic Church.
Virtue ethics, derived from Aristotle's and Confucius's notions, which asserts that the right action will be that chosen by a suitably 'virtuous' agent.

One modern approach which attempts to overcome the seemingly impossible divide between deontology and utilitarianism (of which the divide is caused by the opposite takings of an absolute and relativist moral view) is case-based reasoning, also known as casuistry. Casuistry does not begin with theory, rather it starts with the immediate facts of a real and concrete case. While casuistry makes use of ethical theory, it does not view ethical theory as the most important feature of moral reasoning. Casuists, like Albert Jonsen and Stephen Toulmin (The Abuse of Casuistry 1988), challenge the traditional paradigm of applied ethics. Instead of starting from theory and applying theory to a particular case, casuists start with the particular case itself and then ask what morally significant features (including both theory and practical considerations) ought to be considered for that particular case. In their observations of medical ethics committees, Jonsen and Toulmin note that a consensus on particularly problematic moral cases often emerges when participants focus on the facts of the case, rather than on ideology or theory. Thus, a Rabbi, a Catholic priest, and an agnostic might agree that, in this particular case, the best approach is to withhold extraordinary medical care, while disagreeing on the reasons that support their individual positions. By focusing on cases and not on theory, those engaged in moral debate increase the possibility of agreement.
See also[edit]

Ethical codes
Outline of ethics
Ethics
Philosophy
Effective altruism

Bibliography[edit]

^ Brenda Almond, 'Applied Ethics', in Mautner, Thomas, Dictionary of Philosophy, Penguin 1996


Chadwick, R.F. (1997). Encyclopedia of Applied Ethics. London: Academic Press. ISBN&#160;0-12-227065-7.&#160;
Singer, Peter (1993). Practical Ethics. Cambridge University Press. ISBN&#160;0-521-43971-X.&#160; (monograph)
Cohen, Andrew I. (2005). Contemporary Debates in Applied Ethics. Wiley-Blackwell. ISBN&#160;978-1-4051-1548-3.&#160;
LaFollette, Hugh (2002). Ethics in Practice (2nd Edition). Blackwell Publishing. ISBN&#160;0-631-22834-9.&#160;
Singer, Peter (1986). Applied Ethics. Oxford University Press. ISBN&#160;0-19-875067-6.&#160;
Frey, R.G. (2004). A Companion to Applied Ethics. Blackwell. ISBN&#160;1-4051-3345-7.&#160;
Porter, R. (2006). The Health Ethics Typology: Six Domains to Improve Care. Socratic Publishing. ISBN 0-9786699-0-8
Business Ethics Quarterly
Business and Professional Ethics
Environmental Ethics
Ethics (since 1890)
The Journal of Ethics
Journal of Applied Philosophy
International Journal of Applied Philosophy
International Journal of Philosophical Practice
Journal of Business Ethics
Journal of Business Ethics Education
Professional Ethics
Teaching Ethics

External links[edit]


Library resources about
Applied ethics





Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries





Chris Young, How to teach an introduction to applied ethics
Australian Association for Professional and Applied Ethics
Berman Institute of Bioethics, John Hopkins Institute
Canadian Centre for Ethics in Public Affairs
Centre for Advanced Research in Management and Applied Ethics
Center for Practical Bioethics
Centre for Research Ethics and Bioethics
MacLean Center for Clinical Medical Ethics
Markkula Center for Applied Ethics at Santa Clara University
W. Maurice Young Centre for Applied Ethics at the University of British Columbia
Nuffield Council on Bioethics










v
t
e


Ethics






Theories



Casuistry
Consequentialism
Deontology

Kantian ethics


Ethics of care
Existentialist ethics
Meta-ethics
Particularism
Pragmatic ethics
Role ethics
Virtue ethics








Concepts



Autonomy
Axiology
Belief
Conscience
Consent
Equality
Care
Evil
Free will
Good
Happiness
Justice
Morality
Norm
Freedom
Principles
Suffering or Pain
Stewardship
Sympathy
Trust
Value
Virtue
Wrong
full index...








Philosophers



Plato
Aristotle
Cicero
Confucius
Augustine of Hippo
Mencius
Mozi
Xunzi
Thomas Aquinas
Baruch Spinoza
David Hume
Immanuel Kant
Georg W. F. Hegel
Arthur Schopenhauer
Jeremy Bentham
John Stuart Mill
Søren Kierkegaard
Henry Sidgwick
Friedrich Nietzsche
G. E. Moore
Karl Barth
Paul Tillich
Dietrich Bonhoeffer
Philippa Foot
John Rawls
Bernard Williams
J. L. Mackie
G. E. M. Anscombe
William Frankena
Alasdair MacIntyre
R. M. Hare
Peter Singer
Derek Parfit
Thomas Nagel
Robert Merrihew Adams
Charles Taylor
Joxe Azurmendi
Christine Korsgaard
Martha Nussbaum
more...








Applied ethics



Bioethics
Business ethics
Discourse ethics
Environmental ethics
Legal ethics
Medical ethics
Nursing ethics
Professional ethics
Sexual ethics
Ethics of eating meat
Ethics of technology








Related articles



Christian ethics
Descriptive ethics
Ethics in religion
Evolutionary ethics
History of ethics
Islamic ethics
Jewish ethics
Normative ethics











Portal
Category
Task Force
Stubs
Discussion















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Applied_ethics&amp;oldid=690276216"					
				Categories: Applied ethicsEthicsHidden categories: Use dmy dates from June 2013Articles lacking in-text citations from September 2011All articles lacking in-text citations				
							
		
		
			