


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Avempace
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								  (Redirected from Ibn Bajjah)
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				





This article may contain inappropriate or misinterpreted citations that do not verify the text. Please help improve this article by checking for inaccuracies. (help, talk, get involved!) (November 2009)




Avempace
Ibn Bâjja ابن باجه


Born
1095
Zaragoza, Al-Andalus


Died
1138 (aged 42-43)
Fes, Morocco


Nationality
Andalusian


Fields
mathematics, Astronomer, Philosopher, Physician, Physicist, Poet, Scientist


Influenced
Ibn Tufail, Al-Bitruji, Averroes


Avempace (c. 1085&#160;– 1138) is the Latinate form of Ibn Bâjja (Arabic: ابن باجه‎), full name Abû Bakr Muḥammad Ibn Yaḥyà ibn aṣ-Ṣâ’igh at-Tûjîbî Ibn Bâjja al-Tujibi (أبو بكر محمد بن يحيى بن الصائغ), a medieval Andalusian polymath: his writings include works regarding mathematics, astronomy, physics, psychology, and music, as well as logic, philosophy, medicine, botany, and poetry.[1]
He was the famous author of the Kitab al-Nabat ("The Book of Plants"), a popular work on botany, which defined the sex of plants. His philosophic ideas had a clear effect on Ibn Rushd and Albertus Magnus. Most of his writings and book were not completed (or well-organized) because of his early death. He had a vast knowledge of medicine, mathematics and astronomy. His main contribution to Islamic philosophy is his idea on soul phenomenology, which was never completed.
Avempace was, in his time, not only a prominent figure of philosophy, but also of music and poetry.[2] His diwan (Arabic: collection of poetry) was rediscovered in 1951.
Though many of his works have not survived, his theories on astronomy and physics were preserved by Maimonides and Averroes respectively, which had a subsequent influence on later astronomers and physicists in the Islamic civilization and Renaissance Europe, including Galileo Galilei.[3]



Contents


1 Biography
2 Astronomy
3 Physics
4 Psychology
5 Music
6 Notes
7 References
8 External links



Biography[edit]
He was born in Zaragoza in what is today Aragon, Spain, around 1085[4] and died in Fes, Morocco, in 1138. Avempace worked as vizir for Abu Bakr ibn Ibrahim Ibn Tîfilwît, the Almoravid governor of Zaragoza. Avempace also wrote poems (panegyrics and muwasshahat) for him. Avempace joined in poetic competitions with the poet al-Tutili. He later worked, for some twenty years, as the vizir of Yahyà ibn Yûsuf Ibn Tashufin, another brother of the Almoravid Sultan Yusuf Ibn Tashufin (died 1143) in Morocco.[5] Among his many teachers was Abu Jafar ibn Harun of Trujillo a physician in Seville, Al-Andalus.
Astronomy[edit]
In Islamic astronomy, Maimonides wrote the following on the planetary model proposed by Avempace:

"I have heard that Abu Bakr [Ibn Bajja] discovered a system in which no epicycles occur, but eccentric spheres are not excluded by him. I have not heard it from his pupils; and even if it be correct that he discovered such a system, he has not gained much by it, for eccentricity is likewise contrary to the principles laid down by Aristotle.... I have explained to you that these difficulties do not concern the astronomer, for he does not profess to tell us the existing properties of the spheres, but to suggest, whether correctly or not, a theory in which the motion of the stars and planets is uniform and circular, and in agreement with observation."[6]

In his commentary on Aristotle's Meteorology, Avempace presented his own theory on the Milky Way galaxy. Aristotle believed the Milky Way to be caused by "the ignition of the fiery exhalation of some stars which were large, numerous and close together" and that the "ignition takes place in the upper part of the atmosphere, in the region of the world which is continuous with the heavenly motions." On the other hand, Aristotle's Arabic commentator Ibn al-Bitriq considered "the Milky Way to be a phenomenon exclusively of the heavenly spheres, not of the upper part of the atmosphere" and that the "light of those stars makes a visible patch because they are so close." Avempace's view differed from both, as he considered "the Milky Way to be a phenomenon both of the spheres above the moon and of the sublunar region." The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy describes his theory and observation on the Milky Way as follows:[7]

"The Milky Way is the light of many stars which almost touch one another. Their light forms a “continuous image” (khayâl muttasil) on the surface of the body which is like a “tent” (takhawwum) under the fierily element and over the air which it covers. Avempace defines the continuous image as the result of refraction (in‛ikâs) and supports its explanation with an observation of a conjunction of two planets, Jupiter and Mars which took place in 500/1106-7. He watched the conjunction and “saw them having an elongate figure” although their figure is circular."

Avempace also reported observing "two planets as black spots on the face of the Sun." In the 13th century, the Maragha astronomer Qotb al-Din Shirazi identified this observation as the transit of Venus and Mercury.[8] However, Avempace cannot have observed a Venus transit, as there were no Venus transits in his lifetime.[9]
Physics[edit]
Text 71 of Averroes' commentary on Aristotle's Physics contains a discussion on Avempace's theory of motion, as well as the following quotation from the seventh book of Avempace's lost work on physics:

"And this resistance which is between the plenum and the body which is moved in it, is that between which, and the potency of the void, Aristotle made the proportion in his fourth book; and what is believed to be his opinion, is not so. For the proportion of water to air in density is not as the proportion of the motion of the stone in water to its motion in air; but the proportion of the cohesive power of water to that of air is as the proportion of the retardation occurring to the moved body by reason of the medium in which it is moved, namely water, to the retardation occurring to it when it is moved in air."[10]


"For, if what some people have believed were true, then natural motion would be violent; therefore, if there were no resistance present, how could there be any motion? For it would necessarily be instantaneous. What then shall be said concerning the circular motion? There is no resistance there, because there is no cleavage of a medium involved; the place of the circle is always the same, so that it does not leave one place and enter another; it is therefore necessary that the circular motion should be instantaneous. Yet we observe in it the greatest slowness, as in the case of the fixed stars, and also the greatest speed, as in the case of the diurnal rotation. And this is caused only by the difference in perfection between the mover and the moved. When therefore the mover is of greater perfection, that which is moved by it will be more rapid; and when the mover is of lesser perfection, it will be nearer (in perfection) to that which is moved, and the motion will be slower."[10]

Averroes writes the following comments on Avempace's theory of motion:

"Avempace, however, here raises a good question. For he says that it does not follow that the proportion of the motion of one and the same stone in water to its motion in air is as the proportion of the density of water to the density of air, except on the assumption that the motion of the stone takes time only because it is moved in a medium. And if this assumption were true, it would then be the case that no motion would require time except because of something resisting it for the medium seems to impede the thing moved. And if this were so, then the heavenly bodies, which encounter no resistant medium, would be moved instantaneously. And he says that the proportion of the rarity of water to the rarity of air is as the proportion of the retardation occurring to the moved body in water, to the retardation occurring to it in air."[11]


"And if this which he has said be conceded, then Aristotle's demonstration will be false; because, if the proportion of the rarity of one medium to the rarity of the other is as the proportion of accidental retardation of the movement in one of them to the retardation occurring to it in the other, and is not as the proportion of the motion itself, it will not follow that what is moved in a void would be moved in an instant; because in that case there would be subtracted from the motion only the retardation affecting it by reason of the medium, and its natural motion would remain. And every motion involves time; therefore what is moved in a void is necessarily moved in time and with a divisible motion; and nothing impossible will follow. This, then, is Avempace's question."[12]

Psychology[edit]
In Islamic psychology, Avempace "based his psychological studies on physics." In his essay, Recognition of the Active Intelligence, he wrote that active intelligence is the most important ability of human beings, and he wrote many other essays on sensations and imaginations. He concluded that "knowledge cannot be acquired by senses alone but by Active Intelligence, which is the governing intelligence of nature." He begins his discussion of the soul with the definition that "bodies are composed of matter and form and intelligence is the most important part of man—sound knowledge is obtained through intelligence, which alone enables one to attain prosperity and build character." He viewed the unity of the rational soul as the principle of the individual identity, and that by its contact with the Active Intelligence, it "becomes one of those lights that gives glory to God." His definition of freedom is "that when one can think and act rationally". He also writes that "the aim of life should be to seek spiritual knowledge and make contact with Active Intelligence and thus with the Divine."[13]
Music[edit]
Recently, the web page Webislam of Spanish converts to Islam, reported that the score of the Nuba al-Istihlál of Avempace (11th century), arranged by Omar Metiou and Eduardo Paniagua, save almost complete similarity with Marcha Granadera (18th century) is now the official anthem of Spain. That makes it the world's oldest song (about a thousand years old) used for the official anthem of a country.[14]
Notes[edit]


^ Jon Mcginnis, Classical Arabic Philosophy: An Anthology of Sources, p. 266, Hackett Publishing Company, ISBN 0-87220-871-0.
^ D. M. Dunlop, "The Dīwān Attributed to Ibn Bājjah (Avempace)", Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies, University of London Vol. 14, No. 3, Studies Presented to Vladimir Minorsky by His Colleagues and Friends (1952), pp. 463
^ Ernest A. Moody (April 1951). "Galileo and Avempace: The Dynamics of the Leaning Tower Experiment (I)", Journal of the History of Ideas 12 (2), p. 163-193.
^ http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/ibn-bajja/#LifCir
^ Vincent Lagardère, 1989, pp. 80 and 174-178)
^ Guide for the Perplexed 2:24, quoted by Bernard R. Goldstein (March 1972). "Theory and Observation in Medieval Astronomy", Isis 63 (1), p. 39-47 [40-41].
^ Josep Puig Montada (September 28, 2007). "Ibn Bajja". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Retrieved 2008-07-11.&#160;
^ S. M. Razaullah Ansari (2002). History of oriental astronomy: proceedings of the joint discussion-17 at the 23rd General Assembly of the International Astronomical Union, organised by the Commission 41 (History of Astronomy), held in Kyoto, August 25–26, 1997. Springer. p.&#160;137. ISBN&#160;1-4020-0657-8.&#160;
^ Fred Espenak, Six Millennium Catalog of Venus Transits&#160;
^ a b Ernest A. Moody (April 1951). "Galileo and Avempace: The Dynamics of the Leaning Tower Experiment (I)", Journal of the History of Ideas 12 (2), p. 163-193 [185].
^ Ernest A. Moody (April 1951). "Galileo and Avempace: The Dynamics of the Leaning Tower Experiment (I)", Journal of the History of Ideas 12 (2), p. 163-193 [184-185].
^ Ernest A. Moody (April 1951). "Galileo and Avempace: The Dynamics of the Leaning Tower Experiment (I)", Journal of the History of Ideas 12 (2), p. 163-193 [185-186].
^ (Haque 2004, p.&#160;368)
^ Redacción de Webislam, «El himno nacional, ¿de origen andalusí?», Número 189, 8 de octubre de 2002. (URL visitada el 13 de marzo de 2007); Actualización: 19 de agosto de 2007.. Grabación sonora de la Nuba al-Istihlál [1]


References[edit]

Haque, Amber (2004), "Psychology from Islamic Perspective: Contributions of Early Muslim Scholars and Challenges to Contemporary Muslim Psychologists", Journal of Religion and Health 43 (4): 357–377, doi:10.1007/s10943-004-4302-z&#160;
Marcinkowski, M. Ismail (April 2002), "A Biographical Note on Ibn Bajjah (Avempace) and an English Translation of his Annotations to al-Farabi's Isagoge", in Iqbal Review (Lahore, Pakistan), vol. 43, no. 2, pp.&#160;83–99.


The Diwan Attributed to Ibn Bajjah (Avempace),D. M. Dunlop, Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies, University of London, Vol. 14, No. 3, Studies Presented to Vladimir Minorsky by His Colleagues and Friends (1952), pp.&#160;463–477
Miquel Forcada (2005). "Ibn Bajja". In Thomas F. Glick, Steven John Livesey, and Faith Wallis. Medieval Science, Technology, and Medicine: An Encyclopedia. Routledge. pp.&#160;243–246. ISBN&#160;0415969301.&#160;

External links[edit]



Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article Avempace.



Forcada, Miquel (2007). "Ibn Bājja: Abū Bakr Muḥammad ibn Yaḥyā ibn al‐Ṣāʾigh al‐Tujībī al‐Andalusī al‐Saraqusṭī". In Thomas Hockey; et al. The Biographical Encyclopedia of Astronomers. New York: Springer. pp.&#160;550–1. ISBN&#160;978-0-387-31022-0.&#160; (PDF version)
Ibn Bajja-Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
Muslim Philosophy on Ibn Bajjah
Catholic Encyclopedia: Avempace









v
t
e


Medieval philosophers






Islamic




Early



Al-Jahiz
Alkindus
Ibn al-Rawandi
Al-Razi (Rhazes)
Al-Farabi (Alpharabius)
Ibn Masarra
Al Amiri
Ebn Meskavayh
Ibn al-Haytham (Alhazen)
Abu Rayhan Biruni
"Brethren of Purity"








High



Avicenna
Ibn Hazm
Al-Ghazali (Algazel)
Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī
Ibn Bajjah (Avempace)
Ayn al-Quzat Hamadani
Ibn Tufail
Averroes








Late



Ibn Sab'in
Shahab al-Din Suhrawardi
Fakhr ad-Din ar-Razi
Rashid al-Din
Ibn Arabi
Zachariah Kazwin
Abd-el-latif
Athīr al-Dīn al-Abharī
Nasir al-Din al-Tusi
Ibn al-Nafis
Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi
Ibn Taymiyyah
Ibn Khaldun











Jewish




Medieval



Saadia Gaon
Solomon ibn Gabirol
Judah Halevi
Abraham ibn Daud
Maimonides
Nahmanides
Gersonides
Hasdai Crescas
Joseph Albo











Christian




Early



"Church Fathers"
Augustine of Hippo
Boethius
Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite
Isidore of Seville
Johannes Scotus Eriugena
Alcuin








11–12th
century



"Scholasticism"
Anselm of Canterbury
Peter Abelard
Anselm of Laon
Hugh of Saint Victor
Richard of Saint Victor
Roscelin
Peter Lombard
Alexander of Hales
Bernard of Chartres
Dominicus Gundissalinus
Gilbert de la Porrée
Alain de Lille








13–14th
century



Robert Grosseteste
Albertus Magnus
Bonaventure
Thomas Aquinas
Boetius of Dacia
Henry of Ghent
Roger Bacon
John Peckham
Ramon Llull
Petrus Aureolus
Petrus Peregrinus de Maricourt
Durandus
Giles of Rome
Godfrey of Fontaines
Duns Scotus
William of Ockham








Late



Jean Buridan
Nicole Oresme
Albert of Saxony
Francesc Eiximenis
Vincent Ferrer
Paul of Venice
Lambertus de Monte
John Hennon












See also Renaissance philosophy














v
t
e


Mathematics in medieval Islam






Mathematicians





9th century




'Abd al-Hamīd ibn Turk
Sind ibn Ali
Al-Abbās ibn Said al-Jawharī
Al-Ḥajjāj ibn Yūsuf ibn Maṭar
Al-Kindi
Al-Mahani
Banū Mūsā
Hunayn ibn Ishaq
Muḥammad ibn Mūsā al-Khwārizmī
Thābit ibn Qurra
Na'im ibn Musa
Sahl ibn Bishr
Habash al-Hasib al-Marwazi









10th century




Abd al-Rahman al-Sufi
Abū al-Wafā' al-Būzjānī
Abū Ja'far al-Khāzin
Abū Kāmil Shujāʿ ibn Aslam
Abu'l-Hasan al-Uqlidisi
Abu-Mahmud Khojandi
Ahmad ibn Yusuf
Al-Nayrizi
Al-Saghani
Brethren of Purity
Ibn Sahl
Ibn Yunus
Ibrahim ibn Sinan
Muhammad ibn Jābir al-Harrānī al-Battānī
Sinan ibn Thabit
Al-Isfahani
Abu-Mahmud Khojandi
Nazif ibn Yumn
Abū Sahl al-Qūhī









11th century




Abū Ishāq Ibrāhīm al-Zarqālī
Abu Nasr Mansur
Abū Rayḥān al-Bīrūnī
Alhazen
Ibn Muʿādh al-Jayyānī
Al-Karaji
Al-Sijzi
Alī ibn Ahmad al-Nasawī
Avicenna
Ibn Tahir al-Baghdadi
Kushyar ibn Labban
Yusuf al-Mu'taman ibn Hud









12th century




Al-Khazini
Ibn Yahyā al-Maghribī al-Samaw'al
Omar Khayyám
Jabir ibn Aflah
Abu Bakr al-Hassar









13th century




Muhyi al-Dīn al-Maghribī
Nasīr al-Dīn al-Tūsī
Shams al-Dīn al-Samarqandī
Sharaf al-Dīn al-Tūsī
Ibn al‐Ha'im al‐Ishbili
Ibn Abi al-Shukr









14th century




Yaʿīsh ibn Ibrāhīm al-Umawī
Ibn al-Banna' al-Marrakushi
Ibn al-Shatir
Kamāl al-Dīn Fārisī
Al-Khalili
Qotb al-Din Shirazi
Ahmad al-Qalqashandi









15th century




Abū al-Ḥasan ibn ʿAlī al-Qalaṣādī
Ali Qushji
Jamshīd al-Kāshī
Qāḍī Zāda al-Rūmī
Ulugh Beg
Ibn al-Majdi









16th century




Al-Birjandi
Muhammad Baqir Yazdi
Taqi al-Din
Ibn Hamza al-Maghribi
Ibn Ghazi al-Miknasi











Treatises



Almanac
Book of Fixed Stars
Book of Optics
De Gradibus
Encyclopedia of the Brethren of Purity
Tables of Toledo
Tabula Rogeriana
The Compendious Book on Calculation by Completion and Balancing
The Book of Healing
Zij
Zij-i Ilkhani
Zij-i-Sultani








Concepts



Alhazen's problem
Islamic geometric patterns








Centers



Al-Azhar University
Al-Mustansiriya University
House of Knowledge
House of Wisdom
Istanbul observatory of Taqi al-Din
Madrasah
Maktab
Maragheh observatory
University of Al-Karaouine








Influences



Babylonian mathematics
Greek mathematics
Indian mathematics








Influenced



Byzantine mathematics
European mathematics
Indian mathematics
















v
t
e


Medicine in the medieval Islamic world






Physicians





7th century




Al-Harith ibn Kalada and his son
Abu Hafsa Yazid
Bukhtishu
Masarjawaih
Ibn Abi Ramtha al-Tamimi
Rufaida Al-Aslamia
Ibn Uthal









8th century




Bukhtishu family
Ja'far al-Sadiq









9th century




Ali al-Ridha
Albubather
Bukhtishu family
Jabril ibn Bukhtishu
Jābir ibn Hayyān
Hunayn ibn Ishaq and his son
Yahya ibn Sarafyun
Al-Kindi
Masawaiyh
Shapur ibn Sahl
Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari
Al-Ruhawi
Yuhanna ibn Bukhtishu
Salmawaih ibn Bunan









10th century




Qusta ibn Luqa
Abu ul-Ala Shirazi
Abul Hasan al-Tabari
Al-Natili
Qumri
Abu Zayd al-Balkhi
Isaac Israeli ben Solomon
'Ali ibn al-'Abbas al-Majusi
Abu Sahl 'Isa ibn Yahya al-Masihi
Muvaffak
Muhammad ibn Zakariya al-Razi
Ibn Juljul
Abu al-Qasim al-Zahrawi
Ibn al-Jazzar
Al-Kaŝkarī
Ibn Abi al-Ashʿath
Ibn al-Batriq
Ibrahim ibn Baks









11th century




Abu 'Ubayd al-Juzjani
Alhazen
Ali ibn Ridwan
Avicenna
Ephraim ibn al-Za'faran
Ibn al-Wafid
Abdollah ibn Bukhtishu
Ibn Butlan
Ibn al-Kattani
Ibn Jazla
Masawaih al-Mardini
Ali ibn Yusuf al-Ilaqi
Ibn Al-Thahabi
Ibn Abi Sadiq
Ali ibn Isa al-Kahhal









12th century




Abu al-Bayan ibn al-Mudawwar
Ahmad ibn Farrokh
Ibn Hubal
Zayn al-Din Gorgani
Maimonides
Serapion the Younger
Ibn Zuhr
Ya'qub ibn Ishaq al-Israili
Abu Jafar ibn Harun al-Turjali
Averroes
Ibn Tufail
Al-Ghafiqi
Ibn Abi al-Hakam
Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī
Al-Samawal al-Maghribi
Ibn al-Tilmīdh
Ibn Jumay‘









13th century




Sa'ad al-Dawla
Al-Shahrazuri
Rashidun al-Suri
Amin al-Din Rashid al-Din Vatvat
Abraham ben Moses ben Maimon
Da'ud Abu al-Fadl
Al-Dakhwar
Ibn Abi Usaibia
Joseph ben Judah of Ceuta
Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi (medieval writer)
Ibn al-Nafis
Zakariya al-Qazwini
Najib ad-Din-e-Samarqandi
Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi
Ibn al-Quff









14th century




Muhammad ibn Mahmud Amuli
Al-Nagawri
Aqsara'i
Zayn-e-Attar
Mansur ibn Ilyas
Jaghmini
Mas‘ud ibn Muhammad Sijzi
Najm al-Din Mahmud ibn Ilyas al-Shirazi
Nakhshabi
Sadid al-Din al-Kazaruni
Yusuf ibn Ismail al-Kutubi
Ibn al-Khatib
Rashid-al-Din Hamadani









15th century




Abu Sa'id al-Afif
Muhammad Ali Astarabadi
Husayni Isfahani
Burhan-ud-din Kermani
Şerafeddin Sabuncuoğlu
Muhammad ibn Yusuf al-Harawi
Nurbakhshi
Shaykh Muhammad ibn Thaleb









16th century




Hakim-e-Gilani
Abul Qasim ibn Mohammed al-Ghassani
Taqi ad-Din Muhammad ibn Ma'ruf
Dawud al-Antaki











Concepts



Psychology
Ophthalmology








Works



Al-Risalah al-Dhahabiah
The Canon of Medicine
Anatomy Charts of the Arabs
The Book of Healing
Book of the Ten Treatises of the Eye
De Gradibus
Al-Tasrif
Zakhireye Khwarazmshahi
Adab al-Tabib
Kamel al-Sanaat al-Tibbyya
Al-Hawi








Centers



Bimaristan
Nur al-Din Bimaristan
Al-'Adudi








Influences



Ancient Greek medicine








Influenced



Medical Renaissance
Ibn Sina Academy of Medieval Medicine and Sciences













Authority control



WorldCat
VIAF: 226034628
LCCN: n84022251
ISNI: 0000 0001 1874 2991
GND: 118859803
SUDOC: 033522936
BNF: cb124381704 (data)















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Avempace&amp;oldid=690297714"					
				Categories: Medieval Arab philosophersMuslim philosophersNatural philosophersArabic commentators on AristotleMuslim poetsMoorish writersAlmoravid dynastySufi psychology1095 births1138 deathsBotanistsMathematicians of medieval IslamPhysicians of medieval IslamPeople from ZaragozaPeople from Fez, MoroccoHidden categories: Articles lacking reliable references from November 2009All articles lacking reliable referencesArticles containing Arabic-language textWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers				
							
		
		
			