


		
		
		
			

							
						


			Blaise Pascal
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				

Blaise Pascal



Painting of Blaise Pascal made by François II Quesnel for Gérard Edelinck in 1691.



Born
(1623-06-19)19 June 1623
Clermont-Ferrand,
Auvergne, France


Died
19 August 1662(1662-08-19) (aged&#160;39)
Paris, France


Residence
France


Nationality
French


Religion
Roman Catholic





Era
17th-century philosophy


Region
Western philosophy


School



Jansenism
Proto-existentialism






Main interests




Theology
Mathematics
Philosophy
Physics






Notable ideas




Pascal's Wager
Pascal's triangle
Pascal's law
Pascal's theorem







Influences





St. Augustine of Hippo
Michel de Montaigne
René Descartes
Cornelius Jansen
Epictetus











Influenced





Antoine Arnauld
Pierre Duhem
William James
G. W. Leibniz
Léon Brunschvicg
Alexis de Tocqueville
Henri Bergson









Blaise Pascal (/pæˈskæl, pɑːˈskɑːl/;[1] French:&#160;[blɛz paskal]; 19 June 1623 – 19 August 1662) was a French mathematician, physicist, inventor, writer and Christian philosopher. He was a child prodigy who was educated by his father, a tax collector in Rouen. Pascal's earliest work was in the natural and applied sciences where he made important contributions to the study of fluids, and clarified the concepts of pressure and vacuum by generalizing the work of Evangelista Torricelli. Pascal also wrote in defense of the scientific method.
In 1642, while still a teenager, he started some pioneering work on calculating machines. After three years of effort and fifty prototypes,[2] he built 20 finished machines (called Pascal's calculators and later Pascalines) over the following ten years,[3] establishing him as one of the first two inventors of the mechanical calculator.[4][5]
Pascal was an important mathematician, helping create two major new areas of research: he wrote a significant treatise on the subject of projective geometry at the age of 16, and later corresponded with Pierre de Fermat on probability theory, strongly influencing the development of modern economics and social science. Following Galileo and Torricelli, in 1646, he refuted Aristotle's followers who insisted that nature abhors a vacuum. Pascal's results caused many disputes before being accepted.
In 1646, he and his sister Jacqueline identified with the religious movement within Catholicism known by its detractors as Jansenism.[6] His father died in 1651. Following a religious experience in late 1654, he began writing influential works on philosophy and theology. His two most famous works date from this period: the Lettres provinciales and the Pensées, the former set in the conflict between Jansenists and Jesuits. In that year, he also wrote an important treatise on the arithmetical triangle. Between 1658 and 1659 he wrote on the cycloid and its use in calculating the volume of solids.
Pascal had poor health, especially after his 18th year, and his death came just two months after his 39th birthday.[7]



Contents


1 Early life and education
2 Contributions to mathematics

2.1 Philosophy of mathematics


3 Contributions to the physical sciences
4 Adult life, religion, philosophy, and literature

4.1 Religious conversion
4.2 Brush with death
4.3 The Provincial Letters
4.4 The Pensées
4.5 Last works and death


5 Legacy
6 Works
7 See also
8 References
9 Further reading
10 External links



Early life and education
Pascal was born in Clermont-Ferrand, which is in France's Auvergne region. He lost his mother, Antoinette Begon, at the age of three.[8] His father, Étienne Pascal (1588–1651), who also had an interest in science and mathematics, was a local judge and member of the "Noblesse de Robe". Pascal had two sisters, the younger Jacqueline and the elder Gilberte.
In 1631, five years after the death of his wife,[9] Étienne Pascal moved with his children to Paris. The newly arrived family soon hired Louise Delfault, a maid who eventually became an instrumental member of the family. Étienne, who never remarried, decided that he alone would educate his children, for they all showed extraordinary intellectual ability, particularly his son Blaise. The young Pascal showed an amazing aptitude for mathematics and science.
Particularly of interest to Pascal was a work of Desargues on conic sections. Following Desargues' thinking, the 16-year-old Pascal produced, as a means of proof, a short treatise on what was called the "Mystic Hexagram", Essai pour les coniques ("Essay on Conics") and sent it—his first serious work of mathematics—to Père Mersenne in Paris; it is known still today as Pascal's theorem. It states that if a hexagon is inscribed in a circle (or conic) then the three intersection points of opposite sides lie on a line (called the Pascal line).
Pascal's work was so precocious that Descartes was convinced that Pascal's father had written it. When assured by Mersenne that it was, indeed, the product of the son and not the father, Descartes dismissed it with a sniff: "I do not find it strange that he has offered demonstrations about conics more appropriate than those of the ancients," adding, "but other matters related to this subject can be proposed that would scarcely occur to a 16-year-old child."[10]
In France at that time offices and positions could be—and were—bought and sold. In 1631 Étienne sold his position as second president of the Cour des Aides for 65,665 livres.[11] The money was invested in a government bond which provided, if not a lavish, then certainly a comfortable income which allowed the Pascal family to move to, and enjoy, Paris. But in 1638 Richelieu, desperate for money to carry on the Thirty Years' War, defaulted on the government's bonds. Suddenly Étienne Pascal's worth had dropped from nearly 66,000 livres to less than 7,300.




An early Pascaline on display at the Musée des Arts et Métiers, Paris


Like so many others, Étienne was eventually forced to flee Paris because of his opposition to the fiscal policies of Cardinal Richelieu, leaving his three children in the care of his neighbor Madame Sainctot, a great beauty with an infamous past who kept one of the most glittering and intellectual salons in all France. It was only when Jacqueline performed well in a children's play with Richelieu in attendance that Étienne was pardoned. In time, Étienne was back in good graces with the cardinal and in 1639 had been appointed the king's commissioner of taxes in the city of Rouen—a city whose tax records, thanks to uprisings, were in utter chaos.
In 1642, in an effort to ease his father's endless, exhausting calculations, and recalculations, of taxes owed and paid (into which work the young Pascal had been recruited), Pascal, not yet 19, constructed a mechanical calculator capable of addition and subtraction, called Pascal's calculator or the Pascaline. Of the eight Pascalines known to have survived, four are held by the Musée des Arts et Métiers in Paris and one more by the Zwinger museum in Dresden, Germany, exhibit two of his original mechanical calculators.[12] Though these machines are pioneering forerunners to a further 400 years of development of mechanical methods of calculation, and in a sense to the later field of computer engineering, the calculator failed to be a great commercial success. Partly because it was still quite cumbersome to use in practice, but probably primarily because it was extraordinarily expensive, the Pascaline became little more than a toy, and a status symbol, for the very rich both in France and elsewhere in Europe. Pascal continued to make improvements to his design through the next decade, and he refers to some 50 machines that were built to his design.
Contributions to mathematics




Pascal's triangle. Each number is the sum of the two directly above it. The triangle demonstrates many mathematical properties in addition to showing binomial coefficients.


Pascal continued to influence mathematics throughout his life. His Traité du triangle arithmétique ("Treatise on the Arithmetical Triangle") of 1653 described a convenient tabular presentation for binomial coefficients, now called Pascal's triangle. The triangle can also be represented:



0
1
2
3
4
5
6


0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1


1
1
2
3
4
5
6



2
1
3
6
10
15




3
1
4
10
20





4
1
5
15






5
1
6







6
1








He defines the numbers in the triangle by recursion: Call the number in the (m&#160;+&#160;1)th row and (n&#160;+&#160;1)th column tmn. Then tmn&#160;=&#160;tm–1,n&#160;+&#160;tm,n–1, for m&#160;=&#160;0,&#160;1,&#160;2,&#160;... and n&#160;=&#160;0,&#160;1,&#160;2,&#160;... The boundary conditions are tm,−1&#160;=&#160;0, t−1,n&#160;=&#160;0 for m&#160;=&#160;1,&#160;2,&#160;3,&#160;... and n&#160;=&#160;1,&#160;2,&#160;3,&#160;... The generator t00&#160;=&#160;1. Pascal concludes with the proof,



In 1654 he proved Pascal's identity relating the sums of the p-th powers of the first n positive integers for p = 0, 1, 2, …, k.[13]
In 1654, prompted by his friend the Chevalier de Méré, he corresponded with Pierre de Fermat on the subject of gambling problems, and from that collaboration was born the mathematical theory of probabilities.[14] The specific problem was that of two players who want to finish a game early and, given the current circumstances of the game, want to divide the stakes fairly, based on the chance each has of winning the game from that point. From this discussion, the notion of expected value was introduced. Pascal later (in the Pensées) used a probabilistic argument, Pascal's Wager, to justify belief in God and a virtuous life. The work done by Fermat and Pascal into the calculus of probabilities laid important groundwork for Leibniz' formulation of the calculus.[15]
After a religious experience in 1654, Pascal mostly gave up work in mathematics.
Philosophy of mathematics
Pascal's major contribution to the philosophy of mathematics came with his De l'Esprit géométrique ("Of the Geometrical Spirit"), originally written as a preface to a geometry textbook for one of the famous "Petites-Ecoles de Port-Royal" ("Little Schools of Port-Royal"). The work was unpublished until over a century after his death. Here, Pascal looked into the issue of discovering truths, arguing that the ideal of such a method would be to found all propositions on already established truths. At the same time, however, he claimed this was impossible because such established truths would require other truths to back them up—first principles, therefore, cannot be reached. Based on this, Pascal argued that the procedure used in geometry was as perfect as possible, with certain principles assumed and other propositions developed from them. Nevertheless, there was no way to know the assumed principles to be true.
Pascal also used De l'Esprit géométrique to develop a theory of definition. He distinguished between definitions which are conventional labels defined by the writer and definitions which are within the language and understood by everyone because they naturally designate their referent. The second type would be characteristic of the philosophy of essentialism. Pascal claimed that only definitions of the first type were important to science and mathematics, arguing that those fields should adopt the philosophy of formalism as formulated by Descartes.
In De l'Art de persuader ("On the Art of Persuasion"), Pascal looked deeper into geometry's axiomatic method, specifically the question of how people come to be convinced of the axioms upon which later conclusions are based. Pascal agreed with Montaigne that achieving certainty in these axioms and conclusions through human methods is impossible. He asserted that these principles can be grasped only through intuition, and that this fact underscored the necessity for submission to God in searching out truths.
Contributions to the physical sciences




Portrait of Pascal






An illustration of the (apocryphal) Pascal's barrel experiment


Pascal's work in the fields of the study of hydrodynamics and hydrostatics centered on the principles of hydraulic fluids. His inventions include the hydraulic press (using hydraulic pressure to multiply force) and the syringe. He proved that hydrostatic pressure depends not on the weight of the fluid but on the elevation difference. He demonstrated this principle by attaching a thin tube to a barrel full of water and filling the tube with water up to the level of the third floor of a building. This caused the barrel to leak, in what became known as Pascal's barrel experiment.
By 1646, Pascal had learned of Evangelista Torricelli's experimentation with barometers. Having replicated an experiment that involved placing a tube filled with mercury upside down in a bowl of mercury, Pascal questioned what force kept some mercury in the tube and what filled the space above the mercury in the tube. At the time, most scientists contended that, rather than a vacuum, some invisible matter was present. This was based on the Aristotelian notion that creation was a thing of substance, whether visible or invisible; and that this substance was forever in motion. Furthermore, "Everything that is in motion must be moved by something," Aristotle declared.[16] Therefore, to the Aristotelian trained scientists of Pascal's time, a vacuum was an impossibility. How so? As proof it was pointed out:

Light passed through the so-called "vacuum" in the glass tube.
Aristotle wrote how everything moved, and must be moved by something.
Therefore, since there had to be an invisible "something" to move the light through the glass tube, there was no vacuum in the tube. Not in the glass tube or anywhere else. Vacuums – the absence of any and everything – were simply an impossibility.

Following more experimentation in this vein, in 1647 Pascal produced Experiences nouvelles touchant le vide ("New Experiments with the Vacuum"), which detailed basic rules describing to what degree various liquids could be supported by air pressure. It also provided reasons why it was indeed a vacuum above the column of liquid in a barometer tube.
On 19 September 1648, after many months of Pascal's friendly but insistent prodding, Florin Périer, husband of Pascal's elder sister Gilberte, was finally able to carry out the fact-finding mission vital to Pascal's theory. The account, written by Périer, reads:

"The weather was chancy last Saturday...[but] around five o'clock that morning...the Puy-de-Dôme was visible...so I decided to give it a try. Several important people of the city of Clermont had asked me to let them know when I would make the ascent...I was delighted to have them with me in this great work...
"...at eight o'clock we met in the gardens of the Minim Fathers, which has the lowest elevation in town....First I poured 16 pounds of quicksilver...into a vessel...then took several glass tubes...each four feet long and hermetically sealed at one end and opened at the other...then placed them in the vessel [of quicksilver]...I found the quick silver stood at 26" and 3½ lines above the quicksilver in the vessel...I repeated the experiment two more times while standing in the same spot...[they] produced the same result each time...
"I attached one of the tubes to the vessel and marked the height of the quicksilver and...asked Father Chastin, one of the Minim Brothers...to watch if any changes should occur through the day...Taking the other tube and a portion of the quick silver...I walked to the top of Puy-de-Dôme, about 500 fathoms higher than the monastery, where upon experiment...found that the quicksilver reached a height of only 23" and 2 lines...I repeated the experiment five times with care...each at different points on the summit...found the same height of quicksilver...in each case..."[17]

Pascal replicated the experiment in Paris by carrying a barometer up to the top of the bell tower at the church of Saint-Jacques-de-la-Boucherie, a height of about fifty meters. The mercury dropped two lines.
In the face of criticism that some invisible matter must exist in Pascal's empty space, Pascal, in his reply to Estienne Noel, gave one of the 17th century's major statements on the scientific method, which is a striking anticipation of the idea popularised by Karl Popper that scientific theories are characterised by their falsifiability: "In order to show that a hypothesis is evident, it does not suffice that all the phenomena follow from it; instead, if it leads to something contrary to a single one of the phenomena, that suffices to establish its falsity."[18] His insistence on the existence of the vacuum also led to conflict with other prominent scientists, including Descartes.
Pascal introduced a primitive form of roulette and the roulette wheel in his search for a perpetual motion machine.[19]
Adult life, religion, philosophy, and literature

For after all what is man in nature? A nothing in relation to infinity, all in relation to nothing, a central point between nothing and all and infinitely far from understanding either. The ends of things and their beginnings are impregnably concealed from him in an impenetrable secret. He is equally incapable of seeing the nothingness out of which he was drawn and the infinite in which he is engulfed.










Blaise Pascal, Pensées No. 72









Religious conversion




Pascal studying the cycloid, by Augustin Pajou, 1785, Louvre


In the winter of 1646, Pascal's 58-year-old father broke his hip when he slipped and fell on an icy street of Rouen; given the man's age and the state of medicine in the 17th century, a broken hip could be a very serious condition, perhaps even fatal. Rouen was home to two of the finest doctors in France: Monsieur Doctor Deslandes and Monsieur Doctor de La Bouteillerie. The elder Pascal "would not let anyone other than these men attend him...It was a good choice, for the old man survived and was able to walk again..."[20] But treatment and rehabilitation took three months, during which time La Bouteillerie and Deslandes had become household guests.
Both men were followers of Jean Guillebert, proponent of a splinter group from Catholic teaching known as Jansenism. This still fairly small sect was making surprising inroads into the French Catholic community at that time. It espoused rigorous Augustinism. Blaise spoke with the doctors frequently, and upon his successful treatment of Étienne, borrowed from them works by Jansenist authors. In this period, Pascal experienced a sort of "first conversion" and began to write on theological subjects in the course of the following year.
Pascal fell away from this initial religious engagement and experienced a few years of what some biographers have called his "worldly period" (1648–54). His father died in 1651 and left his inheritance to Pascal and Jacqueline, for whom Pascal acted as her conservator. Jacqueline announced that she would soon become a postulant in the Jansenist convent of Port-Royal. Pascal was deeply affected and very sad, not because of her choice, but because of his chronic poor health; he too needed her.

"Suddenly there was war in the Pascal household. Blaise pleaded with Jacqueline not to leave, but she was adamant. He commanded her to stay, but that didn't work, either. At the heart of this was...Blaise's fear of abandonment...if Jacqueline entered Port-Royal, she would have to leave her inheritance behind...[but] nothing would change her mind."[21]

By the end of October in 1651, a truce had been reached between brother and sister. In return for a healthy annual stipend, Jacqueline signed over her part of the inheritance to her brother. Gilberte had already been given her inheritance in the form of a dowry. In early January, Jacqueline left for Port-Royal. On that day, according to Gilberte concerning her brother, "He retired very sadly to his rooms without seeing Jacqueline, who was waiting in the little parlor..."[22] In early June 1653, after what must have seemed like endless badgering from Jacqueline, Pascal formally signed over the whole of his sister's inheritance to Port-Royal, which, to him, "had begun to smell like a cult."[23] With two thirds of his father's estate now gone, the 29-year-old Pascal was now consigned to genteel poverty.
For a while, Pascal pursued the life of a bachelor. During visits to his sister at Port-Royal in 1654, he displayed contempt for affairs of the world but was not drawn to God.[24]
Brush with death
[dubious – discuss]
On 23 November 1654, between 10:30 and 12:30 at night, Pascal had an intense religious vision and immediately recorded the experience in a brief note to himself which began: "Fire. God of Abraham, God of Isaac, God of Jacob, not of the philosophers and the scholars..." and concluded by quoting Psalm 119:16: "I will not forget thy word. Amen." He seems to have carefully sewn this document into his coat and always transferred it when he changed clothes; a servant discovered it only by chance after his death.[25] This piece is now known as the Memorial. The story of the carriage accident[clarification needed] as having led to the experience described in the Memorial is disputed by some scholars.[26] His belief and religious commitment revitalized, Pascal visited the older of two convents at Port-Royal for a two-week retreat in January 1655. For the next four years, he regularly travelled between Port-Royal and Paris. It was at this point immediately after his conversion when he began writing his first major literary work on religion, the Provincial Letters.
The Provincial Letters
Main article: Lettres provinciales


French literature


by category


French literary history




Medieval
Renaissance
17th
18th
19th
20th century
Contemporary




French writers




Chronological list
Writers by category
Essayists
Novelists
Playwrights
Poets
Short story writers
Children's writers




Portals




France
French language
Literature
French/Francophone literature







v
t
e





Beginning in 1656, Pascal published his memorable attack on casuistry, a popular ethical method used by Catholic thinkers in the early modern period (especially the Jesuits, and in particular Antonio Escobar). Pascal denounced casuistry as the mere use of complex reasoning to justify moral laxity and all sorts of sins. The 18-letter series was published between 1656 and 1657 under the pseudonym Louis de Montalte and incensed Louis XIV. The king ordered that the book be shredded and burnt in 1660. In 1661, in the midsts of the formulary controversy, the Jansenist school at Port-Royal was condemned and closed down; those involved with the school had to sign a 1656 papal bull condemning the teachings of Jansen as heretical. The final letter from Pascal, in 1657, had defied Alexander VII himself. Even Pope Alexander, while publicly opposing them, nonetheless was persuaded by Pascal's arguments.
Aside from their religious influence, the Provincial Letters were popular as a literary work. Pascal's use of humor, mockery, and vicious satire in his arguments made the letters ripe for public consumption, and influenced the prose of later French writers like Voltaire and Jean-Jacques Rousseau.
Charles Perrault wrote of the Letters: "Everything is there—purity of language, nobility of thought, solidity in reasoning, finesse in raillery, and throughout an agrément not to be found anywhere else."[27]
The Pensées



Wikisource has original text related to this article:
Pensées



Main article: Pensées
Pascal's most influential theological work, referred to posthumously as the Pensées ("Thoughts"), was not completed before his death. It was to have been a sustained and coherent examination and defense of the Christian faith, with the original title Apologie de la religion Chrétienne ("Defense of the Christian Religion"). The first version of the numerous scraps of paper found after his death appeared in print as a book in 1669 titled Pensées de M. Pascal sur la religion, et sur quelques autres sujets ("Thoughts of M. Pascal on religion, and on some other subjects") and soon thereafter became a classic. One of the Apologie's main strategies was to use the contradictory philosophies of skepticism and stoicism, personalized by Montaigne on one hand, and Epictetus on the other, in order to bring the unbeliever to such despair and confusion that he would embrace God.
Pascal's Pensées is widely considered to be a masterpiece, and a landmark in French prose. When commenting on one particular section (Thought #72), Sainte-Beuve praised it as the finest pages in the French language.[28] Will Durant hailed it as "the most eloquent book in French prose."[29] In Pensées, Pascal surveys several philosophical paradoxes: infinity and nothing, faith and reason, soul and matter, death and life, meaning and vanity—seemingly arriving at no definitive conclusions besides humility, ignorance, and grace. Rolling these into one he develops Pascal's Wager.
Last works and death




Pascal's epitaph in Saint-Étienne-du-Mont, where he was buried


T. S. Eliot described him during this phase of his life as "a man of the world among ascetics, and an ascetic among men of the world." Pascal's ascetic lifestyle derived from a belief that it was natural and necessary for a person to suffer. In 1659, Pascal fell seriously ill. During his last years, he frequently tried to reject the ministrations of his doctors, saying, "Sickness is the natural state of Christians."[30]
Louis XIV suppressed the Jansenist movement at Port-Royal in 1661. In response, Pascal wrote one of his final works, Écrit sur la signature du formulaire ("Writ on the Signing of the Form"), exhorting the Jansenists not to give in. Later that year, his sister Jacqueline died, which convinced Pascal to cease his polemics on Jansenism. Pascal's last major achievement, returning to his mechanical genius, was inaugurating perhaps the first bus line, moving passengers within Paris in a carriage with many seats.
In 1662, Pascal's illness became more violent, and his emotional condition had severely worsened since his sister's death. Aware that his health was fading quickly, he sought a move to the hospital for incurable diseases, but his doctors declared that he was too unstable to be carried. In Paris on 18 August 1662, Pascal went into convulsions and received extreme unction. He died the next morning, his last words being "May God never abandon me," and was buried in the cemetery of Saint-Étienne-du-Mont.[30]
An autopsy performed after his death revealed grave problems with his stomach and other organs of his abdomen, along with damage to his brain. Despite the autopsy, the cause of his poor health was never precisely determined, though speculation focuses on tuberculosis, stomach cancer, or a combination of the two.[31] The headaches which afflicted Pascal are generally attributed to his brain lesion.
Legacy




Death mask of Blaise Pascal.


In honor of his scientific contributions, the name Pascal has been given to the SI unit of pressure, to a programming language, and Pascal's law (an important principle of hydrostatics), and as mentioned above, Pascal's triangle and Pascal's wager still bear his name.
Pascal's development of probability theory was his most influential contribution to mathematics. Originally applied to gambling, today it is extremely important in economics, especially in actuarial science. John Ross writes, "Probability theory and the discoveries following it changed the way we regard uncertainty, risk, decision-making, and an individual's and society's ability to influence the course of future events."[32] However, it should be noted that Pascal and Fermat, though doing important early work in probability theory, did not develop the field very far. Christiaan Huygens, learning of the subject from the correspondence of Pascal and Fermat, wrote the first book on the subject. Later figures who continued the development of the theory include Abraham de Moivre and Pierre-Simon Laplace.
In literature, Pascal is regarded as one of the most important authors of the French Classical Period and is read today as one of the greatest masters of French prose. His use of satire and wit influenced later polemicists. The content of his literary work is best remembered for its strong opposition to the rationalism of René Descartes and simultaneous assertion that the main countervailing philosophy, empiricism, was also insufficient for determining major truths.
In France, prestigious annual awards, Blaise Pascal Chairs are given to outstanding international scientists to conduct their research in the Ile de France region.[33] One of the Universities of Clermont-Ferrand, France – Université Blaise Pascal – is named after him. The University of Waterloo, Ontario, Canada, holds an annual math contest named in his honour.[34]
Roberto Rossellini directed a filmed biopic (entitled Blaise Pascal) which originally aired on Italian television in 1971.[35] Pascal was a subject of the first edition of the 1984 BBC Two documentary, Sea of Faith, presented by Don Cupitt.
Works

Essai pour les coniques [Essay on conics] (1639)
Experiences nouvelles touchant le vide (1647)
Traité du triangle arithmétique [Treatise on the arithmetic triangle] (1653)
Lettres provinciales [The provincial letters] (1656–57)
De l'Esprit géométrique [On the geometrical spirit] (1657 or 1658)
Écrit sur la signature du formulaire (1661)
Pensées [Thoughts] (incomplete at death)

See also




Kingdom of France portal




Scientific revolution
List of works by Eugène Guillaume

References


^ "Pascal". Random House Webster's Unabridged Dictionary.
^ (fr) La Machine d’arithmétique, Blaise Pascal, Wikisource
^ Mourlevat, Guy (1988). Les machines arithmétiques de Blaise Pascal (in French). Clermont-Ferrand: La Française d'Edition et d'Imprimerie. p.&#160;12.&#160;
^ See Schickard versus Pascal: An Empty Debate? and Marguin, Jean (1994). Histoire des instruments et machines à calculer, trois siècles de mécanique pensante 1642–1942 (in French). Hermann. p.&#160;48. ISBN&#160;978-2-7056-6166-3.&#160;
^ d'Ocagne, Maurice (1893). Le calcul simplifié (in French). Gauthier-Villars et fils. p.&#160;245.&#160;
^ "Blaise Pascal". Catholic Encyclopedia. Retrieved 23 February 2009.&#160;
^ Hald, Anders A History of Probability and Statistics and Its Applications before 1750, (Wiley Publications, 1990) pp.44
^ Devlin, Keith, The Unfinished Game: Pascal, Fermat, and the Seventeenth-Century Letter that Made the World Modern, Basic Books; 1 edition (2008), ISBN 978-0-465-00910-7, p. 20.
^ O'Connor, J.J.; Robertson, E.F. (August 2006). "Étienne Pascal". University of St. Andrews, Scotland. Retrieved 5 February 2010.&#160;
^ The Story of Civilization: Volume 8, "The Age of Louis XIV" by Will &amp; Ariel Durant; chapter II, subsection 4.1 p.56)
^ Connor, James A., Pascal's wager: the man who played dice with God (HarperCollins, NY, 2006) ISBN 0-06-076691-3 p. 42
^ A complete list of known Pascalines and also a review of contemporary replicas can be found at Surviving Pascalines and Replica Pascalines at http://things-that-count.net
^ Kieren MacMillan, Jonathan Sondow (2011). "Proofs of power sum and binomial coefficient congruences via Pascal's identity". American Mathematical Monthly 118: 549–551. doi:10.4169/amer.math.monthly.118.06.549.&#160;
^ Devlin, Keith, The Unfinished Game: Pascal, Fermat, and the Seventeenth-Century Letter that Made the World Modern, Basic Books; 1 edition (2008), ISBN 978-0-465-00910-7, p. 24.
^ "The Mathematical Leibniz". Math.rutgers.edu. Retrieved 16 August 2009.&#160;
^ Aristotle, Physics, VII, 1.
^ Périer to Pascal, 22 September 1648, Pascal, Blaise. Oeuvres complètes. (Paris: Seuil, 1960), 2:682.
^ Pour faire qu'une hypothèse soit évidente, il ne suffit pas que tous les phénomènes s'en ensuivent, au lieu que, s'il s'ensuit quelque chose de contraire à un seul des phénomènes, cela suffit pour assurer de sa fausseté, in Les Lettres de Blaise Pascal: Accompagnées de Lettres de ses Correspondants Publiées, ed. Maurice Beaufreton, 6th edition (Paris: G. Crès, 1922), 25–26, available at http://gallica.bnf.fr and translated in Saul Fisher, Pierre Gassendi's Philosophy and Science: Atomism for Empiricists Brill's Studies in Intellectual History 131 (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 2005), 126 n.7
^ MIT, "Inventor of the Week Archive: Pascal&#160;: Mechanical Calculator", May 2003. "Pascal worked on many versions of the devices, leading to his attempt to create a perpetual motion machine. He has been credited with introducing the roulette machine, which was a by-product of these experiments."
^ Connor, James A., Pascal's wager: the man who played dice with God (HarperCollins, NY, 2006) ISBN 0-06-076691-3 p. 70
^ Miel, Jan. Pascal and Theology. (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1969), p. 122
^ Jacqueline Pascal, "Memoir" p. 87
^ Miel, Jan. Pascal and Theology. (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1969), p. 124
^ Richard H. Popkin, Paul Edwards (ed.), Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 1967 edition, s.v. "Pascal, Blaise.", vol. 6, p. 52–55, New York: Macmillan
^ Pascal, Blaise. Oeuvres complètes. (Paris: Seuil, 1960), p. 618
^ MathPages, Hold Your Horses. For the sources on which the hypothesis of a link between a carriage accident and Pascal's second conversion is based, and for a sage weighing of the evidence for and against, see Henri Gouhier, Blaise Pascal: Commentaires, Vrin, 1984, pp. 379ff.
^ Charles Perrault, Parallèle des Anciens et des Modernes (Paris, 1693), Vol. I, p. 296.
^ Sainte-Beuve, Seventeenth Century ISBN 1-113-16675-4 p. 174 (2009 reprint).
^ The Story of Civilization: Volume 8, "The Age of Louis XIV" by Will &amp; Ariel Durant, chapter II, Subsection 4.4, p. 66 ISBN 1-56731-019-2
^ a b Muir, Jane. Of Men and Numbers. (New York: Dover Publications, Inc, 1996). ISBN 0-486-28973-7, p. 104.
^ Muir, Jane. Of Men and Numbers. (New York: Dover Publications, Inc, 1996). ISBN 0-486-28973-7, p. 103.
^ Ross, John F. (2004). "Pascal's legacy". EMBO Reports 5 (Suppl 1): S7–S10. doi:10.1038/sj.embor.7400229. PMC&#160;1299210. PMID&#160;15459727.&#160;
^ "Chaires Blaise Pascal". Chaires Blaise Pascal. Retrieved 16 August 2009.&#160;
^ "CEMC – Pascal, Cayley and Fermat – Mathematics Contests – University of Waterloo". Cemc.uwaterloo.ca. 23 June 2008. Retrieved 16 August 2009.&#160;
^ Blaise Pascal at the TCM Movie Database


Further reading


Adamson, Donald. Blaise Pascal: Mathematician, Physicist, and Thinker about God (1995) ISBN 0-333-55036-6
Adamson, Donald. "Pascal's Views on Mathematics and the Divine," Mathematics and the Divine: A Historical Study (eds. T. Koetsier and L. Bergmans. Amsterdam: Elsevier 2005), pp.&#160;407–21.
Broome, J.H. Pascal. (London: E. Arnold, 1965). ISBN 0-7131-5021-1
Davidson, Hugh M. Blaise Pascal. (Boston: Twayne Publishers), 1983.
Farrell, John. "Pascal and Power". Chapter seven of Paranoia and Modernity: Cervantes to Rousseau (Cornell UP, 2006).
Goldmann, Lucien, The hidden God; a study of tragic vision in the Pensees of Pascal and the tragedies of Racine (original ed. 1955, Trans. Philip Thody. London: Routledge, 1964).
Groothuis, Douglas. On Pascal. (Belmont: Wadsworth, 2002). ISBN 978-0534583910
Jordan, Jeff. Pascal's Wager: Pragmatic Arguments and Belief in God. (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2006).
Landkildehus, Søren. "Kierkegaard and Pascal as kindred spirits in the Fight against Christendom" in Kierkegaard and the Renaissance and Modern Traditions (ed. Jon Stewart. Farnham: Ashgate Publishing, 2009).
Mackie, John Leslie. The Miracle of Theism: Arguments for and against the Existence of God. (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1982).
Pugh, Anthony R. The Composition of Pascal's Apologia, (University of Toronto Press, 1984).
Saka, Paul (2001). "Pascal's Wager and the Many Gods Objection". Religious Studies 37 (3): 321–41. doi:10.1017/S0034412501005686.&#160;
Stephen, Leslie. "Pascal". Studies of a Biographer 2. London: Duckworth and Co. pp.&#160;241–284.&#160;
Tobin, Paul. "The Rejection of Pascal's Wager: A Skeptic's Guide to the Bible and the Historical Jesus". authorsonline.co.uk, 2009.
Yves Morvan, Pascal à Mirefleurs&#160;? Les dessins de la maison de Domat, Impr. Blandin, 1985.(FRBNF40378895)


External links



Find more about
Blaise Pascal
at Wikipedia's sister projects




Definitions from Wiktionary



Media from Commons



News stories from Wikinews



Quotations from Wikiquote



Source texts from Wikisource



Textbooks from Wikibooks



Learning resources from Wikiversity



Works by Blaise Pascal at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about Blaise Pascal at Internet Archive
Works by Blaise Pascal at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
Blaise Pascal entry by Desmond Clarke in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
Discussion of the Pascaline, its history, mechanism, surviving examples, and modern replicas at http://things-that-count.net
"Avis nécessaire à ceux qui auront curiosité de voir ladite Machine et s'en servir" (Pascaline, 1635), text online and analysed on BibNum [click 'à télécharger' for English version].
Pascal's Memorial in orig. French/Latin and modern English, trans. Elizabeth T. Knuth.
Biography, Bibliography. (in French)
Works by Blaise Pascal at Open Library
BBC Radio 4. In Our Time: Pascal.
Blaise Pascal featured on the 500 French Franc banknote in 1977.
Blaise Pascal's works: text, concordances and frequency lists
&#160;"Blaise Pascal". Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company. 1913.&#160;
Etext of Pascal's Pensées (English, in various formats)
Etext of Pascal's Lettres Provinciales (English)
Etext of a number of Pascal's minor works (English translation) including, De l'Esprit géométrique and De l'Art de persuader.
O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Blaise Pascal", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews&#160;.









v
t
e


Blaise Pascal









Innovations
Career






Pascal's calculator
Pascal's law
Pascal's theorem
Pascal's triangle
Pascal's Wager








Works



Lettres provinciales (1656–1657)
Pensées (1669)








Family



Étienne Pascal (father)
Jacqueline Pascal (sister)













&#160;
Articles related to Blaise Pascal
















v
t
e


Catholic Church







Organizations, papacy, teachings and liturgical traditions






History



Jesus
Twelve Apostles
Early Christianity
History of the papacy
Ecumenical Councils
Missions
Great Schism of East
Crusades
Great Schism of West
Protestant Reformation
Counter-Reformation
Catholic Church by country
Vatican City

index













Hierarchy



Pope
Cardinals
Patriarchs
Major Archbishops
Primates
Metropolitans
Archbishops
Diocesan Bishops
Coadjutor Bishops
Auxiliary Bishops
Titular Bishops
Bishops Emeriti
Priesthood








Theology



Body and Soul
Divine Grace
Dogma
One, Holy, Catholic and Apostolic Church
Original sin
Saints

list


Salvation
Sermon on the Mount
The Ten Commandments
Trinity
Worship








Sacraments



Baptism
Confirmation
Eucharist
Penance
Anointing of the Sick

Last rites


Holy Orders
Matrimony








Mariology



Roman Catholic Mariology
Assumption
History of Mariology
Immaculate Conception
Mariology of the popes
Mariology of the saints
Mother of God
Perpetual Virginity
Veneration








Doctors
of the Church







Gregory the Great
Ambrose
Augustine of Hippo
Jerome
John Chrysostom
Basil of Caesarea
Gregory of Nazianzus
Athanasius of Alexandria
Cyril of Alexandria
Cyril of Jerusalem
John of Damascus
Bede the Venerable
Ephrem the Syrian
Thomas Aquinas
Bonaventure
Anselm of Canterbury
Isidore of Seville
Peter Chrysologus
Leo the Great
Peter Damian
Bernard of Clairvaux
Hilary of Poitiers
Alphonsus Liguori
Francis de Sales
Peter Canisius
John of the Cross
Robert Bellarmine
Albertus Magnus
Anthony of Padua
Lawrence of Brindisi
Teresa of Ávila
Catherine of Siena
Thérèse of Lisieux
John of Ávila
Hildegard of Bingen
Gregory of Narek











Pope Francis



Conclave
Inauguration
Theology
Canonizations
Visits








Preceding popes



Pope Benedict XVI
Pope John Paul II
Pope John Paul I
Pope Paul VI
Pope John XXIII
Pope Pius XII
Pope Pius XI
Pope Benedict XV
Pope Pius X
Pope Leo XIII
(more)








Religious institutes
and similar



Assumptionists
Augustinians
Benedictines
Capuchin Order
Carmelites
Carthusians
Congregations of Holy Cross
Dominican Order
Franciscan orders
Jesuits
Oratory of Saint Philip Neri








International Associations
of the Faithful



International Federation of Catholic Parochial Youth Movements
International Federation of Catholic Universities
International Kolping Society
Schoenstatt Movement
International Union of Catholic Esperantists
Sant'Egidio Community
(more)








Vatican II



Definition of the Church
Dei verbum
Gaudium et spes
Lumen gentium
Nostra aetate
Sacrosanctum Concilium








Particular Churches



Albanian
Armenian
Belarusian
Bulgarian
Chaldean
Coptic
Croatian
Eritrean
Ethiopian
Georgian
Greek
Hungarian
Italo-Albanian
Latin
Macedonian
Maronite
Melkite
Romanian
Russian
Ruthenian
Slovak
Syriac
Syro-Malabar
Syro-Malankara
Ukrainian








Liturgical rites



Alexandrian
Ambrosian
Anglican Use
Antiochian
Armenian
Byzantine
East Syrian
Mozarabic
Ordinariate Use
Roman
Sarum











 Catholicism portal
 Pope portal
















v
t
e


History of the Catholic Church






General



History of the Catholic Church
History of Christianity
History of the Papacy
History of the Roman Curia
Timeline of the Catholic Church
Art in Roman Catholicism
Catholic Ecumenical Councils
Catholic religious institutes
Christian monasticism
Papal States
Role of the Christian Church in civilization








Church beginnings



Jesus
Twelve Apostles
Saint Peter
Paul the Apostle
Saint Stephen
John the Apostle
Great Commission
Council of Jerusalem
Apostolic Age
Apostolic Fathers
Ignatius of Antioch
Irenaeus
Pope Victor I
Tertullian









Constantine to
Pope Gregory I




Constantine the Great and Christianity
Arianism
Archbasilica of St. John Lateran
First Council of Nicaea
Pope Sylvester I
First Council of Constantinople
Biblical canon
Jerome
Vulgate
First Council of Ephesus
Council of Chalcedon
Benedict of Nursia
Second Council of Constantinople
Pope Gregory I
Gregorian chant








Early Middle Ages



Third Council of Constantinople
Saint Boniface
Byzantine Iconoclasm
Second Council of Nicaea
Charlemagne
Pope Leo III
Fourth Council of Constantinople
East–West Schism








High Middle Ages



Pope Urban II
Investiture Controversy
Crusades
First Council of the Lateran
Second Council of the Lateran
Third Council of the Lateran
Pope Innocent III
Latin Empire
Francis of Assisi
Fourth Council of the Lateran
Inquisition
First Council of Lyon
Second Council of Lyon
Bernard of Clairvaux
Thomas Aquinas








Late Middle Ages



Pope Boniface VIII
Avignon Papacy
Pope Clement V
Council of Vienne
Knights Templar
Catherine of Siena
Pope Alexander VI









Protestant Reformation
Counter-Reformation




Protestant Reformation
Counter-Reformation
Thomas More
Pope Leo X
Society of Jesus
Ignatius of Loyola
Francis Xavier
Dissolution of the Monasteries
Council of Trent
Pope Pius V
Tridentine Mass
Teresa of Ávila
John of the Cross
Philip Neri
Robert Bellarmine









Baroque Period to the
French Revolution




Pope Innocent XI
Pope Benedict XIV
Suppression of the Society of Jesus
Anti-clericalism
Pope Pius VI
Shimabara Rebellion
Edict of Nantes
Dechristianisation of France during the French Revolution








19th century



Pope Pius VII
Pope Pius IX
Dogma of the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary
Our Lady of La Salette
Our Lady of Lourdes
First Vatican Council
Papal infallibility
Pope Leo XIII
Mary of the Divine Heart
Prayer of Consecration to the Sacred Heart
Rerum novarum








20th century



Pope Pius X
Our Lady of Fátima
Persecutions of the Catholic Church and Pius XII
Pope Pius XII
Pope Pius XII Consecration to the Immaculate Heart of Mary
Dogma of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary
Lateran Treaty
Pope John XXIII
Second Vatican Council
Pope Paul VI
Pope John Paul I
Pope John Paul II
World Youth Day

1995
2000










21st century



Catholic Church sexual abuse cases
Pope Benedict XVI
World Youth Day

2002
2005
2008
2011
2013


Pope Francis








By country or region



Belize
Brazil
Canada
Cuba
France
Germany
Great Britain
Haiti
Hispano-America
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Mexico
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Spain
United States
Vatican City
Venezuela
Vietnam











Catholicism Portal
Pope Portal
















v
t
e


History of Catholic theology









Theologians
Teachings
Heresies








General history



History of the Catholic Church
Early Christianity
History of the Papacy
Ecumenical Councils
Timeline of the Catholic Church
History of Christianity
History of Christian theology











Church beginnings



Paul
Clement of Rome
First Epistle of Clement
Didache
Ignatius of Antioch
Polycarp
Epistle of Barnabas
Shepherd of Hermas
Justin Martyr
Epistle to Diognetus
Irenaeus
Montanism
Tertullian
Origen
Antipope Novatian
Cyprian









Constantine to
Pope Gregory I




Eusebius
Athanasius of Alexandria
Arianism
Pelagianism
Nestorianism
Monophysitism
Ephrem the Syrian
Hilary of Poitiers
Cyril of Jerusalem
Basil of Caesarea
Gregory Nazianzus
Gregory of Nyssa
Ambrose
John Chrysostom
Jerome
Augustine of Hippo
John Cassian
Cyril of Alexandria
Peter Chrysologus
Pope Leo I
Boethius
Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite
Pope Gregory I








Early Middle Ages



Isidore of Seville
Maximus the Confessor
Monothelitism
Ecthesis
Bede
John of Damascus
Iconoclasm
Transubstantiation dispute
Predestination disputes
Paulinus II of Aquileia
Alcuin
Rabanus Maurus
Paschasius Radbertus
John Scotus Eriugena








High Middle Ages



Roscellinus
Gregory of Narek
Berengar of Tours
Peter Damian
Anselm of Canterbury
Joachim of Fiore
Peter Abelard
Decretum Gratiani
Bernard of Clairvaux
Peter Lombard
Anselm of Laon
Hildegard of Bingen
Hugh of Saint Victor
Dominic de Guzmán
Robert Grosseteste
Francis of Assisi
Anthony of Padua
Bonaventure
Albertus Magnus
Thomas Aquinas
Thomism
Roger Bacon








Mysticism and reforms



Ramon Llull
Duns Scotus
Dante Alighieri
William of Ockham
Richard Rolle
Catherine of Siena
Brigit of Sweden
Meister Eckhart
Johannes Tauler
Walter Hilton
The Cloud of Unknowing
Heinrich Seuse
Geert Groote
Devotio Moderna
Julian of Norwich
Thomas à Kempis
Nicholas of Kues
Marsilio Ficino
Girolamo Savonarola
Giovanni Pico della Mirandola









Protestant Reformation
Counter-Reformation




Desiderius Erasmus
Thomas Cajetan
Thomas More
John Fisher
Johann Eck
Francisco de Vitoria
Ignatius of Loyola
Francisco de Osuna
John of Avila
Francis Xavier
Teresa of Ávila
Luis de León
John of the Cross
Petrus Canisius
Luis de Molina
Molinism
Robert Bellarmine
Francisco Suárez
Lawrence of Brindisi
Francis de Sales









Baroque Period to
French Revolution




Tommaso Campanella
Pierre de Bérulle
Mary of Jesus of Ágreda
Jean-Jacques Olier
Louis Thomassin
Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet
François Fénelon
Cornelius Jansen
Jansenism
Blaise Pascal
Nicolas Malebranche
Giambattista Vico
Alphonsus Liguori
Louis de Montfort
Maria Gaetana Agnesi
Alfonso Muzzarelli
Johann Michael Sailer
Clemens Maria Hofbauer








19th century



Joseph Görres
Ignaz von Döllinger
John Henry Newman
Jaime Balmes
Gaetano Sanseverino
Giovanni Maria Cornoldi
Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler
Giuseppe Pecci
Joseph Hergenröther
Tommaso Maria Zigliara
Modernism
Léon Bloy
Friedrich von Hügel
George Tyrrell
Maurice Blondel
Thérèse of Lisieux








20th–21st century



G. K. Chesterton
Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange
Joseph Maréchal
Pierre Teilhard de Chardin
Jacques Maritain
Étienne Gilson
Gabriel Marcel
Marie-Dominique Chenu
Romano Guardini
Edith Stein
Henri de Lubac
Gabriel Roschini
Josemaría Escrivá
Adrienne von Speyr
Karl Rahner
Yves Congar
Bernard Lonergan
Emmanuel Mounier
Jean Daniélou
Hans Urs von Balthasar
Edward Schillebeeckx
Thomas Merton
Raimondo Spiazzi
René Girard
Pope Benedict XVI
Johann Baptist Metz
Henri Nouwen
Walter Kasper
Jean-Luc Marion
Tomáš Halík











Catholicism portal
Pope portal
















v
t
e


Philosophy of religion






Concepts in religion



Afterlife
Euthyphro dilemma
Faith
Intelligent design
Miracle
Problem of evil
Religious belief
Soul
Spirit
Theodicy
Theological veto








Conceptions of God







Aristotelian view
Brahman
Demiurge
Divine simplicity
Egoism
Holy Spirit
Maltheism
Pandeism
Personal god
Process theology
Supreme Being
Unmoved mover








God in



Abrahamic religions
Buddhism
Christianity
Hinduism
Islam
Jainism
Judaism
Mormonism
Sikhism
Bahá'í Faith
Wicca











Existence of God




For



Beauty
Christological
Consciousness
Cosmological

Kalam
Contingency


Degree
Desire
Experience
Fine-tuning of the Universe
Love
Miracles
Morality
Ontological
Pascal's Wager
Proper basis
Reason
Teleological

Natural law
Watchmaker analogy


Transcendental








Against



747 Gambit
Atheist's Wager
Evil
Free will
Hell
Inconsistent revelations
Nonbelief
Noncognitivism
Occam's razor
Omnipotence
Poor design
Russell's teapot











Theology



Acosmism
Agnosticism
Animism
Antireligion
Atheism
Creationism
Dharmism
Deism
Divine command theory
Dualism
Esotericism
Exclusivism
Existentialism

Christian
Agnostic
Atheistic


Feminist theology

Thealogy
Womanist theology


Fideism
Fundamentalism
Gnosticism
Henotheism
Humanism

Religious
Secular
Christian


Inclusivism
Theories about religions
Monism
Monotheism
Mysticism
Naturalism

Metaphysical
Religious
Humanistic


New Age
Nondualism
Nontheism
Pandeism
Panentheism
Pantheism
Perennialism
Polytheism
Process theology
Religious skepticism
Spiritualism
Shamanism
Taoic
Theism
Transcendentalism
more...








Religious language



Eschatological verification
Language-game
Logical positivism
Apophatic theology
Verificationism








Problem of evil



Augustinian theodicy
Best of all possible worlds
Euthyphro dilemma
Inconsistent triad
Irenaean theodicy
Natural evil
Theodicy









Philosophers
of religion

(by date active)




Ancient
and
Medieval



Heraclitus


Augustine of Hippo
Boethius
Anselm of Canterbury
Gaunilo of Marmoutiers
Averroes
Thomas Aquinas
Maimonides


Pico della Mirandola
Desiderius Erasmus








Enlightenment



René Descartes
Blaise Pascal
Baruch Spinoza
Nicolas Malebranche
Gottfried W Leibniz
William Wollaston
Thomas Chubb


David Hume
Baron d'Holbach
Immanuel Kant
Johann G Herder








1800
1850



Friedrich Schleiermacher
Karl C F Krause
Georg W F Hegel


William Whewell
Ludwig Feuerbach
Søren Kierkegaard
Karl Marx
Albrecht Ritschl








1880
1900



Ernst Haeckel
W K Clifford
Friedrich Nietzsche
Harald Høffding
William James


Vladimir Solovyov
Ernst Troeltsch
Rudolf Otto
Lev Shestov
Sergei Bulgakov
Pavel Florensky
Ernst Cassirer
Joseph Maréchal








1920
postwar



George Santayana
Bertrand Russell
Martin Buber
René Guénon
Paul Tillich
Karl Barth
Emil Brunner
Rudolf Bultmann
Reinhold Niebuhr


Charles Hartshorne
Mircea Eliade
J L Mackie
Walter Kaufmann
Martin Lings
Peter Geach
George I Mavrodes
William Alston
Antony Flew








1970
1990
2010



William L Rowe
Dewi Z Phillips
Alvin Plantinga
Anthony Kenny
Nicholas Wolterstorff
Richard Swinburne
Robert Merrihew Adams


Peter van Inwagen
Daniel Dennett
Loyal Rue
Jean-Luc Marion
William Lane Craig
Ali Akbar Rashad


Alexander Pruss











Related topics



Criticism of religion
Ethics in religion
Exegesis
History of religions
Religion
Religious language
Religious philosophy
Relationship between religion and science
Political science of religion
Faith and rationality
more...











 Portal
 Category























v
t
e


Scientists whose names are used as SI units






Base units



André-Marie Ampère
William Thomson, 1st Baron Kelvin








Derived units



Henri Becquerel
Anders Celsius
Charles-Augustin de Coulomb
Michael Faraday
Louis Harold Gray
Joseph Henry
Heinrich Hertz
James Prescott Joule
Isaac Newton
Georg Ohm
Blaise Pascal
Werner von Siemens
Rolf Maximilian Sievert
Nikola Tesla
Alessandro Volta
James Watt
Wilhelm Eduard Weber








See also



Scientists whose names are used as non SI units
Scientists whose names are used in physical constants













Authority control



WorldCat
VIAF: 29538862
LCCN: n79084279
ISNI: 0000 0001 2125 8260
GND: 118591843
SELIBR: 220083
SUDOC: 027059073
BNF: cb11918679x (data)
MGP: 126406
NLA: 35410983
NDL: 00452212
NKC: jn19990006387
ICCU: IT\ICCU\CFIV\010441
BNE: XX1147855















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Blaise_Pascal&amp;oldid=689356808"					
				Categories: 1623 births1662 deathsPeople from Clermont-FerrandFrench Roman Catholic writersWriters from Auvergne17th-century French writers17th-century French mathematicians17th-century philosophersAphoristsBlaise PascalChristian apologistsChristian humanistsChristian mysticsChristian philosophersCritics of atheismConverts to Roman CatholicismFluid dynamicistsFrench mathematiciansFrench philosophersFrench physicistsFrench scientists17th-century French theologiansHypochondriacsJansenistsProbability theoristsRoman Catholic philosophers17th-century Roman CatholicsBurials at Saint-Étienne-du-MontHidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr)Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesWikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesUse dmy dates from December 2013Articles with hCardsAll accuracy disputesArticles with disputed statements from September 2011Wikipedia articles needing clarification from July 2012Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource referenceWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiersWikipedia articles with SBN identifiers				
							
		
		
			