


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Buddhist philosophy
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				

Part of a series on


Buddhism







History


Timeline
Gautama Buddha


Councils
Later Buddhists











Dharma
Concepts





Four Noble Truths


Five Aggregates
Impermanence


Suffering
Non-self


Dependent Origination


Middle Way
Emptiness
Karma


Rebirth
Saṃsāra
Cosmology








Practices


Three Jewels


Buddhist Paths to liberation


Morality
Perfections
Meditation


Mindfulness
Wisdom


Compassion


Aids to Enlightenment
Monasticism


Laity








Nirvāṇa


Four Stages
Arhat


Buddha
Bodhisattva











Traditions
Canons





Theravāda
Pāli
Mahāyāna


Hinayana
Chinese
Vajrayāna


Tibetan
Navayana








Outline
 Buddhism portal







v
t
e





Buddhist philosophy is the elaboration and explanation of the delivered teachings of the Buddha as found in the Tripitaka and Agama. Its main concern is with explicating the dharmas constituting reality. A recurrent theme is the reification of concepts, and the subsequent return to the Buddhist Middle Way.[1][2]
Early Buddhism avoided speculative thought on metaphysics, phenomenology, ethics, and epistemology,[3] but was based instead on empirical evidence gained by the sense organs (ayatana).[4]
Nevertheless, Buddhist scholars have addressed ontological and metaphysical issues subsequently. Particular points of Buddhist philosophy have often been the subject of disputes between different schools of Buddhism. These elaborations and disputes gave rise to various schools in early Buddhism of Abhidhamma, and to the Mahayana traditions and schools of the prajnaparamita, Madhyamaka, buddha-nature and Yogacara.



Contents


1 Philosophical orientation
2 Life and teachings of the Buddha

2.1 Biography
2.2 Philosophy

2.2.1 Emphasis on awakening
2.2.2 Attachments to the skandhas
2.2.3 Emptiness




3 Early Buddhism

3.1 Basic teachings

3.1.1 Dukkha
3.1.2 Dependent origination
3.1.3 Anatta


3.2 Ethics

3.2.1 Eightfold Path
3.2.2 Precepts


3.3 Textual authority


4 Early Buddhist schools

4.1 Sarvastivadin realism
4.2 Theravada


5 Mahayana

5.1 Indian Mahayana

5.1.1 Prajnaparamita
5.1.2 Madhyamaka
5.1.3 Tathagatagarbha
5.1.4 Yogacara


5.2 Chinese Buddhism

5.2.1 Tiantai and the Lotus School
5.2.2 Huayan and Avatamsaka-sutra


5.3 Tibetan Buddhism


6 Comparison with other philosophies
7 See also

7.1 Topics
7.2 Buddhist philosophers


8 Notes
9 References
10 Sources
11 External links



Philosophical orientation[edit]
Philosophy in India was aimed mainly at spiritual liberation and had soteriological goals. In his study of Mādhyamaka Buddhist philosophy in India, Peter Deller Santina writes:[5]

Attention must first of all be drawn to the fact that philosophical systems in India were seldom, if ever, purely speculative or descriptive. Virtually all the great philosophical systems of India: Sāṅkhya, Advaitavedānta, Mādhyamaka and so forth, were preeminently concerned with providing a means to liberation or salvation. It was a tacit assumption with these systems that if their philosophy were correctly understood and assimilated, an unconditioned state free of suffering and limitation could be achieved. [...] If this fact is overlooked, as often happens as a result of the propensity engendered by formal Occidental philosophy to consider the philosophical enterprise as a purely descriptive one, the real significance of Indian and Buddhist philosophy will be missed.

Life and teachings of the Buddha[edit]




Gautama Buddha surrounded by followers, from an 18th century Burmese watercolour


Biography[edit]
According to the traditional accounts, Gautama, the future Buddha, born into a Vedic Kshatriya family, was a prince who grew up in an environment of luxury and opulence. He became convinced that sense-pleasures and wealth did not provide the satisfaction that human beings longed for deep within. He abandoned worldly life to live as a mendicant. He studied under a number of teachers, developing his insight into the problem of suffering.
After his awakening he regarded himself as a physician rather than a philosopher. Whereas philosophers merely had views about things, he taught the Noble Eightfold Path which liberates from suffering.
Philosophy[edit]
The Buddha discouraged his followers from indulging in intellectual disputation for its own sake, which is fruitless, and distracting from true awakening. Nevertheless, the delivered sayings of the Buddha contain a philosophical component, in its teachings on the working of the mind, and its criticisms of the philosophies of his contemporaries.
According to the scriptures, during his lifetime the Buddha remained silent when asked several metaphysical questions. These regarded issues such as whether the universe is eternal or non-eternal (or whether it is finite or infinite), the unity or separation of the body and the self, the complete inexistence of a person after Nirvana and death, and others.
Emphasis on awakening[edit]
One explanation for this silence is that such questions distract from activity that is practical to realizing enlightenment[6] and bring about the danger of substituting the experience of liberation by conceptual understanding of the doctrine or by religious faith.

Experience is [...] the path most elaborated in early Buddhism. The doctrine on the other hand was kept low. The Buddha avoided doctrinal formulations concerning the final reality as much as possible in order to prevent his followers from resting content with minor achievements on the path in which the absence of the final experience could be substituted by conceptual understanding of the doctrine or by religious faith, a situation which sometimes occurs, in both varieties, in the context of Hindu systems of doctrine.[7]

Attachments to the skandhas[edit]
Another explanation is that both affirmative and negative positions regarding these questions are based on attachment to and misunderstanding of the aggregates and senses. That is, when one sees these things for what they are, the idea of forming positions on such metaphysical questions simply does not occur.
Emptiness[edit]
Another closely related explanation is that reality is devoid of sensory mediation and conception, or empty, and therefore language itself is a priori inadequate without direct experience.[8]
Thus, the Buddha's silence does not indicate misology or disdain for philosophy. Rather, it indicates that he viewed the answers to these questions as not understandable by the unenlightened.[8] Dependent arising provides a framework for analysis of reality that is not based on metaphysical assumptions regarding existence or non-existence, but instead on imagining direct cognition of phenomena as they are presented to the mind. This informs and supports the Buddhist approach to liberation from adventitious distortion and engaging in the Noble Eightfold Path.
The Buddha of the earliest Buddhists texts describes Dharma (in the sense of "truth") as "beyond reasoning" or "transcending logic", in the sense that reasoning is a subjectively introduced aspect of the way unenlightened humans perceive things, and the conceptual framework which underpins their cognitive process, rather than a feature of things as they really are. Going "beyond reasoning" means in this context penetrating the nature of reasoning from the inside, and removing the causes for experiencing any future stress as a result of it, rather than functioning outside of the system as a whole.[9]
Early Buddhism[edit]
Basic teachings[edit]
Certain basic teachings appear in many places throughout the early texts, so most scholars conclude that the Buddha must at least have taught these teachings:[10]

Three marks of existence
Five aggregates
Dependent arising
Karma and rebirth
The four noble truths
The Noble Eightfold Path
Nirvana

According to these scholars, there was something they variously call "earliest Buddhism", "original Buddhism" or "pre-canonical Buddhism".
Some scholars disagree, and have proposed other theories.[11] According to some scholars, the philosophical outlook of earliest Buddhism was primarily negative, in the sense that it focused on what doctrines to reject more than on what doctrines to accept.[a] Only knowledge that is useful in achieving enlightenment is valued. According to this theory, the cycle of philosophical upheavals that in part drove the diversification of Buddhism into its many schools and sects only began once Buddhists began attempting to make explicit the implicit philosophy of the Buddha and the early suttas.
Other scholars reject this theory. After the death of the Buddha, attempts were made to gather his teachings and transmit them in a commonly agreed form, first orally, then also in writing (the Tripiṭaka).
Dukkha[edit]
Dukkha, often translated as suffering, is the inherent unsatisfactoriness of life. This unsatisfactoriness drives our yearning for a better way of life, yet keeps us imprisoned in wordly existence and rebirth.
Dependent origination[edit]
Main article: Dependent origination
The working of the rising and ceasing of suffering is explained by Pratitya-samutpada, dependent origination. It states that events are not predetermined, nor are they random. It rejects notions of direct causation, which are necessarily undergirded by a substantialist metaphysics. Instead, it posits the arising of events under certain conditions which are inextricable, such that the processes in question at no time, are considered to be entities.
Dependent origination posits that certain specific events, concepts, or realities are always dependent on other specific things. Craving, for example, is always dependent on, and caused by, emotion. Emotion is always dependent on contact with our surroundings. This chain of causation purports to show that the cessation of decay, death, and sorrow is indirectly dependent on the cessation of craving.
This concept leaves no room for the existence of everlasting, absolute entities. The world must be thought of in procedural terms, not in terms of things or substances.[12] Likewise,
Anatta[edit]
The Buddha asserted the non inherently existent concept of the ego, in opposition to the Upanishadic concept of an unchanging ultimate self. The Buddha held that attachment to the appearance of a permanent self in this world of change is the cause of suffering, and the main obstacle to liberation. The apparent ego is merely the result of identification with the temporary aggregates, the components of the individual human being's body and consciousness at any given moment in time.
Ethics[edit]
Main article: Buddhist ethics
Eightfold Path[edit]
Although there are many ethical tenets in Buddhism that differ depending on whether one is a monk or a layman, and depending on individual schools, the Buddhist system of ethics can be summed up in the eightfold path:

And this, monks, is the noble truth of the way of practice leading to the cessation of suffering – precisely this Noble Eightfold Path – right view, right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right concentration.[13]

The purpose of living an ethical life is to escape the suffering inherent in samsara. Skillful actions condition the mind in a positive way and lead to future happiness, while the opposite is true for unskillful actions. Ethical discipline also provides the mental stability and freedom to embark upon mental cultivation via meditation.
The part of the Noble Eightfold path that covers morality/ethics is right speech, right action and right livelihood. The other parts cover concentration and wisdom, with wisdom being covered by right view and right intention and the remaining three belonging to concentration.

The three aggregates are not included under the noble eightfold path, friend Visakha, but the noble eightfold path is included under the three aggregates. Right speech, right action, &amp; right livelihood come under the aggregate of virtue. Right effort, right mindfulness, &amp; right concentration come under the aggregate of concentration. Right view &amp; right resolve come under the aggregate of discernment.[14]

Precepts[edit]
While the precepts for monks and nuns differ somewhat depending on which tradition one has ordained in (Tibetan, Thai Theravadan, etc.), the precepts for laymen and laywomen followers of the Buddha are the same.
There are the five precepts that all followers of the Buddha must observe if they hope to be reborn as a human being. Eight precepts are practiced by anagarikas and lay-followers staying in temples. Ten precepts are followed by bhikkhus or other serious practitioners.

Refrain from killing living things.
Refrain from stealing.
Refrain from unchastity (sensuality, sexuality, lust).
Refrain from lying.
Refrain from taking intoxicants.
Refrain from taking food at inappropriate times (after noon).
Refrain from singing, dancing, playing music or attending entertainment programs (performances).
Refrain from wearing perfume, cosmetics and garland (decorative accessories).
Refrain from sitting on high chairs and sleeping on luxurious, soft beds.
Refrain from accepting money.

Textual authority[edit]
Decisive in distinguishing Buddhism from what is commonly called Hinduism is the issue of epistemological justification.
All schools of Indian logic recognize various sets of valid justifications for knowledge, or pramāṇa. Buddhism recognizes a set that is smaller than the others. For some schools of Hinduism and Buddhism the received textual tradition is an epistemological category equal to perception and inference (although this is not necessarily true for some other schools).[b]
Thus, in the Hindu schools, if a claim was made that could not be substantiated by appeal to the textual canon, it would be considered as ridiculous as a claim that the sky was green and, conversely, a claim which could not be substantiated via conventional means might still be justified through textual reference, differentiating this from the epistemology of modern science. It must also be remembered that most Hindu schools do believe that logical inference and perception of the sense organs is the most effective means testing of a claim. The Nyaya school of Hinduism is one which highly believes in application of logic and reason more than canonical evidence.[citation needed]
Early Buddhist schools[edit]
The main early Buddhist philosophical schools are the Abhidharma schools, particularly Sarvāstivāda and Theravāda.
Sarvastivadin realism[edit]
Early Buddhist philosophers and exegetes of the Sarvāstivādins created a pluralist metaphysical and phenomenological system, in which all experiences of people, things and events can be broken down into smaller and smaller perceptual or perceptual-ontological units called "dharmas".
Other schools incorporated some parts of this theory and criticized others. The Sautrāntikas, another early school, and the Theravādins, now the only modern survivor of the early Buddhist schools, criticized the realist standpoint of the Sarvāstivādins.
Theravada[edit]
Theravada promotes the concept of vibhajjavada (Pāli, literally "Teaching of Analysis") to non-Buddhists. This doctrine says that insight must come from the aspirant's experience, critical investigation, and reasoning instead of by blind faith. As the Buddha said according to the canonical scriptures:

Do not accept anything by mere tradition ... Do not accept anything just because it accords with your scriptures ... Do not accept anything merely because it agrees with your pre-conceived notions ... But when you know for yourselves—these things are moral, these things are blameless, these things are praised by the wise, these things, when performed and undertaken, conduce to well-being and happiness—then do you live acting accordingly.[15]

Mahayana[edit]
Mahayana often adopts a pragmatic concept of truth:[16] doctrines are regarded as conditionally "true" in the sense of being spiritually beneficial. In modern Chinese Buddhism, all doctrinal traditions are regarded as equally valid.[17]
Main Mahayana philosophical schools and traditions include the prajnaparamita, Madhyamaka, Tathagatagarbha, Yogācāra, Huayan, and Tiantai schools.
Indian Mahayana[edit]
Prajnaparamita[edit]
The Prajanaparamita-sutras emphasize the emptiness of the five skandhas. The Heart sutra, a text from the prajnaparamita-sutras, articulates this in the following saying in which the five skandhas are said to be "empty":

"Oh, Sariputra, Form Does not Differ From the Void,
And the Void Does Not Differ From Form.
Form is Void and Void is Form;
The Same is True For Feelings,
Perceptions, Volitions and Consciousness".[18]

Madhyamaka[edit]
Main article: Madhyamaka
The Mahāyānist Nāgārjuna, one of the most influential Buddhist thinkers, promoted classical Buddhist emphasis on phenomena and attacked Sarvāstivāda realism and Sautrāntika nominalism in his magnum opus, The Fundamental Verses on the Middle Way (Mūlamadhyamakakārikā).[19]
Nagarjuna asserted a direct connection between, even identity of, dependent origination, selflessness (anatta), and emptiness (śūnyatā). He pointed out that implicit in the early Buddhist concept of dependent origination is the lack of any substantial being (anatta) underlying the participants in origination, so that they have no independent existence, a state identified as emptiness (śūnyatā), or emptiness of a nature or essence (svabhāva).
Tathagatagarbha[edit]
Main article: Tathagatagarbha
The tathāgathagarbha sutras, in a departure from mainstream Buddhist language, insist that the potential for awakening is inherent to every sentient being. They marked a shift from a largely apophatic (negative) philosophical trend within Buddhism to a decidedly more cataphatic (positive) modus.
Prior to the period of these scriptures, Mahāyāna metaphysics had been dominated by teachings on emptiness in the form of Madhyamaka philosophy. The language used by this approach is primarily negative, and the tathāgatagarbha genre of sutras can be seen as an attempt to state orthodox Buddhist teachings of dependent origination using positive language instead, to prevent people from being turned away from Buddhism by a false impression of nihilism.
In these sutras the perfection of the wisdom of not-self is stated to be the true self; the ultimate goal of the path is then characterized using a range of positive language that had been used previously in Indian philosophy by essentialist philosophers, but which was now transmuted into a new Buddhist vocabulary to describe a being who has successfully completed the Buddhist path.[20]
The word "self" (atman) is used in a way idiosyncratic to these sutras; the "true self" is described as the perfection of the wisdom of not-self in the Buddha-Nature Treatise, for example.[21] Language that had previously been used by essentialist non-Buddhist philosophers was now adopted, with new definitions, by Buddhists to promote orthodox teachings.
The tathāgatagarbha does not, according to some scholars, represent a substantial self; rather, it is a positive language expression of emptiness and represents the potentiality to realize Buddhahood through Buddhist practices. In this interpretation, the intention of the teaching of tathāgatagarbha is soteriological rather than theoretical.[21][22]
The tathāgathagarbha, the Theravāda doctrine of bhavaṅga, and the Yogācāra store consciousness were all identified at some point with the luminous mind of the Nikāyas.
In the Mahayana Mahaparinirvana Sutra, the Buddha insists that while pondering upon Dharma is vital, one must then relinquish fixation on words and letters, as these are utterly divorced from liberation and the Buddha-nature.
Yogacara[edit]
Main article: Yogacara
The Yogacara-school tries to explain the arising of suffering by explaining the workings of our mind. It takes the concepts of the five skandhas and the six consciousnesses, to explain how manas creates vijnapti, concepts to which we cling.[23]
Chinese Buddhism[edit]
Tiantai and the Lotus School[edit]
Main article: Tiantai
The schools of Buddhism that had existed in China prior to the emergence of the Tiantai are generally believed to represent direct transplantations from India, with little modification to their basic doctrines and methods. However, Tiantai grew and flourished as a natively Chinese Buddhist school under the 4th patriarch, Zhiyi, who developed a hierarchy Buddhist sutras that asserted the Lotus Sutra as the supreme teaching, as well as a system of meditation and practices around it.
Huayan and Avatamsaka-sutra[edit]
Main article: Huayan school
The Huayan developed the doctrine of "interpenetration" or "coalescence" (Wylie: zung-'jug; Sanskrit: yuganaddha),[24][25] based on the Avataṃsaka Sūtra, a Mahāyāna scripture. It holds that all phenomena (Sanskrit: dharmas) are intimately connected (and mutually arising). Two images are used to convey this idea. The first is known as Indra's net. The net is set with jewels which have the extraordinary property that they reflect all of the other jewels. The second image is that of the world text. This image portrays the world as consisting of an enormous text which is as large as the universe itself. The words of the text are composed of the phenomena that make up the world. However, every atom of the world contains the whole text within it. It is the work of a Buddha to let out the text so that beings can be liberated from suffering. The doctrine of interpenetration influenced the Japanese monk Kūkai, who founded the Shingon school of Buddhism. Interpenetration and essence-function are mutually informing in the East Asian Buddhist traditions, especially the Korean Buddhist tradition.
In Tibetan Buddhism, it is iconographically represented by yab-yum.
Tibetan Buddhism[edit]
The Tibetan tantra entitled the "All-Creating King" (Kunjed Gyalpo Tantra) also emphasizes how Buddhist realization lies beyond the range of discursive/verbal thought and is ultimately mysterious. Samantabhadra, states there:

The mind of perfect purity ... is beyond thinking and inexplicable..."[26]

Also later, the famous Indian Buddhist practitioner and teacher, mahasiddha Tilopa discouraged any intellectual activity in his six words of advice.
Comparison with other philosophies[edit]
Main article: Buddhism and Western Philosophy
Baruch Spinoza, though he argued for the existence of a permanent reality, asserts that all phenomenal existence is transitory. In his opinion sorrow is conquered "by finding an object of knowledge which is not transient, not ephemeral, but is immutable, permanent, everlasting." The Buddha taught that the only thing which is eternal is Nirvana. David Hume, after a relentless analysis of the mind, concluded that consciousness consists of fleeting mental states. Hume's Bundle theory is a very similar concept to the Buddhist skandhas, though his skepticism about causation lead him to opposite conclusions in other areas. Arthur Schopenhauer's philosophy parallels Buddhism in his affirmation of asceticism and renunciation as a response to suffering and desire.
Ludwig Wittgenstein's "language-game" closely parallel the warning that intellectual speculation or papañca is an impediment to understanding, as found in the Buddhist Parable of the Poison Arrow. Friedrich Nietzsche, although himself dismissive of Buddhism as yet another nihilism, had a similar impermanent view of the self. Heidegger's ideas on being and nothingness have been held by some[who?] to be similar to Buddhism today.[27]
An alternative approach to the comparison of Buddhist thought with Western philosophy is to use the concept of the Middle Way in Buddhism as a critical tool for the assessment of Western philosophies. In this way Western philosophies can be classified in Buddhist terms as eternalist or nihilist. In a Buddhist view all philosophies are considered non-essential views (ditthis) and not to be clung to.[28]
See also[edit]
Topics[edit]

Critical Buddhism
God in Buddhism
List of Buddhist terms and concepts
List of Buddhist topics
List of sutras
Madhyamaka
Mindstream
Reality in Buddhism
Tulpa

Buddhist philosophers[edit]

Asanga
Buddha
Chandrakirti
Dignaga
Dharmakirti
Dogen
Fazang
Honen
Jinul
Jizang
Nagarjuna
Vasubandhu
Wonhyo

Notes[edit]


^ See for example Thanissaro Bhikkhu's commentary on the Mulapariyaya Sutta, [1].
^ The Theravāda commentary, ascribed to Dhammapala, on the Nettipakaraṇa, says (Pāli pamāṇa is equivalent to Sanskrit pramāṇa): "na hi pāḷito aññaṃ pamāṇataraṃ atthi (quoted in Pali Text Society edition of the Nettipakaraṇa, 1902, page XI) which Nanamoli translates as: "for there is no other criterion beyond a text" (The Guide, Pali Text Society, 1962, page xi).


References[edit]


^ Kalupahana 1994.
^ David Kalupahana, Mulamadhyamakakarika of Nagarjuna. Motilal Banarsidass, 2006, page 1.
^ Gunnar Skirbekk, Nils Gilje, A history of Western thought: from ancient Greece to the twentieth century. 7th edition published by Routledge, 2001, page 25.
^ David Kalupahana, Causality: The Central Philosophy of Buddhism. The University Press of Hawaii, 1975, page 70.
^ Santina, Peter Della. Madhyamaka Schools in India: A Study of the Madhyamaka Philosophy and of the Division of the System into the Prasangika and Svatantrika Schools. 2008. p. 31
^ MN 72 (Thanissaro, 1997). For further discussion of the context in which these statements was made, see Thanissaro (2004).
^ Karel Werner, Mysticism and Indian Spirituality. In Karel Werner, ed., The Yogi and the Mystic. Curzon Press, 1989: p. 27.
^ a b Gadjin M. Nagao, Madhyamika and Yogachara. Leslie S. Kawamura, translator, SUNY Press, Albany 1991, pp. 40–41.
^ Sue Hamilton, Early Buddhism. Routledge, 2000, page 135.
^ Mitchell, Buddhism, Oxford University Press, 2002, page 34 and table of contents
^ Skorupski, Buddhist Forum, vol I, Heritage, Delhi/SOAS, London, 1990, page 5; Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies, vol 21 (1998), part 1, pages 4, 11
^ Gunnar Skirbekk, Nils Gilje, A history of Western thought: from ancient Greece to the twentieth century. 7th edition published by Routledge, 2001, page 26.
^ Samyutta Nikaya LVI.11
^ Majjhima Nikaya 44
^ Kalama Sutta, Anguttara Nikaya III.65
^ Williams, Mahayana Buddhism, Routledge, 1989, p. 2
^ Welch, Practice of Chinese Buddhism, Harvard, 1967, p. 395
^ The Heart Sutra Prajna Paramita Hrydaya Sutra
^ Randall Collins, The Sociology of Philosophies: A Global Theory of Intellectual Change. Harvard University Press, 2000, pages 221-222.
^ Sallie B. King (1997),The Doctrine of Buddha Nature is Impeccably Buddhist. In: Jamie Hubbard (ed.), Pruning the Bodhi Tree: The Storm Over Critical Buddhism, Univ of Hawaii Press 1997, pp. 174-192. ISBN 0824819497.
^ a b Sallie B. King (1997),The Doctrine of Buddha Nature is Impeccably Buddhist. In: Jamie Hubbard (ed.), Pruning the Bodhi Tree: The Storm Over Critical Buddhism, Univ of Hawaii Press 1997, pp. 174-192. ISBN 0824819497
^ Heng-Ching Shih, The Significance Of 'Tathagatagarbha' -- A Positive Expression Of 'Sunyata'
^ Kalupahana 1992.
^ Neville, Robert C. (1987).New metaphysics for eternal experience, Journal of Chinese Philosophy 14, 357-370
^ http://rywiki.tsadra.org/index.php/zung_'jug
^ The Sovereign All-Creating Mind tr. by E. K. Neumaier-Dargyay, pp. 111–112.
^ God Is Dead: What Next
^ Robert Ellis A Buddhist theory of moral objectivity(Ph.D. thesis)


Sources[edit]


Elías Capriles. The Four Schools of Buddhist Philosophy: Clear Discrimination of Views Pointing at the Definitive Meaning. The Four Philosophical Schools of the Sutrayana Traditionally Taught in Tibet with Reference to the Dzogchen Teachings.
William Edelglass and Jay Garfield, Buddhist Philosophy: Essential Readings, New York: Oxford University Press, 2009, ISBN 0-19-532817-5.
Kalupahana, David J. (1992), The Principles of Buddhist Psychology, Delhi: Sri Satguru Publications&#160;
Kalupahana, David J. (1994), A history of Buddhist philosophy, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass Publishers Private Limited&#160;
Daniel Perdue: Debate in Tibetan Buddhism, Publisher&#160;: Snow Lion Publications, 1992, ISBN 0-937938-76-9, EAN 9780937938768


External links[edit]

Buddhism in a Nutshell
2500 Years of Buddhism by Prof. P.Y. Bapat (1956) at archive.org









v
t
e


Buddhism topics









Outline
Glossary
Index








Foundations



Three Jewels

Buddha
Dharma
Sangha


Four Noble Truths
Noble Eightfold Path
Nirvana
Middle Way








The Buddha



Tathāgata
Birthday
Four sights
Physical characteristics
Footprint
Iconography in Laos and Thailand
Films
Miracles
Family

Suddhodāna (father)
Māyā (mother)
Mahapajapati Gotamī (aunt, adoptive mother)
Yasodhara (wife)
Rāhula (son)
Ānanda (cousin)
Devadatta (cousin)


Places where the Buddha stayed
Buddha in world religions








Key concepts



Dharma
Three Marks of Existence

Impermanence
Dukkha
Anatta


Pratītyasamutpāda
Skandha
Karma
Rebirth
Saṃsāra
Saṅkhāra
Kleshas
Ignorance
Craving
Five hindrances
Ten Fetters
Indriya
Enlightenment
Parinirvana
Tathatā
Dharmas
Two truths doctrine
Śūnyatā
Bodhicitta
Bodhisattva
Buddha-nature
Mindstream








Cosmology



Ten spiritual realms
Six realms

Heaven
Human realm
Asura realm
Hungry Ghost realm
Animal realm
Hell


Three planes of existence








Practices



Refuge
Buddhist devotion
Puja

Offerings
Prostration
Chanting


Merit
Paritta
Dāna
Nekkhamma
Śīla

Five Precepts
Bodhisattva vow
Prātimokṣa


Threefold Training

Śīla
Samadhi
Prajñā


Brahmavihara

Mettā
Karuṇā
Mudita
Upekkha


Pāramitā
Bodhipakkhiyādhammā
Seven Factors of Enlightenment

Sati
Dhamma vicaya
Pīti
Passaddhi


Vīrya

Four Right Exertions


Iddhipada
Five Strengths
Faith
Mindfulness

Satipatthana


Dhyāna
Bhavana
Satya

Sacca


Meditation

Mantras
Kammaṭṭhāna
Recollection
Smarana
Anapanasati
Samatha
Vipassana movement
Shikantaza
Zazen
Kōan
Mandala
Tonglen
Tantra
Tertön
Terma










Nirvana



Buddhahood
Pratyekabuddha
Bodhisattva
Four stages of enlightenment

Sotāpanna
Sakadagami
Anāgāmi
Arhat










Monasticism



Bhikkhu
Bhikkhuni
Śrāmaṇera
Śrāmaṇerī
Anagarika
Ajahn
Sayadaw
Zen master
Rōshi
Lama
Rinpoche
Geshe
Tulku
Householder
Upāsaka and Upāsikā
Śrāvaka

The ten principal disciples


Shaolin Monastery








Major figures



Gautama Buddha
Kaundinya
Assaji
Sāriputta
Mahamoggallāna
Mulian
Ānanda
Mahākassapa
Anuruddha
Mahākaccana
Nanda
Subhuti
Punna
Upali
Mahapajapati Gotamī
Khema
Uppalavanna
Asita
Channa
Yasa
Buddhaghosa
Nagasena
Bodhidharma
Nagarjuna
Asanga
Vasubandhu
Atiśa
Padmasambhava
Nichiren
Ambedkar
Songtsän Gampo
Emperor Wen of Sui
Dalai Lama
Panchen Lama
Karmapa
Shamarpa
Naropa
Xuanzang








Texts



Tripiṭaka
Mahayana sutras
Pāli Canon
Chinese Buddhist canon
Tibetan Buddhist canon








Branches



Theravada
Mahayana

Chan Buddhism

Zen
Seon
Thiền


Pure Land
Tiantai
Nichiren
Madhyamaka
Yogacara


Navayana
Vajrayana

Tibetan
Shingon
Dzogchen


Early Buddhist schools
Pre-sectarian Buddhism
Basic points unifying Theravāda and Mahāyāna








Countries



Afghanistan
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Myanmar
Cambodia
China
India
Indonesia
Japan
Korea
Laos
Malaysia
Maldives
Mongolia
Nepal
Pakistan
Philippines
Russia
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Taiwan
Thailand
Tibet
Vietnam
Middle East

Iran


Western countries

Argentina
Australia
Brazil
France
United Kingdom
United States
Venezuela










History



Timeline
Ashoka
Buddhist councils
History of Buddhism in India

Decline of Buddhism in India


Great Anti-Buddhist Persecution
Greco-Buddhism
Buddhism and the Roman world
Buddhism in the West
Silk Road transmission of Buddhism
Persecution of Buddhists
Banishment of Buddhist monks from Nepal
Buddhist crisis
Sinhalese Buddhist nationalism
Buddhism in the West
Buddhist modernism
Vipassana movement
969 Movement
Women in Buddhism








Philosophy



Abhidharma
Logic
Buddhology
Eschatology
Reality
God
Secular Buddhism
Humanism
Eight Consciousnesses
Engaged Buddhism
Socialism
Economics
Atomism
Evolution
Ethics
The unanswered questions








Culture



Jaya Sri Maha Bodhi
Temple of the Tooth
Art
Greco-Buddhist art
Poetry
Buddha statue
Budai
Symbolism

Dharmachakra
Flag
Bhavacakra
Swastika
Thangka


Prayer wheel
Mala
Mudra
Mantra

Om mani padme hum


Funeral
Music
Holidays

Vesak
Uposatha
Magha Puja
Asalha Puja
Rains retreat


Kassaya
Architecture

Temple
Vihara
Wat
Stupa
Pagoda
Candi
Thai temple art and architecture


Pilgrimage

Lumbini
Maya Devi Temple
Bodh Gaya
Sarnath
Kushinagar


Bodhi Tree
Mahabodhi Temple
Calendar
Cuisine
Vegetarianism








Miscellaneous



Lineage
Maitreya
Avalokiteśvara

Guanyin


Amitābha
Brahmā
Māra
Comparison of the rise of Buddhism in China and Japan
Dhammapada
Vinaya
Sutra
Koliya
Hinayana
Sacred languages

Pali
Sanskrit


Dharma talk
Kalpa
Abhijñā
Ṛddhi
Siddhi








Buddhism and:



Science
Psychology
Hinduism
Jainism
Judaism
East Asian religions
Christianity

Influences
Comparison


Theosophy
Gnosticism
Violence
Western philosophy








Lists



Buddhas
Twenty-eight Buddhas
Bodhisattvas
Buddhists
Suttas
Books
Temples

Candi













Portal
Category
















v
t
e


Philosophy










&#160;
Branches










Traditional



Metaphysics
Epistemology
Logic
Ethics
Aesthetics








Philosophy of



Action
Art

Culture
Design
Music
Film


Being
Business
Dialogue
Education
Environment
Futility
Happiness
Healthcare
History
Human nature
Humor
Language
Literature
Mathematics
Mind

Pain
Psychology


Philosophy
Religion
Science

Physics
Chemistry
Biology
Geography


Sexuality
Social science

Economics
Justice
Law
Politics
Society


Space and time
Sport
Technology

Computer science
Engineering
Information


War


















&#160;
Schools of thought










By era



Ancient
Western

Medieval
Renaissance
Early modern
Modern
Contemporary










Ancient




Chinese



Agriculturalism
Confucianism
Legalism
Logicians
Mohism
Chinese naturalism
Neotaoism
Taoism
Yangism
Zen








Greco-Roman



Aristotelianism
Cynicism
Epicureanism
Hermeneutics
Neoplatonism
Peripatetic
Platonism
Presocratic
Pythagoreanism
Sophism
Stoicism








Indian



Buddhist
Cārvāka
Hindu
Jain








Persian



Mazdakism
Zoroastrianism
Zurvanism











Medieval
9th–16th
century





European



Christian philosophy
Scholasticism
Thomism
Renaissance humanism








East Asian



Korean Confucianism
Edo Neo-Confucianism
Neo-Confucianism








Indian



Navya-Nyāya
Vishishtadvaita
Dvaita








Islamic



Averroism
Avicennism
Persian Illuminationism
Ilm al-Kalam
Sufi








Jewish



Judeo-Islamic











Modern
17th–19th
century





people



Neo-Scholasticism
Cartesianism
Kantianism
Neo-Kantianism
Hegelianism
Marxism








Ideal&#160;/ Material



Idealism
Absolute idealism
Rationalism
Empiricism
Utilitarianism
Pragmatism








Other



Liberalism
Anarchism
Modernism
Phenomenology
Transcendentalism
Existentialism
Kokugaku
New Confucianism











Contemporary
20th–21st
century





Analytic



Analytic feminism
Consequentialism
Experimental philosophy
Internalism and Externalism
Falsificationism
Foundationalism&#160;/ Coherentism
Logical positivism
Legal positivism
Quinean Naturalism
Ordinary language philosophy
Quietism
Rawlsian
Reformed epistemology
Postanalytic philosophy
Contemporary utilitarianism
Neo-Aristotelian
Vienna Circle
Wittgensteinian








Continental



Critical theory
Deconstruction
Existentialism
Feminist
Frankfurt School
Postmodernism
Post-structuralism
Social constructionism
Structuralism








Other



Kyoto School
Objectivism
Russian cosmism
more...





















&#160;
Positions










Aesthetics



Formalism
Institutionalism
Aesthetic response








Ethics



Consequentialism
Deontology
Virtue








Free will



Compatibilism
Determinism
Libertarianism








Metaphysics



Atomism
Dualism
Monism
Naturalism








Epistemology



Constructivism
Empiricism
Idealism
Particularism
Fideism
Rationalism&#160;/ Reasonism
Skepticism
Solipsism








Mind



Behaviorism
Eliminativism
Epiphenomenalism
Functionalism
Objectivism
Subjectivism








Normativity



Absolutism
Particularism
Relativism
Nihilism
Skepticism
Universalism








Ontology



Action
Event
Process








Reality



Anti-realism
Conceptualism
Idealism
Materialism
Naturalism
Nominalism
Realism


















&#160;



Philosophy by region
Philosophy-related lists













By region



African
Ethiopian
Aztec
Native America
Eastern
Chinese
Egyptian
Czech
Indian
Indonesian
Iranian
Japanese
Korean
Vietnam
Pakistani
Western
American
British
Danish
French
German
Greek
Italian
Polish
Romanian
Russian
Slovene








Lists



Outline
Index
Years
Problems
Schools
Glossary
Philosophers
Movements
Publications

















Portal
Category
WikiProject
Changes
















v
t
e


Indian philosophy






Topics



Atheism
Atomism
Idealism
Logic
Monotheism
Vedic philosophy








Āstika



Samkhya
Nyaya
Vaisheshika
Yoga
Mīmāṃsā
Vedanta

Acintya bheda abheda
Advaita
Bhedabheda
Dvaita
Dvaitadvaita
Shuddhadvaita
Vishishtadvaita


Shaiva

Pratyabhijña
Pashupata Shaivism
Shaiva Siddhanta










Nāstika



Cārvāka
Ājīvika
Jain

Anekantavada
Syādvāda


Buddhist

Śūnyatā
Madhyamaka
Yogacara
Sautrāntika
Svatantrika










Texts



Vedas
Vedangas
Vedantasara
Upanishads

primary
Whole list...


Bhagavad Gita
Buddhist texts
Jain Agamas
Yoga Sutras of Patanjali
Nyāya Sūtras
Vaiśeṣika Sūtra
Samkhyapravachana Sutra
Purva Mimamsa Sutras
Brahma Sutra
Panchadasi
Shiva Sutras
Arthashastra
Abhinavabharati
Yoga Vasistha
More...








Philosophers



Avatsara
Yajnavalkya
Gargi Vachaknavi
Patanjali
Kanada
Kapila
Brihadratha Ikshvaku
Jaimini
Vyasa
Chanakya
Akshapada Gotama
Nagarjuna
Padmasambhava
Vasubandhu
Gaudapada
Adi Shankara
Swami Vivekananda
Dayananda Saraswati
Ramanuja
Vedanta Desika
Raikva
Sadananda
Sakayanya
Satyakama Jabala
Madhvacharya
Vidyaranya
More...








Concepts



Abhava
Abhasavada
Abheda
Adarsana
Advaita
Aham
Aishvarya
Akrodha
Aksara
Anatta
Ananta
Anavastha
Anupalabdhi
Apauruṣheyā
Asiddhatva
Asatkalpa
Ātman
Avyakta
Brahman
Brahmi sthiti
Bhuman
Bhumika
Chaitanya
Chidabhasa
Cittabhumi
Devatas
Dharma
Dhi
Dravya
Dhrti
Ekagrata
Guṇa
Hitā
Idam
Ikshana
Ishvaratva
Jivatva
Karma
Kasaya
Kshetrajna
Lakshana
Mithyatva
Mokṣa
Nididhyasana
Nirvāṇa
Padārtha
Paramatman
Paramananda
Parameshashakti
Parinama-vada
Pradhana
Prajna
Prakṛti
Pratibimbavada
Pratītyasamutpāda
Puruṣa
Rājamaṇḍala
Ṛta
Sakshi
Samadhi
Saṃsāra
Sankalpa
Satya
Satkaryavada
Shabda Brahman
Sphoṭa
Sthiti
Śūnyatā
Sutram
Svātantrya
Iccha-mrityu
Syādvāda
Taijasa
Tajjalan
Tanmatra
Tyāga
Uparati
Upekkhā
Utsaha
Vivartavada
Viraj
Yoga
More...
















v
t
e


Idealism






Forms



Absolute idealism
Actual idealism
British idealism
German idealism
Monistic idealism
Epistemological idealism
Platonic idealism
Subjective idealism
Objective idealism
Transcendental idealism
Indian idealism
Monistic idealism (Shaivism)
Magical (thaumaturgic) idealism
Buddhist Idealism (consciousness-only)
Practical Idealism
Political idealism








Related topics



Idea
Plato's Theory of Ideas
Anti-realism
consciousness-only
rationalism
mentalism
panpsychism
phenomenalism
idealistic pluralism
Idealistic Studies













Authority control



NDL: 00560971















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Buddhist_philosophy&amp;oldid=679278557"					
				Categories: Buddhist philosophyChinese philosophyIndian philosophyHidden categories: EngvarB from April 2015Use dmy dates from April 2015All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from May 2012All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from April 2012				
							
		
		
			