


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Byzantium
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				This article is about the ancient city.  For other uses, see Byzantium (disambiguation).
For the city in the late Roman and the Eastern Roman or Byzantine periods (330–1453), see Constantinople. For the Ottoman and modern city (after 1453), see Istanbul. For the empire, see Byzantine Empire.




Location of Byzantium


Byzantium (/bɪˈzæntiəm/&#160;; Greek: Βυζάντιον Byzántion) was an ancient Greek colony on the site that later became Constantinople, and later still Istanbul. Byzantium was colonised by Greek colonists from Megara in 657 BC.



Contents


1 Name
2 History

2.1 Emblem


3 Notable people
4 See also
5 Notes
6 References
7 External links



Name[edit]
The etymology of Byzantion is unknown. It has been suggested that the name is of Thraco-Illyrian origin,[1] It may be derived from a Thracian or Illyrian personal name, Byzas.[2] Ancient Greek legend refers to a legendary king Byzas, the leader of the Megarean colonists and founder of the city.[3] The form Byzantium is a Latinization of the original name. Much later, the name Byzantium became common in the West to refer to the Eastern Roman Empire, the "Byzantine" Empire, whose capital Constantinople stood on the site of ancient Byzantium. This usage was introduced only in 1555 by the German historian Hieronymus Wolf, a century after the empire had ceased to exist. During the time of the empire, the term Byzantium was restricted to just the city, rather than the empire that it ruled.
History[edit]





O: Head of Alexander the Great with Amun's horns.
R: Seated Athena holding Nike with wreath, ΒΑΣΙΛΕΩΣ / ΛΥΣΙΜΑΧΟΥ; monogram (ΠΩΛΥΒ) to left; ΒΥ below throne; trident in exergue


Silver tetradrachm struck in Byzantion 150–±100 BC. There were struck coins in the name of Lysimachus nearly 200 years after his death.






Byzantine lamellar klivanium (Κλιβάνιον) - a predecessor of ottoman krug mirror armour


The European side (at Seraglio Point) featured only two fishing settlements: Lygos and Semistra. The origins of Byzantium are shrouded in legend. The traditional legend has it that Byzas from Megara (a city-state near Athens) founded Byzantium in 667 BC when he sailed northeast across the Aegean Sea. The tradition tells that Byzas, son of King Nisos (Νίσος), planned to found a colony of the Dorian Greek city of Megara. Byzas consulted the oracle of Apollo at Delphi, which instructed Byzas to settle opposite the "Land of the Blind". Leading a group of Megarian colonists, Byzas found a location where the Golden Horn, a great natural harbour, meets the Bosphorus and flows into the Sea of Marmara, opposite Chalcedon (modern day Kadıköy). He adjudged the Chalcedonians blind not to have recognized the advantages the land on the European side of the Bosphorus had over the Asiatic side. In 667 BC he founded Byzantium at their location, thus fulfilling the oracle's requirement. Cape Moda in Chalcedon was the first location which the Greek settlers from Megara chose to colonize in 685 BC, prior to colonizing Byzantion on the European side of the Bosphorus under the command of King Byzas in 667 BC.
It was mainly a trading city due to its location at the Black Sea's only entrance. Byzantium later conquered Chalcedon, across the Bosporus on the Asiatic side.
Byzantium was besieged by Greek forces during the Peloponnesian war. As part of Sparta's strategy for cutting off grain supplies to Athens, Sparta took the city in 411 BC. The Athenian military later took the city in 408 BC.[4]
After siding with Pescennius Niger against the victorious Septimius Severus, the city was besieged by Roman forces and suffered extensive damage in 196 AD.[5] Byzantium was rebuilt by Septimius Severus, now emperor, and quickly regained its previous prosperity. It was bound to Perinthos during the period of Septimius Severus. The location of Byzantium attracted Roman Emperor Constantine I who, in 330 AD, refounded it as an imperial residence inspired by Rome itself. (See Nova Roma.) After his death the city was called Constantinople (Greek Κωνσταντινούπολις or Konstantinoupolis) ("city of Constantine").
This combination of imperialism and location would affect Constantinople's role as the nexus between the continents of Europe and Asia. It was a commercial, cultural, and diplomatic centre. With its strategic position, Constantinople controlled the route between Asia and Europe, as well as the passage from the Mediterranean Sea to the Black Sea. On May 29, 1453, the city fell to the Ottoman Turks, and again became the capital of a powerful state, the Ottoman Empire. The Turks called the city "Istanbul" (although it was not officially renamed until 1930); the name derives from "eis-tin-polin" (Greek: "to-the-city"). To this day it remains the largest and most populous city in Turkey (the successor to the Ottoman Empire), although Ankara is now the national capital.
Emblem[edit]
Main article: Star and crescent
Though associated with the Sassanid Persians and with Mithradates VI Eupator (who for a time incorporated the city into his empire),[6] by the late Hellenistic or early Roman period, the star and crescent motif had been associated to some degree with Byzantium. For example, some Byzantine coins of the 1st century BC and later show the head of Artemis with bow and quiver, and feature a crescent with what appears to be a six-rayed star on the reverse. According to accounts which vary in some of the details, in 340 BC the Byzantines and their allies the Athenians were under siege by the troops of Philip of Macedon. On a particularly dark and wet night Philip attempted a surprise attack but was thwarted by the appearance of a bright light in the sky. This light is occasionally described by subsequent interpreters as a meteor, sometimes as the moon, and some accounts also mention the barking of dogs. However, the original accounts mention only a light in the sky, without specifying the moon.[7] To commemorate the event the Byzantines erected a statue of Hecate lampadephoros (light-bearer or bringer). This story survived in the works of Hesychius of Miletus, who in all probability lived in the time of Justinian I. His works survive only in fragments preserved in Photius and the tenth century lexicographer Suidas. The tale is also related by Stephanus of Byzantium, and Eustathius.
Devotion to Hecate was especially favored by the Byzantines for her aid in having protected them from the incursions of Philip of Macedon. Her symbols were the crescent and star, and the walls of her city were her provenance.[8]
It is unclear precisely how the symbol Hecate/Artemis, one of many goddesses[9] would have been transferred to the city itself, but it seems likely to have been an effect of being credited with the intervention against Philip and the subsequent honors. This was a common process in ancient Greece, as in Athens where the city was named after Athena in honor of such an intervention in time of war.
Later, under the Romans, cities in the empire often continued to issue their own coinage. "Of the many themes that were used on local coinage, celestial and astral symbols often appeared, mostly stars or crescent moons."[10] The wide variety of these issues, and the varying explanations for the significance of the star and crescent on Roman coinage precludes their discussion here. It is, however, apparent that by the time of the Romans, coins featuring a star or crescent in some combination were not at all rare.
Notable people[edit]

Homerus, tragedian, lived in the early 3rd century BC
Philo, engineer, lived ca. 280 BC–ca. 220 BC
Epigenes of Byzantium, astrologer, lived in the 3rd–2nd century BC
Aristophanes of Byzantium, a scholar who flourished in Alexandria, 3rd–2nd century BC

See also[edit]

Constantinople details the history of the city before the Turkish conquest of 1453.
Istanbul details the history of the city from 1453 on, and describes the modern city.
Sarayburnu is the geographic location of ancient Byzantium.
Timeline of Istanbul history

Notes[edit]


^ Janin, Raymond (1964). Constantinople byzantine. Paris: Institut Français d'Études Byzantines. p.&#160;10f.&#160;
^ Georgacas, Demetrius John (1947). "The Names of Constantinople". Transactions and Proceedings of the American Philological Association (The Johns Hopkins University Press) 78: 347–67. doi:10.2307/283503. JSTOR&#160;283503.&#160;
^ Room, Adrian (2006). Placenames of the World: Origins and Meanings of the Names for 6,600 Countries, Cities, Territories, Natural Features, and Historic Sites (2nd ed.). Jefferson, N.C.: McFarland &amp; Company. ISBN&#160;978-0-7864-2248-7.&#160;
^ "Egypt, Greece, and Rome: Civilizations of the Ancient Mediterranean," Oxford University Press, 2nd Edition, 2004, p. 302
^ Daily Life in Ancient and Modern Istanbul Robert Bator, Chris Rothero p.8
^ Andrew G. Traver, From Polis to Empire, The Ancient World, ca. 800 B.C.-A.D. 500, Greenwood Publishing Group, 2002, p257
^ "In 340 BC, however, the Byzantines, with the aid of the Athenians, withstood a siege successfully, an occurrence the more remarkable as they were attacked by the greatest general of the age, Philip of Macedon. In the course of this beleaguerment, it is related, on a certain wet and moonless night the enemy attempted a surprise, but were foiled by reason of a bright light which, appearing suddenly in the heavens, startled all the dogs in the town and thus roused the garrison to a sense of their danger. To commemorate this timely phenomenon, which was attributed to Hecate, they erected a public statue to that goddess [...]" William Gordon Holmes, The Age of Justinian and Theodora, 2003 p5-6; "If any goddess had a connection with the walls in Constantinople, it was Hecate. Hecate had a cult in Byzantium from the time of its founding. Like Byzas in one legend, she had her origins in Thrace. Since Hecate was the guardian of "liminal places," in Byzantium small temples in her honor were placed close to the gates of the city. Hecate's importance to Byzantium was above all as deity of protection. When Philip of Macedon was about to attack the city, according to the legend she alerted the townspeople with her ever-present torches, and with her pack of dogs, which served as her constant companions. Her mythic qualities thenceforth forever entered the fabric of Byzantine history. A statue known as the 'Lampadephoros' was erected on the hill above the Bosphorous to commemorate Hecate's defensive aid." Vasiliki Limberis, Divine Heiress, Routledge, 1994, p126-127
^ Vasiliki Limberis, Divine Heiress, Routledge, 1994, p15
^ "In 324 Byzantium had a number of operative cults to traditional gods and goddesses tied to its very foundation eight hundred years before. Rhea, called "the mother of the gods" by Zosimus, had a well-ensconced cult in Byzantium from its very foundation. [...] Devotion to Hecate was especially favored by the Byzantines [...] Constantine would also have found Artemis-Selene and Aphrodite along with the banished Apollo Zeuxippus on the Acropolis in the old Greek section of the city. Other gods mentioned in the sources are Athena, Hera, Zeus, Hermes, and Demeter and Kore. Even evidence of Isis and Serapis appears from the Roman era on coins during the reign of Caracalla and from inscriptions." Vasiliki Limberis, Divine Heiress, Routledge, 1994, p16
^ Michael R. Molnar, The Star of Bethlehem, Rutgers University Press, 1999, p48


References[edit]


Harris, Jonathan, Constantinople: Capital of Byzantium (Hambledon/Continuum, London, 2007). ISBN 978-1-84725-179-4
Jeffreys, Elizabeth and Michael, and Moffatt, Ann, Byzantine Papers: Proceedings of the First Australian Byzantine Studies Conference, Canberra, 17–19 May 1978 (Australian National University, Canberra, 1979).
Istanbul Historical Information - Istanbul Informative Guide To The City. Retrieved January 6, 2005.
The Useful Information about Istanbul. Retrieved January 6, 2005.
The Oxford Dictionary of Byzantium (Oxford University Press, 1991) ISBN 0-19-504652-8
Yeats, William Butler, "Sailing to Byzantium",


External links[edit]

www.byzantium.ac.uk Society for the Promotion of Byzantine Studies
Vasilief, A History of the Byzantine Empire, hyperlinked with notes and more resources, at Elpenor
History of money FAQs – description of Byzantine monetary system, fifth century BC
Byzantine &amp; Christian Museum
BBC documentary "Byzantium and the History of Faith"
Coins of the Byzantine empire









v
t
e


Ancient settlements in Turkey






Aegean



Aegae
Aizanoi
Alabanda
Alinda
Allianoi
Amorium
Amyzon
Antioch on the Maeander
Apamea in Phrygia
Aphrodisias
Apollonia in Mysia
Atarneus
Bargylia
Beycesultan
Blaundus
Caloe
Caryanda
Celaenae
Ceramus
Colophon
Claros
Cyme
Didyma
Docimium
Ephesus
Erythrae
Eucarpia
Euromus
Gambrion
Gryneion
Halicarnassus
Hierapolis
Iasos
Karmylissos
Kaunos
Klazomenai
Knidos
Labraunda
Laodicea on the Lycus
Latmus
Lebedus
Leucae
Limantepe
Magnesia ad Sipylus
Magnesia on the Maeander
Metropolis
Miletus
Myndus
Myriandrus
Myrina
Myus
Notion
Nysa on the Maeander
Oenoanda
Pepuza
Pergamon
Perperene
Phocaea
Pinara
Pitane
Priene
Sardis
Smyrna
Stratonicea in Lydia
Stratonicea in Caria
Temnos
Teos
Tymion








Black Sea



Alaca Höyük
Comana in the Pontus
Euchaita
Hattusa
Heraclea Pontica
Hüseyindede Tepe
Ibora
Laodicea Pontica
Nerik
Nicopolis
Pompeiopolis
Salatiwara
Samuha
Sapinuwa
Tripolis
Yazılıkaya
Zaliche








Central Anatolia



Alishar Hüyük
Binbirkilise
Çatalhöyük
Cotenna
Derbe
Dorylaeum
Eudocia (Cappadocia)
Eudocia (Phrygia)
Gordium
Heraclea Cybistra
Irenopolis
Kaman-Kalehöyük
Kerkenes
Kültepe (Kanesh)
Laodicea Combusta
Meloë
Mokissos
Nyssa
Pessinus
Purushanda
Tavium
Tyana








Eastern Anatolia



Altıntepe
Ani
Cafer Höyük
Melid
Sugunia
Tushpa








Marmara



Achilleion
Aegospotami
Ainos
Alexandria Troas
Apamea Myrlea
Apollonia on the Rhyndax
Apros
Assos
Byzantium
Cardia
Cebrene
Chalcedon
Charax
Cius
Cyzicus
Drusipara
Faustinopolis
Germanicopolis
Lamponeia
Lampsacus
Lygos
Lysimachia
Marpessos
Neandreia
Nicomedia
Orestias
Perinthos
Sestos
Sigeion
Skepsis
Troy (Hisarlik)








Mediterranean



Acalissus
Acarassus
Alalakh
Amelas
Anazarbus
Andriaca
Antigonia
Antioch on the Orontes
Antioch of Pisidia
Antiochia Lamotis
Antioch on the Cragus
Antioch on the Pyramis
Antiphellus
Aperlae
Aphrodisias of Cilicia
Araxa
Ariassos
Arneae
Arsinoe
Arycanda
Aspendos
Bab al-Hawa Border Crossing
Balbura
Bubon
Calynda
Carallia
Carmylessus
Casae
Cestrus
Choma
Cibyra Mikra
Comama
Comana in Cappadocia
Comba
Coracesium
Corycus (Kızkalesi)
Corydala
Cremna
Cyaneae
Cyrrhus
Dalisandus in Isauria
Dalisandus in Pamphylia
Dias
Domuztepe
Elaiussa Sebaste
Epiphania
Erymna
Etenna
Eudocia (Lycia)
Eudocias (Pamphylia)
Gagae
Gözlükule
Hacilar
Idebessos
Irenopolis
Isba
Issus
Kandyba
Karakabaklı
Karatepe
Kibyra
Lebessus
Limyra
Lyrbe
Magydus
Mallus
Mamure Castle
Mastaura
Meloë
Mezgitkale
Mopsuestia
Myra
Nisa
Olba
Olympos
Öküzlü
Orokenda
Patara
Perga
Phaselis
Phellus
Podalia
Rhodiapolis
Rhosus
Sagalassos
Seleucia in Pamphylia
Seleucia Pieria
Seleucia Sidera
Selge
Side
Sidyma
Sillyon
Simena
Sinda
Soli
Sozopolis
Syedra
Tapureli
Tell Tayinat
Termessos
Tlos
Trebenna
Xanthos
Yanıkhan
Yumuktepe








Southeastern Anatolia



Antioch in the Taurus
Antioch in Mesopotamia
Apamea on the Euphrates
Carchemish
Urshu
Khashshum
Çayönü
Dara
Edessa
Göbekli Tepe
Harran
Kussara
Nevalı Çori
Sakçagözü
Sam'al
Samosata
Sareisa
Seleucia at the Zeugma
Sultantepe
Tille
Tushhan
Zeugma















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Byzantium&amp;oldid=691453720"					
				Categories: Ancient Greece667 BCPopulated places established in the 7th century BCAncient Byzantium7th-century BC establishmentsHidden categories: Articles containing Greek-language text				
							
		
		
			