


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Charles Sanders Peirce
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				
Charles Sanders Peirce


Charles Sanders Peirce



Born
September 10, 1839 in Cambridge, Massachusetts


Died
April 19, 1914 (aged 74) in Milford, Pennsylvania


Nationality
American


Fields
Logic, Mathematics,
Statistics,[1][2] Philosophy,
Metrology,[3] Chemistry,
Experimental psychology[4]
Economics,[5] Linguistics,[6]
History of science


Religious stance
Episcopal (unconventional)[7]




Charles Sanders Peirce


General




Charles Sanders Peirce
Charles Sanders Peirce bibliography




Philosophical




Categories (Peirce)
Semiotic elements and classes of signs
Pragmatic maxim
Pragmaticism
Synechism
Tychism
Classification of the sciences




Biographical




Juliette Peirce
Charles Santiago Sanders Peirce






Abbreviations
B:x: Brent, Joseph (1998), Charles Sanders Peirce: A Life, 2nd edition, page x[8]
CDPT: Commens Dictionary of Peirce's Terms
CP x.y: Collected Papers, volume x, paragraph y
EP x:y: The Essential Peirce, volume x, page y
W x:y Writings of Charles S. Peirce, volume x, page y







v
t
e





Charles Sanders Peirce (/ˈpɜrs/,[9] like "purse", September 10, 1839 – April 19, 1914) was an American philosopher, logician, mathematician, and scientist who is sometimes known as "the father of pragmatism". He was educated as a chemist and employed as a scientist for 30 years. Today he is appreciated largely for his contributions to logic, mathematics, philosophy, scientific methodology, and semiotics, and for his founding of pragmatism.
An innovator in mathematics, statistics, philosophy, research methodology, and various sciences, Peirce considered himself, first and foremost, a logician. He made major contributions to logic, but logic for him encompassed much of that which is now called epistemology and philosophy of science. He saw logic as the formal branch of semiotics, of which he is a founder, and which foreshadowed the debate among logical positivists and proponents of philosophy of language that dominated 20th century Western philosophy; additionally, he defined the concept of abductive reasoning, as well as rigorously formulated mathematical induction and deductive reasoning. As early as 1886 he saw that logical operations could be carried out by electrical switching circuits; the same idea was used decades later to produce digital computers.[10]
In 1934, the philosopher Paul Weiss called Peirce "the most original and versatile of American philosophers and America's greatest logician".[11] Webster's Biographical Dictionary said in 1943 that Peirce was "now regarded as the most original thinker and greatest logician of his time."[12] Keith Devlin similarly referred to Peirce as one of the greatest philosophers ever.[13]



Contents


1 Life

1.1 Early employment
1.2 Johns Hopkins University
1.3 Poverty
1.4 Slavery, the Civil War and racism


2 Reception
3 Works
4 Mathematics

4.1 Mathematics of logic
4.2 Continua
4.3 Probability and statistics


5 Philosophy

5.1 Theory of categories
5.2 Aesthetics and ethics


6 Philosophy: logic, or semiotic

6.1 Logic as philosophical

6.1.1 Presuppositions of logic
6.1.2 Four incapacities
6.1.3 Logic as formal semiotic


6.2 Signs

6.2.1 Sign relation
6.2.2 Semiotic elements
6.2.3 Classes of signs


6.3 Modes of inference
6.4 Pragmatism

6.4.1 Theory of inquiry

6.4.1.1 Critical common-sensism
6.4.1.2 Rival methods of inquiry
6.4.1.3 Scientific method
6.4.1.4 Against Cartesianism






7 Philosophy: metaphysics
8 Science of review
9 See also
10 Notes
11 External links



Life[edit]




Peirce's birthplace. Now part of Lesley University's Graduate School of Arts and Social Sciences


Peirce was born at 3 Phillips Place in Cambridge, Massachusetts. He was the son of Sarah Hunt Mills and Benjamin Peirce, himself a professor of astronomy and mathematics at Harvard University and perhaps the first serious research mathematician in America. At age 12, Charles read his older brother's copy of Richard Whately's Elements of Logic, then the leading English-language text on the subject. So began his lifelong fascination with logic and reasoning.[14] He went on to earn the A.B. and A.M. from Harvard; in 1863 the Lawrence Scientific School awarded him a B.Sc. that was Harvard's first summa cum laude chemistry degree;[15] and otherwise his academic record was undistinguished.[16] At Harvard, he began lifelong friendships with Francis Ellingwood Abbot, Chauncey Wright, and William James.[17] One of his Harvard instructors, Charles William Eliot, formed an unfavorable opinion of Peirce. This opinion proved fateful, because Eliot, while President of Harvard 1869–1909—a period encompassing nearly all of Peirce's working life—repeatedly vetoed Harvard's employing Peirce in any capacity.[18]
Peirce suffered from his late teens onward from a nervous condition then known as "facial neuralgia", which would today be diagnosed as trigeminal neuralgia. Brent says that when in the throes of its pain "he was, at first, almost stupefied, and then aloof, cold, depressed, extremely suspicious, impatient of the slightest crossing, and subject to violent outbursts of temper".[19] Its consequences may have led to the social isolation which made his life's later years so tragic.
Early employment[edit]
Between 1859 and 1891, Peirce was intermittently employed in various scientific capacities by the United States Coast Survey and its successor, the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey,[20] where he enjoyed his highly influential father's protection[21] until the latter's death in 1880. That employment exempted Peirce from having to take part in the Civil War; it would have been very awkward for him to do so, as the Boston Brahmin Peirces sympathized with the Confederacy.[22] At the Survey, he worked mainly in geodesy and gravimetry, refining the use of pendulums to determine small local variations in the Earth's gravity.[20] He was elected a resident fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in January 1867.[23] The Survey sent him to Europe five times,[24] first in 1871 as part of a group sent to observe a solar eclipse; there, he sought out Augustus De Morgan, William Stanley Jevons, and William Kingdon Clifford,[25] British mathematicians and logicians whose turn of mind resembled his own. From 1869 to 1872, he was employed as an Assistant in Harvard's astronomical observatory, doing important work on determining the brightness of stars and the shape of the Milky Way.[26] On April 20, 1877 he was elected a member of the National Academy of Sciences.[27] Also in 1877, he proposed measuring the meter as so many wavelengths of light of a certain frequency,[28] the kind of definition employed from 1960 to 1983.
During the 1880s, Peirce's indifference to bureaucratic detail waxed while his Survey work's quality and timeliness waned. Peirce took years to write reports that he should have completed in months.[according to whom?] Meanwhile, he wrote entries, ultimately thousands during 1883–1909, on philosophy, logic, science, and other subjects for the encyclopedic Century Dictionary.[29] In 1885, an investigation by the Allison Commission exonerated Peirce, but led to the dismissal of Superintendent Julius Hilgard and several other Coast Survey employees for misuse of public funds.[30] In 1891, Peirce resigned from the Coast Survey at Superintendent Thomas Corwin Mendenhall's request.[31] He never again held regular employment.
Johns Hopkins University[edit]
In 1879, Peirce was appointed Lecturer in logic at the new Johns Hopkins University, which had strong departments in a number of areas that interested him, such as philosophy (Royce and Dewey completed their PhDs at Hopkins), psychology (taught by G. Stanley Hall and studied by Joseph Jastrow, who coauthored a landmark empirical study with Peirce), and mathematics (taught by J. J. Sylvester, who came to admire Peirce's work on mathematics and logic). 1883 saw publication of his Studies in Logic by Members of the Johns Hopkins University containing works by himself and Allan Marquand, Christine Ladd, Benjamin Ives Gilman, and Oscar Howard Mitchell, several of whom were his graduate students.[32] Peirce's nontenured position at Hopkins was the only academic appointment he ever held.
Brent documents something Peirce never suspected, namely that his efforts to obtain academic employment, grants, and scientific respectability were repeatedly frustrated by the covert opposition of a major Canadian-American scientist of the day, Simon Newcomb.[33] Peirce's efforts may also have been hampered by a difficult personality; Brent conjectures as to further psychological difficulty.[34] Conversely, Keith Devlin believes that Peirce's work was too far ahead of his time to be appreciated by the academic establishment of the day and that this played a large role in Peirce's inability to obtain a tenured position.[13]
Peirce's personal life worked against his professional success. After his first wife, Harriet Melusina Fay ("Zina"), left him in 1875,[35] Peirce, while still legally married, became involved with Juliette, whose name, given variously as Froissy and Pourtalai[36] and nationality (she spoke French[37]) remain uncertain.[38] When his divorce from Zina became final in 1883, he married Juliette.[39] That year, Newcomb pointed out to a Johns Hopkins trustee that Peirce, while a Hopkins employee, had lived and traveled with a woman to whom he was not married; the ensuing scandal led to his dismissal in January 1884.[40] Over the years Peirce sought academic employment at various universities without success.[41] He had no children by either marriage.[42]


Cambridge, where Peirce was born and raised, New York City, where he often visited and sometimes lived, and Milford, where he spent the later years of his life with his second wife Juliette.






Juliette and Charles by a well at their home Arisbe in 1907


Poverty[edit]
In 1887 Peirce spent part of his inheritance from his parents to buy 2,000 acres (8&#160;km2) of rural land near Milford, Pennsylvania, which never yielded an economic return.[43] There he had an 1854 farmhouse remodeled to his design.[44] The Peirces named the property "Arisbe". There they lived with few interruptions for the rest of their lives,[45] Charles writing prolifically, much of it unpublished to this day (see Works). Living beyond their means soon led to grave financial and legal difficulties.[46] He spent much of his last two decades unable to afford heat in winter and subsisting on old bread donated by the local baker. Unable to afford new stationery, he wrote on the verso side of old manuscripts. An outstanding warrant for assault and unpaid debts led to his being a fugitive in New York City for a while.[47] Several people, including his brother James Mills Peirce[48] and his neighbors, relatives of Gifford Pinchot, settled his debts and paid his property taxes and mortgage.[49]
Peirce did some scientific and engineering consulting and wrote much for meager pay, mainly encyclopedic dictionary entries, and reviews for The Nation (with whose editor, Wendell Phillips Garrison, he became friendly). He did translations for the Smithsonian Institution, at its director Samuel Langley's instigation. Peirce also did substantial mathematical calculations for Langley's research on powered flight. Hoping to make money, Peirce tried inventing.[50] He began but did not complete a number of books.[51] In 1888, President Grover Cleveland appointed him to the Assay Commission.[52]




Arisbe in 2011


From 1890 on, he had a friend and admirer in Judge Francis C. Russell of Chicago,[53] who introduced Peirce to editor Paul Carus and owner Edward C. Hegeler of the pioneering American philosophy journal The Monist, which eventually published at least 14 articles by Peirce.[54] He wrote many texts in James Mark Baldwin's Dictionary of Philosophy and Psychology (1901–5); half of those credited to him appear to have been written actually by Christine Ladd-Franklin under his supervision.[55] He applied in 1902 to the newly formed Carnegie Institution for a grant to write a systematic book of his life's work. The application was doomed; his nemesis Newcomb served on the Institution's executive committee, and its President had been the President of Johns Hopkins at the time of Peirce's dismissal.[56]
The one who did the most to help Peirce in these desperate times was his old friend William James, dedicating his Will to Believe (1897) to Peirce, and arranging for Peirce to be paid to give two series of lectures at or near Harvard (1898 and 1903).[57] Most important, each year from 1907 until James's death in 1910, James wrote to his friends in the Boston intelligentsia to request financial aid for Peirce; the fund continued even after James died. Peirce reciprocated by designating James's eldest son as his heir should Juliette predecease him.[58] It has been believed that this was also why Peirce used "Santiago" ("St. James" in English) as a middle name, but he appeared in print as early as 1890 as Charles Santiago Peirce. (See Charles Santiago Sanders Peirce for discussion and references).
Peirce died destitute in Milford, Pennsylvania, twenty years before his widow.
Slavery, the Civil War and racism[edit]
Peirce grew up in a home where the supremacy of the white Anglo-Saxon male was taken for granted, Irish immigrants were considered inferior and Negro slavery was considered natural.[59]
Until the outbreak of the Civil War his father described himself as a secessionist, but after the outbreak of the war, this stopped and he became a Union partisan, supporting with donations the Sanitary Commission, the leading Northern war charity. No members of the Peirce family volunteered or enlisted. Peirce shared his father's views and liked to use the syllogism

   All Men are equal in their political rights,
   Negroes are Men
   -  Negroes are equal in political rights to whites

to illustrate the unreliability of traditional forms of logic.[60] See: Peirce's law#Other proofs of Peirce's law
Reception[edit]
Bertrand Russell (1959) wrote,[61] "Beyond doubt [...] he was one of the most original minds of the later nineteenth century, and certainly the greatest American thinker ever." (Russell and Whitehead's Principia Mathematica, published from 1910 to 1913, does not mention Peirce; Peirce's work was not widely known until later.)[62] A. N. Whitehead, while reading some of Peirce's unpublished manuscripts soon after arriving at Harvard in 1924, was struck by how Peirce had anticipated his own "process" thinking. (On Peirce and process metaphysics, see Lowe 1964.[26]) Karl Popper viewed Peirce as "one of the greatest philosophers of all times".[63] Yet Peirce's achievements were not immediately recognized. His imposing contemporaries William James and Josiah Royce[64] admired him, and Cassius Jackson Keyser at Columbia and C. K. Ogden wrote about Peirce with respect, but to no immediate effect.
The first scholar to give Peirce his considered professional attention was Royce's student Morris Raphael Cohen, the editor of an anthology of Peirce's writings titled Chance, Love, and Logic (1923) and the author of the first bibliography of Peirce's scattered writings.[65] John Dewey studied under Peirce at Johns Hopkins[32] and, from 1916 onwards, Dewey's writings repeatedly mention Peirce with deference. His 1938 Logic: The Theory of Inquiry is much influenced by Peirce.[66] The publication of the first six volumes of the Collected Papers (1931–35), the most important event to date in Peirce studies and one that Cohen made possible by raising the needed funds,[67] did not prompt an outpouring of secondary studies. The editors of those volumes, Charles Hartshorne and Paul Weiss, did not become Peirce specialists. Early landmarks of the secondary literature include the monographs by Buchler (1939), Feibleman (1946), and Goudge (1950), the 1941 Ph.D. thesis by Arthur W. Burks (who went on to edit volumes 7 and 8), and the studies edited by Wiener and Young (1952). The Charles S. Peirce Society was founded in 1946. Its Transactions, an academic quarterly specializing in Peirce, pragmatism, and American philosophy, has appeared since 1965.
In 1949, while doing unrelated archival work, the historian of mathematics Carolyn Eisele (1902–2000) chanced on an autograph letter by Peirce. So began her 40 years of research on Peirce the mathematician and scientist, culminating in Eisele (1976, 1979, 1985). Beginning around 1960, the philosopher and historian of ideas Max Fisch (1900–1995) emerged as an authority on Peirce; Fisch (1986)[68] includes many of his relevant articles, including a wide-ranging survey (Fisch 1986: 422–48) of the impact of Peirce's thought through 1983.
Peirce has gained a significant international following, marked by university research centers devoted to Peirce studies and pragmatism in Brazil (CeneP/CIEP), Finland (HPRC, including Commens), Germany (Wirth's group, Hoffman's and Otte's group, and Deuser's and Härle's group[69]), France (L'I.R.S.C.E.), Spain (GEP), and Italy (CSP). His writings have been translated into several languages, including German, French, Finnish, Spanish, and Swedish. Since 1950, there have been French, Italian, Spanish, British, and Brazilian Peirceans of note. For many years, the North American philosophy department most devoted to Peirce was the University of Toronto's, thanks in good part to the leadership of Thomas Goudge and David Savan. In recent years, U.S. Peirce scholars have clustered at Indiana University - Purdue University Indianapolis, home of the Peirce Edition Project (PEP), and the Pennsylvania State University.

Currently, considerable interest is being taken in Peirce's ideas by researchers wholly outside the arena of academic philosophy. The interest comes from industry, business, technology, intelligence organizations, and the military; and it has resulted in the existence of a substantial number of agencies, institutes, businesses, and laboratories in which ongoing research into and development of Peircean concepts are being vigorously undertaken.
— Robert Burch, 2001, updated 2010[20]

In recent years, Peirce's trichotomy of signs is exploited by a growing number of practitioners for marketing and design tasks.
Works[edit]
Peirce's reputation rests largely on a number of academic papers published in American scientific and scholarly journals such as Proceedings of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, the Journal of Speculative Philosophy, The Monist, Popular Science Monthly, the American Journal of Mathematics, Memoirs of the National Academy of Sciences, The Nation, and others. See Articles by Peirce, published in his lifetime for an extensive list with links to them online. The only full-length book (neither extract nor pamphlet) that Peirce authored and saw published in his lifetime[70] was Photometric Researches (1878), a 181-page monograph on the applications of spectrographic methods to astronomy. While at Johns Hopkins, he edited Studies in Logic (1883), containing chapters by himself and his graduate students. Besides lectures during his years (1879–1884) as Lecturer in Logic at Johns Hopkins, he gave at least nine series of lectures, many now published; see Lectures by Peirce.
Harvard University obtained from Peirce's widow soon after his death the papers found in his study, but did not microfilm them until 1964. Only after Richard Robin (1967)[71] catalogued this Nachlass did it become clear that Peirce had left approximately 1650 unpublished manuscripts, totaling over 100,000 pages,[72] mostly still unpublished except on microfilm. On the vicissitudes of Peirce's papers, see Houser (1989).[73] Reportedly the papers remain in unsatisfactory condition.[74]
The first published anthology of Peirce's articles was the one-volume Chance, Love and Logic: Philosophical Essays, edited by Morris Raphael Cohen, 1923, still in print. Other one-volume anthologies were published in 1940, 1957, 1958, 1972, 1994, and 2009, most still in print. The main posthumous editions[75] of Peirce's works in their long trek to light, often multi-volume, and some still in print, have included:
1931–58: Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce (CP), 8 volumes, includes many published works, along with a selection of previously unpublished work and a smattering of his correspondence. This long-time standard edition drawn from Peirce's work from the 1860s to 1913 remains the most comprehensive survey of his prolific output from 1893 to 1913. It is organized thematically, but texts (including lecture series) are often split up across volumes, while texts from various stages in Peirce's development are often combined, requiring frequent visits to editors' notes.[76] Edited (1–6) by Charles Hartshorne and Paul Weiss and (7–8) by Arthur Burks, in print and online.
1975–87: Charles Sanders Peirce: Contributions to The Nation, 4 volumes, includes Peirce's more than 300 reviews and articles published 1869–1908 in The Nation. Edited by Kenneth Laine Ketner and James Edward Cook, online.
1976: The New Elements of Mathematics by Charles S. Peirce, 4 volumes in 5, included many previously unpublished Peirce manuscripts on mathematical subjects, along with Peirce's important published mathematical articles. Edited by Carolyn Eisele, back in print.
1977: Semiotic and Significs: The Correspondence between C. S. Peirce and Victoria Lady Welby (2nd edition 2001), included Peirce's entire correspondence (1903–1912) with Victoria, Lady Welby. Peirce's other published correspondence is largely limited to the 14 letters included in volume 8 of the Collected Papers, and the 20-odd pre-1890 items included so far in the Writings. Edited by Charles S. Hardwick with James Cook, out of print.
1982–now: Writings of Charles S. Peirce, A Chronological Edition (W), Volumes 1–6 &amp; 8, of a projected 30. The limited coverage, and defective editing and organization, of the Collected Papers led Max Fisch and others in the 1970s to found the Peirce Edition Project (PEP), whose mission is to prepare a more complete critical chronological edition. Only seven volumes have appeared to date, but they cover the period from 1859–1892, when Peirce carried out much of his best-known work. W 8 was published in November 2010; and work continues on W 7, 9, and 11. In print and online.
1985: Historical Perspectives on Peirce's Logic of Science: A History of Science, 2 volumes. Auspitz has said,[77] "The extent of Peirce's immersion in the science of his day is evident in his reviews in the Nation [...] and in his papers, grant applications, and publishers' prospectuses in the history and practice of science", referring latterly to Historical Perspectives. Edited by Carolyn Eisele, back in print.
1992: Reasoning and the Logic of Things collects in one place Peirce's 1898 series of lectures invited by William James. Edited by Kenneth Laine Ketner, with commentary by Hilary Putnam, in print.
1992–98: The Essential Peirce (EP), 2 volumes, is an important recent sampler of Peirce's philosophical writings. Edited (1) by Nathan Hauser and Christian Kloesel and (2) by PEP editors, in print.
1997: Pragmatism as a Principle and Method of Right Thinking collects Peirce's 1903 Harvard "Lectures on Pragmatism" in a study edition, including drafts, of Peirce's lecture manuscripts, which had been previously published in abridged form; the lectures now also appear in EP 2. Edited by Patricia Ann Turisi, in print.
2010: Philosophy of Mathematics: Selected Writings collects important writings by Peirce on the subject, many not previously in print. Edited by Matthew E. Moore, in print.
Mathematics[edit]




The Peirce quincuncial projection of a sphere keeps angles true except at several isolated points and results in less distortion of area than in other projections.


Peirce's most important work in pure mathematics was in logical and foundational areas. He also worked on linear algebra, matrices, various geometries, topology and Listing numbers, Bell numbers, graphs, the four-color problem, and the nature of continuity.
He worked on applied mathematics in economics, engineering, and map projections (such as the Peirce quincuncial projection), and was especially active in probability and statistics.[78]

Discoveries

Peirce made a number of striking discoveries in formal logic and foundational mathematics, nearly all of which came to be appreciated only long after he died:
In 1860[79] he suggested a cardinal arithmetic for infinite numbers, years before any work by Georg Cantor (who completed his dissertation in 1867) and without access to Bernard Bolzano's 1851 (posthumous) Paradoxien des Unendlichen.

↓
The Peirce arrow,
symbol for "(neither)...nor...", also called the Quine dagger.

In 1880–81[80] he showed how Boolean algebra could be done via a repeated sufficient single binary operation (logical NOR), anticipating Henry M. Sheffer by 33 years. (See also De Morgan's Laws).
In 1881[81] he set out the axiomatization of natural number arithmetic, a few years before Richard Dedekind and Giuseppe Peano. In the same paper Peirce gave, years before Dedekind, the first purely cardinal definition of a finite set in the sense now known as "Dedekind-finite", and implied by the same stroke an important formal definition of an infinite set (Dedekind-infinite), as a set that can be put into a one-to-one correspondence with one of its proper subsets.
In 1885[82] he distinguished between first-order and second-order quantification.[83][84] In the same paper he set out what can be read as the first (primitive) axiomatic set theory, anticipating Zermelo by about two decades (Brady 2000,[85] pp.&#160;132–3).
In 1886 he saw that Boolean calculations could be carried out via electrical switches,[10] anticipating Claude Shannon by more than 50 years.




Existential graphs: Alpha graphs


By the later 1890s[86] he was devising existential graphs, a diagrammatic notation for the predicate calculus. Based on them are John F. Sowa's conceptual graphs and Sun-Joo Shin's diagrammatic reasoning.

The New Elements of Mathematics

Peirce wrote drafts for an introductory textbook, with the working title The New Elements of Mathematics, that presented mathematics from an original standpoint. Those drafts and many other of his previously unpublished mathematical manuscripts finally appeared[78] in The New Elements of Mathematics by Charles S. Peirce (1976), edited by mathematician Carolyn Eisele.

Nature of mathematics

Peirce agreed with Auguste Comte in regarding mathematics as more basic than philosophy and the special sciences (of nature and mind). Peirce classified mathematics into three subareas: (1) mathematics of logic, (2) discrete series, and (3) pseudo-continua (as he called them, including the real numbers) and continua. Influenced by his father Benjamin, Peirce argued that mathematics studies purely hypothetical objects and is not just the science of quantity but is more broadly the science which draws necessary conclusions; that mathematics aids logic, not vice versa; and that logic itself is part of philosophy and is the science about drawing conclusions necessary and otherwise.[87]
Mathematics of logic[edit]
Mathematical logic and foundations, some noted articles

On an Improvement in Boole's Calculus of Logic (1867)
Description of a Notation for the Logic of Relatives (1870)
On the Algebra of Logic (1880)
A Boolean Algebra with One Constant (1880 MS)
On the Logic of Number (1881)
Note B: The Logic of Relatives (1883)
On the Algebra of Logic: A Contribution to the
Philosophy of Notation (1884/1885)
The Logic of Relatives (1897)
The Simplest Mathematics (1902 MS)
Prolegomena To an Apology For Pragmaticism (1906,
on existential graphs)


Beginning with his first paper on the "Logic of Relatives" (1870), Peirce extended the theory of relations that Augustus De Morgan had just recently awakened from its Cinderella slumbers. Much of the mathematics of relations now taken for granted was "borrowed" from Peirce, not always with all due credit; on that and on how the young Bertrand Russell, especially his Principles of Mathematics and Principia Mathematica, did not do Peirce justice, see Anellis (1995).[62] In 1918 the logician C.&#160;I. Lewis wrote, "The contributions of C.S. Peirce to symbolic logic are more numerous and varied than those of any other writer — at least in the nineteenth century."[88] Beginning in 1940, Alfred Tarski and his students rediscovered aspects of Peirce's larger vision of relational logic, developing the perspective of relation algebra.
Relational logic gained applications. In mathematics, it influenced the abstract analysis of E. H. Moore and the lattice theory of Garrett Birkhoff. In computer science, the relational model for databases was developed with Peircean ideas in work of Edgar F. Codd, who was a doctoral student[89] of Arthur W. Burks, a Peirce scholar. In economics, relational logic was used by Frank P. Ramsey, John von Neumann, and Paul Samuelson to study preferences and utility and by Kenneth J. Arrow in Social Choice and Individual Values, following Arrow's association with Tarski at City College of New York.
On Peirce and his contemporaries Ernst Schröder and Gottlob Frege, Hilary Putnam (1982)[83] documented that Frege's work on the logic of quantifiers had little influence on his contemporaries, although it was published four years before the work of Peirce and his student Oscar Howard Mitchell. Putnam found that mathematicians and logicians learned about the logic of quantifiers through the independent work of Peirce and Mitchell, particularly through Peirce's "On the Algebra of Logic: A Contribution to the Philosophy of Notation"[82] (1885), published in the premier American mathematical journal of the day, and cited by Peano and Schröder, among others, who ignored Frege. They also adopted and modified Peirce's notations, typographical variants of those now used. Peirce apparently was ignorant of Frege's work, despite their overlapping achievements in logic, philosophy of language, and the foundations of mathematics.
Peirce's work on formal logic had admirers besides Ernst Schröder:

Philosophical algebraist William Kingdon Clifford[90] and logician William Ernest Johnson, both British;
The Polish school of logic and foundational mathematics, including Alfred Tarski;
Arthur Prior, who praised and studied Peirce's logical work in a 1964 paper[26] and in Formal Logic (saying on page 4 that Peirce "perhaps had a keener eye for essentials than any other logician before or since.").

A philosophy of logic, grounded in his categories and semiotic, can be extracted from Peirce's writings and, along with Peirce's logical work more generally, is exposited and defended in Hilary Putnam (1982);[83] the Introduction in Nathan Houser et al. (1997);[91] and Randall Dipert's chapter in Cheryl Misak (2004).[92]
Continua[edit]
Continuity and synechism are central in Peirce's philosophy: "I did not at first suppose that it was, as I gradually came to find it, the master-Key of philosophy".[93]
From a mathematical point of view, he embraced infinitesimals and worked long on the mathematics of continua. He long held that the real numbers constitute a pseudo-continuum;[94] that a true continuum is the real subject matter of analysis situs (topology); and that a true continuum of instants exceeds—and within any lapse of time has room for—any Aleph number (any infinite multitude as he called it) of instants.[95]
In 1908 Peirce wrote that he found that a true continuum might have or lack such room. Jérôme Havenel (2008): "It is on May 26, 1908, that Peirce finally gave up his idea that in every continuum there is room for whatever collection of any multitude. From now on, there are different kinds of continua, which have different properties."[96]
Probability and statistics[edit]
Peirce held that science achieves statistical probabilities, not certainties, and that spontaneity (absolute chance) is real (see Tychism on his view). Most of his statistical writings promote the frequency interpretation of probability (objective ratios of cases), and many of his writings express skepticism about (and criticize the use of) probability when such models are not based on objective randomization.[97] Though Peirce was largely a frequentist, his possible world semantics introduced the "propensity" theory of probability before Karl Popper.[98][99] Peirce (sometimes with Joseph Jastrow) investigated the probability judgments of experimental subjects, "perhaps the very first" elicitation and estimation of subjective probabilities in experimental psychology and (what came to be called) Bayesian statistics.[2]
Peirce was one of the founders of statistics. He formulated modern statistics in "Illustrations of the Logic of Science" (1877–8) and "A Theory of Probable Inference" (1883). With a repeated measures design, Charles Sanders Peirce and Joseph Jastrow introduced blinded, controlled randomized experiments in 1884[100] (Hacking 1990:205)[1] (before Ronald A. Fisher).[2] He invented optimal design for experiments on gravity, in which he "corrected the means". He used correlation and smoothing. Peirce extended the work on outliers by Benjamin Peirce, his father.[2] He introduced terms "confidence" and "likelihood" (before Jerzy Neyman and Fisher). (See Stephen Stigler's historical books and Ian Hacking 1990[1]).
Philosophy[edit]

It is not sufficiently recognized that Peirce's career was that of a scientist, not a philosopher; and that during his lifetime he was known and valued chiefly as a scientist, only secondarily as a logician, and scarcely at all as a philosopher. Even his work in philosophy and logic will not be understood until this fact becomes a standing premise of Peircean studies.
— Max Fisch 1964, p. 486.[26]

Peirce was a working scientist for 30 years, and arguably was a professional philosopher only during the five years he lectured at Johns Hopkins. He learned philosophy mainly by reading, each day, a few pages of Kant's Critique of Pure Reason, in the original German, while a Harvard undergraduate. His writings bear on a wide array of disciplines, including mathematics, logic, philosophy, statistics, astronomy,[26] metrology,[3] geodesy, experimental psychology,[4] economics,[5] linguistics,[6] and the history and philosophy of science. This work has enjoyed renewed interest and approval, a revival inspired not only by his anticipations of recent scientific developments but also by his demonstration of how philosophy can be applied effectively to human problems.
Peirce's philosophy includes (see below in related sections) a pervasive three-category system, belief that truth is immutable and is both independent from actual opinion (fallibilism) and discoverable (no radical skepticism), logic as formal semiotic on signs, on arguments, and on inquiry's ways—including philosophical pragmatism (which he founded), critical common-sensism, and scientific method—and, in metaphysics: Scholastic realism, e.g. John Duns Scotus, belief in God, freedom, and at least an attenuated immortality, objective idealism, and belief in the reality of continuity and of absolute chance, mechanical necessity, and creative love. In his work, fallibilism and pragmatism may seem to work somewhat like skepticism and positivism, respectively, in others' work. However, for Peirce, fallibilism is balanced by an anti-skepticism and is a basis for belief in the reality of absolute chance and of continuity,[101] and pragmatism commits one to anti-nominalist belief in the reality of the general (CP 5.453–7).
For Peirce, First Philosophy, which he also called cenoscopy, is less basic than mathematics and more basic than the special sciences (of nature and mind). It studies positive phenomena in general, phenomena available to any person at any waking moment, and does not settle questions by resorting to special experiences.[102] He divided such philosophy into (1) phenomenology (which he also called phaneroscopy or categorics), (2) normative sciences (esthetics, ethics, and logic), and (3) metaphysics; his views on them are discussed in order below.
Theory of categories[edit]
Main article: Categories (Peirce)
On May 14, 1867, the 27-year-old Peirce presented a paper entitled "On a New List of Categories" to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, which published it the following year. The paper outlined a theory of predication, involving three universal categories that Peirce developed in response to reading Aristotle, Kant, and Hegel, categories that Peirce applied throughout his work for the rest of his life.[20] Peirce scholars generally regard the "New List" as foundational or breaking the ground for Peirce's "architectonic", his blueprint for a pragmatic philosophy. In the categories one will discern, concentrated, the pattern that one finds formed by the three grades of clearness in "How To Make Our Ideas Clear" (1878 paper foundational to pragmatism), and in numerous other trichotomies in his work.
"On a New List of Categories" is cast as a Kantian deduction; it is short but dense and difficult to summarize. The following table is compiled from that and later works.[103] In 1893, Peirce restated most of it for a less advanced audience.[104]

Peirce's categories (technical name: the cenopythagorean categories)[105]

Name:
Typical characterizaton:
As universe of experience:
As quantity:
Technical definition:
Valence, "adicity":


Firstness.[106]
Quality of feeling.
Ideas, chance, possibility.
Vagueness, "some".
Reference to a ground (a ground is a pure abstraction of a quality).[107]
Essentially monadic (the quale, in the sense of the such,[108] which has the quality).


Secondness.[109]
Reaction, resistance, (dyadic)&#160;relation.
Brute facts, actuality.
Singularity, discreteness, “this”.
Reference to a correlate (by its relate).
Essentially dyadic (the relate and the correlate).


Thirdness.[110]
Representation, mediation.
Habits, laws, necessity.
Generality, continuity, "all".
Reference to an interpretant*.
Essentially triadic (sign, object, interpretant*).


&#160;*Note: An interpretant is an interpretation (human or otherwise) in the sense of the product of an interpretive process.
Aesthetics and ethics[edit]
Peirce did not write extensively in aesthetics and ethics,[111] but came by 1902 to hold that aesthetics, ethics, and logic, in that order, comprise the normative sciences.[112] He characterized aesthetics as the study of the good (grasped as the admirable), and thus of the ends governing all conduct and thought.[113]
Philosophy: logic, or semiotic[edit]


Semiotics


&#160;


General concepts





Sign


(relation
relational complex)







Code
Confabulation



Connotation&#160;/ Denotation
Encoding&#160;/ Decoding



Lexical
Modality
Representation




Salience
Semiosis
Semiosphere



Semiotic elements and sign classes



Umwelt
Value





Fields





Biosemiotics
Cognitive semiotics



Computational semiotics
Literary semiotics
Semiotics of culture




Methods




Commutation test
Paradigmatic analysis
Syntagmatic analysis




Semioticians





Mikhail Bakhtin
Roland Barthes
Marcel Danesi
John Deely
Umberto Eco
Gottlob Frege
Algirdas Julien Greimas
Félix Guattari
Louis Hjelmslev
Vyacheslav Ivanov
Roman Jakobson
Roberta Kevelson
Kalevi Kull
Juri Lotman
Charles W. Morris
Charles S. Peirce
Augusto Ponzio
Ferdinand de Saussure




Thomas Sebeok
Michael Silverstein
Eero Tarasti
Vladimir Toporov
Jakob von Uexküll





Related topics




Copenhagen–Tartu school
Tartu–Moscow Semiotic School



Post-structuralism
Structuralism



Postmodernity







v
t
e





Logic as philosophical[edit]
Peirce regarded logic per se as a division of philosophy, as a normative science based on esthetics and ethics, as more basic than metaphysics,[114] and as "the art of devising methods of research".[115] More generally, as inference, "logic is rooted in the social principle", since inference depends on a standpoint that, in a sense, is unlimited.[116] Peirce called (with no sense of deprecation) "mathematics of logic" much of the kind of thing which, in current research and applications, is called simply "logic". He was productive in both (philosophical) logic and logic's mathematics, which were connected deeply in his work and thought.
Peirce argued that logic is formal semiotic, the formal study of signs in the broadest sense, not only signs that are artificial, linguistic, or symbolic, but also signs that are semblances or are indexical such as reactions. Peirce held that "all this universe is perfused with signs, if it is not composed exclusively of signs",[117] along with their representational and inferential relations. He argued that, since all thought takes time, all thought is in signs[118] and sign processes ("semiosis") such as the inquiry process. He divided logic into: (1) speculative grammar, or stechiology, on how signs can be meaningful and, in relation to that, what kinds of signs there are, how they combine, and how some embody or incorporate others; (2) logical critic, or logic proper, on the modes of inference; and (3) speculative or universal rhetoric, or methodeutic,[119] the philosophical theory of inquiry, including pragmatism.
Presuppositions of logic[edit]
In his "F.R.L." [First Rule of Logic] (1899), Peirce states that the first, and "in one sense, the sole", rule of reason is that, to learn, one needs to desire to learn and desire it without resting satisfied with that which one is inclined to think.[114] So, the first rule is, to wonder. Peirce proceeds to a critical theme in research practices and the shaping of theories:

...there follows one corollary which itself deserves to be inscribed upon every wall of the city of philosophy:

Do not block the way of inquiry.
Peirce adds, that method and economy are best in research but no outright sin inheres in trying any theory in the sense that the investigation via its trial adoption can proceed unimpeded and undiscouraged, and that "the one unpardonable offence" is a philosophical barricade against truth's advance, an offense to which "metaphysicians in all ages have shown themselves the most addicted". Peirce in many writings holds that logic precedes metaphysics (ontological, religious, and physical).
Peirce goes on to list four common barriers to inquiry: (1) Assertion of absolute certainty; (2) maintaining that something is absolutely unknowable; (3) maintaining that something is absolutely inexplicable because absolutely basic or ultimate; (4) holding that perfect exactitude is possible, especially such as to quite preclude unusual and anomalous phenomena. To refuse absolute theoretical certainty is the heart of fallibilism, which Peirce unfolds into refusals to set up any of the listed barriers. Peirce elsewhere argues (1897) that logic's presupposition of fallibilism leads at length to the view that chance and continuity are very real (tychism and synechism).[101]
The First Rule of Logic pertains to the mind's presuppositions in undertaking reason and logic, presuppositions, for instance, that truth and the real do not depend on yours or my opinion of them but do depend on representational relation and consist in the destined end in investigation taken far enough (see below). He describes such ideas as, collectively, hopes which, in particular cases, one is unable seriously to doubt.[120]
Four incapacities[edit]
The Journal of Speculative Philosophy series (1868–69), including

Questions concerning certain Faculties claimed for Man (1868)
Some Consequences of Four Incapacities (1868)
Grounds of Validity of the Laws of Logic:
Further Consequences of Four Incapacities (1869)


In three articles in 1868–69,[118][121][122] Peirce rejected mere verbal or hyperbolic doubt and first or ultimate principles, and argued that we have (as he numbered them[121]):

No power of Introspection. All knowledge of the internal world comes by hypothetical reasoning from known external facts.
No power of Intuition (cognition without logical determination by previous cognitions). No cognitive stage is absolutely first in a process. All mental action has the form of inference.
No power of thinking without signs. A cognition must be interpreted in a subsequent cognition in order to be a cognition at all.
No conception of the absolutely incognizable.

(The above sense of the term "intuition" is almost Kant's, said Peirce. It differs from the current looser sense that encompasses instinctive or anyway half-conscious inference.)
Peirce argued that those incapacities imply the reality of the general and of the continuous, the validity of the modes of reasoning,[122] and the falsity of philosophical Cartesianism (see below).
Peirce rejected the conception (usually ascribed to Kant) of the unknowable thing-in-itself[121] and later said that to "dismiss make-believes" is a prerequisite for pragmatism.[123]
Logic as formal semiotic[edit]
Peirce sought, through his wide-ranging studies through the decades, formal philosophical ways to articulate thought's processes, and also to explain the workings of science. These inextricably entangled questions of a dynamics of inquiry rooted in nature and nurture led him to develop his semiotic with very broadened conceptions of signs and inference, and, as its culmination, a theory of inquiry for the task of saying 'how science works' and devising research methods. This would be logic by the medieval definition taught for centuries: art of arts, science of sciences, having the way to the principles of all methods.[115] Influences radiate from points on parallel lines of inquiry in Aristotle's work, in such loci as: the basic terminology of psychology in On the Soul; the founding description of sign relations in On Interpretation; and the differentiation of inference into three modes that are commonly translated into English as abduction, deduction, and induction, in the Prior Analytics, as well as inference by analogy (called paradeigma by Aristotle), which Peirce regarded as involving the other three modes.
Peirce began writing on semiotic in the 1860s, around the time when he devised his system of three categories. He called it both semiotic and semeiotic. Both are current in singular and plural. He based it on the conception of a triadic sign relation, and defined semiosis as "action, or influence, which is, or involves, a cooperation of three subjects, such as a sign, its object, and its interpretant, this tri-relative influence not being in any way resolvable into actions between pairs".[124] As to signs in thought, Peirce emphasized the reverse:

To say, therefore, that thought cannot happen in an instant, but requires a time, is but another way of saying that every thought must be interpreted in another, or that all thought is in signs.
— Peirce 1868.[118]

Peirce held that all thought is in signs, issuing in and from interpretation, where 'sign' is the word for the broadest variety of conceivable semblances, diagrams, metaphors, symptoms, signals, designations, symbols, texts, even mental concepts and ideas, all as determinations of a mind or quasi-mind, that which at least functions like a mind, as in the work of crystals or bees[125] — the focus is on sign action in general rather than on psychology, linguistics, or social studies (fields which he also pursued).
Inquiry is a kind of inference process, a manner of thinking and semiosis. Global divisions of ways for phenomena to stand as signs, and the subsumption of inquiry and thinking within inference as a sign process, enable the study of inquiry on semiotics' three levels:

Conditions for meaningfulness. Study of significatory elements and combinations, their grammar.
Validity, conditions for true representation. Critique of arguments in their various separate modes.
Conditions for determining interpretations. Methodology of inquiry in its mutually interacting modes.

Peirce uses examples often from common experience, but defines and discusses such things as assertion and interpretation in terms of philosophical logic. In a formal vein, Peirce said:

On the Definition of Logic. Logic is formal semiotic. A sign is something, A, which brings something, B, its interpretant sign, determined or created by it, into the same sort of correspondence (or a lower implied sort) with something, C, its object, as that in which itself stands to C. This definition no more involves any reference to human thought than does the definition of a line as the place within which a particle lies during a lapse of time. It is from this definition that I deduce the principles of logic by mathematical reasoning, and by mathematical reasoning that, I aver, will support criticism of Weierstrassian severity, and that is perfectly evident. The word "formal" in the definition is also defined.
&#160; &#160; —Peirce, "Carnegie Application", The New Elements of Mathematics v. 4, p. 54.

Signs[edit]
Main article: Semiotic elements and classes of signs (Peirce)
See also: Representation (arts) § Peirce and representation and Sign (semiotics) § Triadic signs
A list of noted writings by Peirce on signs and sign relations is at Semiotic elements and classes of signs (Peirce)#References and further reading.
Sign relation[edit]
Peirce's theory of signs is known to be one of the most complex semiotic theories due to its generalistic claim. Anything is a sign — not absolutely as itself, but instead in some relation or other. The sign relation is the key. It defines three roles encompassing (1) the sign, (2) the sign's subject matter, called its object, and (3) the sign's meaning or ramification as formed into a kind of effect called its interpretant (a further sign, for example a translation). It is an irreducible triadic relation, according to Peirce. The roles are distinct even when the things that fill those roles are not. The roles are but three; a sign of an object leads to one or more interpretants, and, as signs, they lead to further interpretants.
Extension × intension = information. Two traditional approaches to sign relation, necessary though insufficient, are the way of extension (a sign's objects, also called breadth, denotation, or application) and the way of intension (the objects' characteristics, qualities, attributes referenced by the sign, also called depth, comprehension, significance, or connotation). Peirce adds a third, the way of information, including change of information, to integrate the other two approaches into a unified whole.[126] For example, because of the equation above, if a term's total amount of information stays the same, then the more that the term 'intends' or signifies about objects, the fewer are the objects to which the term 'extends' or applies.
Determination. A sign depends on its object in such a way as to represent its object — the object enables and, in a sense, determines the sign. A physically causal sense of this stands out when a sign consists in an indicative reaction. The interpretant depends likewise on both the sign and the object — an object determines a sign to determine an interpretant. But this determination is not a succession of dyadic events, like a row of toppling dominoes; sign determination is triadic. For example, an interpretant does not merely represent something which represented an object; instead an interpretant represents something as a sign representing the object. The object (be it a quality or fact or law or even fictional) determines the sign to an interpretant through one's collateral experience[127] with the object, in which the object is found or from which it is recalled, as when a sign consists in a chance semblance of an absent object. Peirce used the word "determine" not in a strictly deterministic sense, but in a sense of "specializes," bestimmt,[128] involving variable amount, like an influence.[129] Peirce came to define representation and interpretation in terms of (triadic) determination.[130] The object determines the sign to determine another sign — the interpretant — to be related to the object as the sign is related to the object, hence the interpretant, fulfilling its function as sign of the object, determines a further interpretant sign. The process is logically structured to perpetuate itself, and is definitive of sign, object, and interpretant in general.[129]
Semiotic elements[edit]
Peirce held there are exactly three basic elements in semiosis (sign action):

A sign (or representamen)[131] represents, in the broadest possible sense of "represents". It is something interpretable as saying something about something. It is not necessarily symbolic, linguistic, or artificial—a cloud might be a sign of rain for instance, or ruins the sign of ancient civilization.[132] As Peirce sometimes put it (he defined sign at least 76 times[129]), the sign stands for the object to the interpretant. A sign represents its object in some respect, which respect is the sign's ground.[107]
An object (or semiotic object) is a subject matter of a sign and an interpretant. It can be anything thinkable, a quality, an occurrence, a rule, etc., even fictional, such as Prince Hamlet.[133] All of those are special or partial objects. The object most accurately is the universe of discourse to which the partial or special object belongs.[133] For instance, a perturbation of Pluto's orbit is a sign about Pluto but ultimately not only about Pluto. An object either (i) is immediate to a sign and is the object as represented in the sign or (ii) is a dynamic object, the object as it really is, on which the immediate object is founded "as on bedrock".[134]
An interpretant (or interpretant sign) is a sign's meaning or ramification as formed into a kind of idea or effect, an interpretation, human or otherwise. An interpretant is a sign (a) of the object and (b) of the interpretant's "predecessor" (the interpreted sign) as a sign of the same object. An interpretant either (i) is immediate to a sign and is a kind of quality or possibility such as a word's usual meaning, or (ii) is a dynamic interpretant, such as a state of agitation, or (iii) is a final or normal interpretant, a sum of the lessons which a sufficiently considered sign would have as effects on practice, and with which an actual interpretant may at most coincide.

Some of the understanding needed by the mind depends on familiarity with the object. To know what a given sign denotes, the mind needs some experience of that sign's object, experience outside of, and collateral to, that sign or sign system. In that context Peirce speaks of collateral experience, collateral observation, collateral acquaintance, all in much the same terms.[127]
Classes of signs[edit]
Among Peirce's many sign typologies, three stand out, interlocked. The first typology depends on the sign itself, the second on how the sign stands for its denoted object, and the third on how the sign stands for its object to its interpretant. Also, each of the three typologies is a three-way division, a trichotomy, via Peirce's three phenomenological categories: (1) quality of feeling, (2) reaction, resistance, and (3) representation, mediation.[135]
I. Qualisign, sinsign, legisign (also called tone, token, type, and also called potisign, actisign, famisign):[136] This typology classifies every sign according to the sign's own phenomenological category—the qualisign is a quality, a possibility, a "First"; the sinsign is a reaction or resistance, a singular object, an actual event or fact, a "Second"; and the legisign is a habit, a rule, a representational relation, a "Third".
II. Icon, index, symbol: This typology, the best known one, classifies every sign according to the category of the sign's way of denoting its object—the icon (also called semblance or likeness) by a quality of its own, the index by factual connection to its object, and the symbol by a habit or rule for its interpretant.
III. Rheme, dicisign, argument (also called sumisign, dicisign, suadisign, also seme, pheme, delome,[136] and regarded as very broadened versions of the traditional term, proposition, argument): This typology classifies every sign according to the category which the interpretant attributes to the sign's way of denoting its object—the rheme, for example a term, is a sign interpreted to represent its object in respect of quality; the dicisign, for example a proposition, is a sign interpreted to represent its object in respect of fact; and the argument is a sign interpreted to represent its object in respect of habit or law. This is the culminating typology of the three, where the sign is understood as a structural element of inference.

Lines of joint classification of signs.
Every sign is:[135]


1.

2.

3.


I.
Qualisign
or
Sinsign
or
Legisign


and



II.
Icon
or
Index
or
Symbol


and



III.
Rheme
or
Dicisign
or
Argument


Every sign belongs to one class or another within (I) and within (II) and within (III). Thus each of the three typologies is a three-valued parameter for every sign. The three parameters are not independent of each other; many co-classifications are absent, for reasons pertaining to the lack of either habit-taking or singular reaction in a quality, and the lack of habit-taking in a singular reaction. The result is not 27 but instead ten classes of signs fully specified at this level of analysis.
Modes of inference[edit]
Main article: Inquiry
Borrowing a brace of concepts from Aristotle, Peirce examined three basic modes of inference — abduction, deduction, and induction — in his "critique of arguments" or "logic proper". Peirce also called abduction "retroduction", "presumption", and, earliest of all, "hypothesis". He characterized it as guessing and as inference to an explanatory hypothesis. He sometimes expounded the modes of inference by transformations of the categorical syllogism Barbara (AAA), for example in "Deduction, Induction, and Hypothesis" (1878).[137] He does this by rearranging the rule (Barbara's major premise), the case (Barbara's minor premise), and the result (Barbara's conclusion):



Deduction.
Rule: All the beans from this bag are white.
Case: These beans are from this bag.
 Result: These beans are white.



Induction.
Case: These beans are [randomly selected] from this bag.
Result: These beans are white.
 Rule: All the beans from this bag are white.



Hypothesis (Abduction).
Rule: All the beans from this bag are white.
Result: These beans [oddly] are white.
 Case: These beans are from this bag.



Peirce 1883 in "A Theory of Probable Inference" (Studies in Logic) equated hypothetical inference with the induction of characters of objects (as he had done in effect before[121]). Eventually dissatisfied, by 1900 he distinguished them once and for all and also wrote that he now took the syllogistic forms and the doctrine of logical extension and comprehension as being less basic than he had thought. In 1903 he presented the following logical form for abductive inference:[138]

The surprising fact, C, is observed;

But if A were true, C would be a matter of course,
Hence, there is reason to suspect that A is true.


The logical form does not also cover induction, since induction neither depends on surprise nor proposes a new idea for its conclusion. Induction seeks facts to test a hypothesis; abduction seeks a hypothesis to account for facts. "Deduction proves that something must be; Induction shows that something actually is operative; Abduction merely suggests that something may be."[139] Peirce did not remain quite convinced that one logical form covers all abduction.[140] In his methodeutic or theory of inquiry (see below), he portrayed abduction as an economic initiative to further inference and study, and portrayed all three modes as clarified by their coordination in essential roles in inquiry: hypothetical explanation, deductive prediction, inductive testing.
Pragmatism[edit]
Main articles: Pragmaticism, Pragmatic maxim and Pragmatic theory of truth § Peirce
Some noted articles and lectures

Illustrations of the Logic of Science (1877–78):
inquiry, pragmatism, statistics, inference


The Fixation of Belief (1877)
How to Make Our Ideas Clear (1878)
The Doctrine of Chances (1878)
The Probability of Induction (1878)
The Order of Nature (1878)
Deduction, Induction, and Hypothesis (1878)


The Harvard lectures on pragmatism (1903)
What Pragmatism Is (1905)
Issues of Pragmaticism (1905)
Pragmatism (1907 MS in EP 2)


Peirce's recipe for pragmatic thinking, which he called pragmatism and, later, pragmaticism, is recapitulated in several versions of the so-called pragmatic maxim. Here is one of his more emphatic reiterations of it:

Consider what effects that might conceivably have practical bearings you conceive the objects of your conception to have. Then, your conception of those effects is the whole of your conception of the object.

As a movement, pragmatism began in the early 1870s in discussions among Peirce, William James, and others in the Metaphysical Club. James among others regarded some articles by Peirce such as "The Fixation of Belief" (1877) and especially "How to Make Our Ideas Clear" (1878) as foundational to pragmatism.[141] Peirce (CP 5.11–12), like James (Pragmatism: A New Name for Some Old Ways of Thinking, 1907), saw pragmatism as embodying familiar attitudes, in philosophy and elsewhere, elaborated into a new deliberate method for fruitful thinking about problems. Peirce differed from James and the early John Dewey, in some of their tangential enthusiasms, in being decidedly more rationalistic and realistic, in several senses of those terms, throughout the preponderance of his own philosophical moods.
In 1905 Peirce coined the new name pragmaticism "for the precise purpose of expressing the original definition", saying that "all went happily" with James's and F.C.S. Schiller's variant uses of the old name "pragmatism" and that he coined the new name because of the old name's growing use in "literary journals, where it gets abused". Yet he cited as causes, in a 1906 manuscript, his differences with James and Schiller and, in a 1908 publication, his differences with James as well as literary author Giovanni Papini's declaration of pragmatism's indefinability. Peirce in any case regarded his views that truth is immutable and infinity is real, as being opposed by the other pragmatists, but he remained allied with them on other issues.[142]
Pragmatism begins with the idea that belief is that on which one is prepared to act. Peirce's pragmatism is a method of clarification of conceptions of objects. It equates any conception of an object to a conception of that object's effects to a general extent of the effects' conceivable implications for informed practice. It is a method of sorting out conceptual confusions occasioned, for example, by distinctions that make (sometimes needed) formal yet not practical differences. He formulated both pragmatism and statistical principles as aspects of scientific logic, in his "Illustrations of the Logic of Science" series of articles. In the second one, "How to Make Our Ideas Clear", Peirce discussed three grades of clearness of conception:

Clearness of a conception familiar and readily used, even if unanalyzed and undeveloped.
Clearness of a conception in virtue of clearness of its parts, in virtue of which logicians called an idea "distinct", that is, clarified by analysis of just what makes it applicable. Elsewhere, echoing Kant, Peirce called a likewise distinct definition "nominal" (CP 5.553).
Clearness in virtue of clearness of conceivable practical implications of the object's conceived effects, such as fosters fruitful reasoning, especially on difficult problems. Here he introduced that which he later called the pragmatic maxim.

By way of example of how to clarify conceptions, he addressed conceptions about truth and the real as questions of the presuppositions of reasoning in general. In clearness's second grade (the "nominal" grade), he defined truth as a sign's correspondence to its object, and the real as the object of such correspondence, such that truth and the real are independent of that which you or I or any actual, definite community of inquirers think. After that needful but confined step, next in clearness's third grade (the pragmatic, practice-oriented grade) he defined truth as that opinion which would be reached, sooner or later but still inevitably, by research taken far enough, such that the real does depend on that ideal final opinion—a dependence to which he appeals in theoretical arguments elsewhere, for instance for the long-run validity of the rule of induction.[143] Peirce argued that even to argue against the independence and discoverability of truth and the real is to presuppose that there is, about that very question under argument, a truth with just such independence and discoverability.
Peirce said that a conception's meaning consists in "all general modes of rational conduct" implied by "acceptance" of the conception—that is, if one were to accept, first of all, the conception as true, then what could one conceive to be consequent general modes of rational conduct by all who accept the conception as true?—the whole of such consequent general modes is the whole meaning. His pragmatism does not equate a conception's meaning, its intellectual purport, with the conceived benefit or cost of the conception itself, like a meme (or, say, propaganda), outside the perspective of its being true, nor, since a conception is general, is its meaning equated with any definite set of actual consequences or upshots corroborating or undermining the conception or its worth. His pragmatism also bears no resemblance to "vulgar" pragmatism, which misleadingly connotes a ruthless and Machiavellian search for mercenary or political advantage. Instead the pragmatic maxim is the heart of his pragmatism as a method of experimentational mental reflection[144] arriving at conceptions in terms of conceivable confirmatory and disconfirmatory circumstances—a method hospitable to the formation of explanatory hypotheses, and conducive to the use and improvement of verification.[145]
Peirce's pragmatism, as method and theory of definitions and conceptual clearness, is part of his theory of inquiry,[146] which he variously called speculative, general, formal or universal rhetoric or simply methodeutic.[119] He applied his pragmatism as a method throughout his work.
Theory of inquiry[edit]
See also: Inquiry
Critical common-sensism[edit]
Critical common-sensism,[147] treated by Peirce as a consequence of his pragmatism, is his combination of Thomas Reid's common-sense philosophy with a fallibilism that recognizes that propositions of our more or less vague common sense now indubitable may later come into question, for example because of transformations of our world through science. It includes efforts to work up in tests genuine doubts for a core group of common indubitables that vary slowly if at all.
Rival methods of inquiry[edit]
In The Fixation of Belief (1877), Peirce described inquiry in general not as the pursuit of truth per se but as the struggle to move from irritating, inhibitory doubt born of surprise, disagreement, and the like, and to reach a secure belief, belief being that on which one is prepared to act. That let Peirce frame scientific inquiry as part of a broader spectrum and as spurred, like inquiry generally, by actual doubt, not mere verbal, quarrelsome, or hyperbolic doubt, which he held to be fruitless. Peirce sketched four methods of settling opinion, ordered from least to most successful:

The method of tenacity (policy of sticking to initial belief) — which brings comforts and decisiveness but leads to trying to ignore contrary information and others' views as if truth were intrinsically private, not public. The method goes against the social impulse and easily falters since one may well notice when another's opinion seems as good as one's own initial opinion. Its successes can be brilliant but tend to be transitory.
The method of authority — which overcomes disagreements but sometimes brutally. Its successes can be majestic and long-lasting, but it cannot regulate people thoroughly enough to withstand doubts indefinitely, especially when people learn about other societies present and past.
The method of the a priori — which promotes conformity less brutally but fosters opinions as something like tastes, arising in conversation and comparisons of perspectives in terms of "what is agreeable to reason." Thereby it depends on fashion in paradigms and goes in circles over time. It is more intellectual and respectable but, like the first two methods, sustains accidental and capricious beliefs, destining some minds to doubt it.
The method of science — wherein inquiry supposes that the real is discoverable but independent of particular opinion, such that, unlike in the other methods, inquiry can, by its own account, go wrong (fallibilism), not only right, and thus purposely tests itself and criticizes, corrects, and improves itself.

Peirce held that, in practical affairs, slow and stumbling ratiocination is often dangerously inferior to instinct and traditional sentiment, and that the scientific method is best suited to theoretical research,[148] which in turn should not be trammeled by the other methods and practical ends; reason's "first rule"[114] is that, in order to learn, one must desire to learn and, as a corollary, must not block the way of inquiry. Scientific method excels the others finally by being deliberately designed to arrive — eventually — at the most secure beliefs, upon which the most successful practices can be based. Starting from the idea that people seek not truth per se but instead to subdue irritating, inhibitory doubt, Peirce showed how, through the struggle, some can come to submit to truth for the sake of belief's integrity, seek as truth the guidance of potential conduct correctly to its given goal, and wed themselves to the scientific method.
Scientific method[edit]
Insofar as clarification by pragmatic reflection suits explanatory hypotheses and fosters predictions and testing, pragmatism points beyond the usual duo of foundational alternatives: deduction from self-evident truths, or rationalism; and induction from experiential phenomena, or empiricism.
Based on his critique of three modes of argument and different from either foundationalism or coherentism, Peirce's approach seeks to justify claims by a three-phase dynamic of inquiry:

Active, abductive genesis of theory, with no prior assurance of truth;
Deductive application of the contingent theory so as to clarify its practical implications;
Inductive testing and evaluation of the utility of the provisional theory in anticipation of future experience, in both senses: prediction and control.

Thereby, Peirce devised an approach to inquiry far more solid than the flatter image of inductive generalization simpliciter, which is a mere re-labeling of phenomenological patterns. Peirce's pragmatism was the first time the scientific method was proposed as an epistemology for philosophical questions.
A theory that succeeds better than its rivals in predicting and controlling our world is said to be nearer the truth. This is an operational notion of truth used by scientists.
Peirce extracted the pragmatic model or theory of inquiry from its raw materials in classical logic and refined it in parallel with the early development of symbolic logic to address problems about the nature of scientific reasoning.
Abduction, deduction, and induction make incomplete sense in isolation from one another but comprise a cycle understandable as a whole insofar as they collaborate toward the common end of inquiry. In the pragmatic way of thinking about conceivable practical implications, every thing has a purpose, and, as possible, its purpose should first be denoted. Abduction hypothesizes an explanation for deduction to clarify into implications to be tested so that induction can evaluate the hypothesis, in the struggle to move from troublesome uncertainty to more secure belief. No matter how traditional and needful it is to study the modes of inference in abstraction from one another, the integrity of inquiry strongly limits the effective modularity of its principal components.
Peirce's outline of the scientific method in §III–IV of "A Neglected Argument"[149] is summarized below (except as otherwise noted). There he also reviewed plausibility and inductive precision (issues of critique of arguments).
1. Abductive (or retroductive) phase. Guessing, inference to explanatory hypotheses for selection of those best worth trying. From abduction, Peirce distinguishes induction as inferring, on the basis of tests, the proportion of truth in the hypothesis. Every inquiry, whether into ideas, brute facts, or norms and laws, arises from surprising observations in one or more of those realms (and for example at any stage of an inquiry already underway). All explanatory content of theories comes from abduction, which guesses a new or outside idea so as to account in a simple, economical way for a surprising or complicated phenomenon. The modicum of success in our guesses far exceeds that of random luck, and seems born of attunement to nature by developed or inherent instincts, especially insofar as best guesses are optimally plausible and simple in the sense of the "facile and natural", as by Galileo's natural light of reason and as distinct from "logical simplicity".[150] Abduction is the most fertile but least secure mode of inference. Its general rationale is inductive: it succeeds often enough and it has no substitute in expediting us toward new truths.[151] In 1903, Peirce called pragmatism "the logic of abduction".[152] Coordinative method leads from abducting a plausible hypothesis to judging it for its testability[153] and for how its trial would economize inquiry itself.[154] The hypothesis, being insecure, needs to have practical implications leading at least to mental tests and, in science, lending themselves to scientific tests. A simple but unlikely guess, if not costly to test for falsity, may belong first in line for testing. A guess is intrinsically worth testing if it has plausibility or reasonably objective probability, while subjective likelihood, though reasoned, can be misleadingly seductive. Guesses can be selected for trial strategically, for their caution (for which Peirce gave as example the game of Twenty Questions), breadth, or incomplexity.[155] One can discover only that which would be revealed through their sufficient experience anyway, and so the point is to expedite it; economy of research demands the leap, so to speak, of abduction and governs its art.[154]
2. Deductive phase. Two stages:

i. Explication. Not clearly premised, but a deductive analysis of the hypothesis so as to render its parts as clear as possible.
ii. Demonstration: Deductive Argumentation, Euclidean in procedure. Explicit deduction of consequences of the hypothesis as predictions about evidence to be found. Corollarial or, if needed, Theorematic.

3. Inductive phase. Evaluation of the hypothesis, inferring from observational or experimental tests of its deduced consequences. The long-run validity of the rule of induction is deducible from the principle (presuppositional to reasoning in general) that the real "is only the object of the final opinion to which sufficient investigation would lead";[143] in other words, anything excluding such a process would never be real. Induction involving the ongoing accumulation of evidence follows "a method which, sufficiently persisted in," will "diminish the error below any predesignate degree." Three stages:

i. Classification. Not clearly premised, but an inductive classing of objects of experience under general ideas.
ii. Probation: direct Inductive Argumentation. Crude or Gradual in procedure. Crude Induction, founded on experience in one mass (CP 2.759), presumes that future experience on a question will not differ utterly from all past experience (CP 2.756). Gradual Induction makes a new estimate of the proportion of truth in the hypothesis after each test, and is Qualitative or Quantitative. Qualitative Gradual Induction depends on estimating the relative evident weights of the various qualities of the subject class under investigation (CP 2.759; see also CP 7.114–20). Quantitative Gradual Induction depends on how often, in a fair sample of instances of S, S is found actually accompanied by P that was predicted for S (CP 2.758). It depends on measurements, or statistics, or counting.
iii. Sentential Induction. "...which, by Inductive reasonings, appraises the different Probations singly, then their combinations, then makes self-appraisal of these very appraisals themselves, and passes final judgment on the whole result".

Against Cartesianism[edit]
Peirce drew on the methodological implications of the four incapacities — no genuine introspection, no intuition in the sense of non-inferential cognition, no thought but in signs, and no conception of the absolutely incognizable — to attack philosophical Cartesianism, of which he said that:[121]
1. "It teaches that philosophy must begin in universal doubt" — when, instead, we start with preconceptions, "prejudices [...] which it does not occur to us can be questioned", though we may find reason to question them later. "Let us not pretend to doubt in philosophy what we do not doubt in our hearts."
2. "It teaches that the ultimate test of certainty is...in the individual consciousness" — when, instead, in science a theory stays on probation till agreement is reached, then it has no actual doubters left. No lone individual can reasonably hope to fulfill philosophy's multi-generational dream. When "candid and disciplined minds" continue to disagree on a theoretical issue, even the theory's author should feel doubts about it.
3. It trusts to "a single thread of inference depending often upon inconspicuous premisses" — when, instead, philosophy should, "like the successful sciences", proceed only from tangible, scrutinizable premisses and trust not to any one argument but instead to "the multitude and variety of its arguments" as forming, not a chain at least as weak as its weakest link, but "a cable whose fibers", soever "slender, are sufficiently numerous and intimately connected".
4. It renders many facts "absolutely inexplicable, unless to say that 'God makes them so' is to be regarded as an explanation"[156] — when, instead, philosophy should avoid being "unidealistic",[157] misbelieving that something real can defy or evade all possible ideas, and supposing, inevitably, "some absolutely inexplicable, unanalyzable ultimate", which explanatory surmise explains nothing and so is inadmissible.
Philosophy: metaphysics[edit]
Some noted articles

The Monist Metaphysical Series (1891–93)

The Architecture of Theories (1891)
The Doctrine of Necessity Examined (1892)
The Law of Mind (1892)
Man's Glassy Essence (1892)
Evolutionary Love (1893)


Immortality in the Light of Synechism (1893 MS)


Peirce divided metaphysics into (1) ontology or general metaphysics, (2) psychical or religious metaphysics, and (3) physical metaphysics.
Ontology. Peirce was a Scholastic Realist, declaring for the reality of generals as early as 1868.[158] Regarding modalities (possibility, necessity, etc.), he came in later years to regard himself as having wavered earlier as to just how positively real the modalities are. In his 1897 "The Logic of Relatives" he wrote:

I formerly defined the possible as that which in a given state of information (real or feigned) we do not know not to be true. But this definition today seems to me only a twisted phrase which, by means of two negatives, conceals an anacoluthon. We know in advance of experience that certain things are not true, because we see they are impossible.

Peirce retained, as useful for some purposes, the definitions in terms of information states, but insisted that the pragmaticist is committed to a strong modal realism by conceiving of objects in terms of predictive general conditional propositions about how they would behave under certain circumstances.[159]
Psychical or religious metaphysics. Peirce believed in God, and characterized such belief as founded in an instinct explorable in musing over the worlds of ideas, brute facts, and evolving habits — and it is a belief in God not as an actual or existent being (in Peirce's sense of those words), but all the same as a real being.[160] In "A Neglected Argument for the Reality of God" (1908),[149] Peirce sketches, for God's reality, an argument to a hypothesis of God as the Necessary Being, a hypothesis which he describes in terms of how it would tend to develop and become compelling in musement and inquiry by a normal person who is led, by the hypothesis, to consider as being purposed the features of the worlds of ideas, brute facts, and evolving habits (for example scientific progress), such that the thought of such purposefulness will "stand or fall with the hypothesis"; meanwhile, according to Peirce, the hypothesis, in supposing an "infinitely incomprehensible" being, starts off at odds with its own nature as a purportively true conception, and so, no matter how much the hypothesis grows, it both (A) inevitably regards itself as partly true, partly vague, and as continuing to define itself without limit, and (B) inevitably has God appearing likewise vague but growing, though God as the Necessary Being is not vague or growing; but the hypothesis will hold it to be more false to say the opposite, that God is purposeless. Peirce also argued that the will is free[161] and (see Synechism) that there is at least an attenuated kind of immortality.
Physical metaphysics. Peirce held the view, which he called objective idealism, that "matter is effete mind, inveterate habits becoming physical laws".[162] Peirce asserted the reality of (1) absolute chance (his tychist view), (2) mechanical necessity (anancist view), and (3) that which he called the law of love (agapist view), echoing his categories Firstness, Secondness, and Thirdness, respectively. He held that fortuitous variation (which he also called "sporting"), mechanical necessity, and creative love are the three modes of evolution (modes called "tychasm", "anancasm", and "agapasm")[163] of the cosmos and its parts. He found his conception of agapasm embodied in Lamarckian evolution; the overall idea in any case is that of evolution tending toward an end or goal, and it could also be the evolution of a mind or a society; it is the kind of evolution which manifests workings of mind in some general sense. He said that overall he was a synechist, holding with reality of continuity,[164] especially of space, time, and law.[165]
Science of review[edit]
Main article: Classification of the sciences (Peirce)
Peirce outlined two fields, "Cenoscopy" and "Science of Review", both of which he called philosophy. Both included philosophy about science. In 1903 he arranged them, from more to less theoretically basic, thus:[102]

Science of Discovery.

Mathematics.
Cenoscopy (philosophy as discussed earlier in this article—categorial, normative, metaphysical), as First Philosophy, concerns positive phenomena in general, does not rely on findings from special sciences, and includes the general study of inquiry and scientific method.
Idioscopy, or the Special Sciences (of nature and mind).


Science of Review, as Ultimate Philosophy, arranges "...the results of discovery, beginning with digests, and going on to endeavor to form a philosophy of science". His examples included Humboldt's Cosmos, Comte's Philosophie positive, and Spencer's Synthetic Philosophy.
Practical Science, or the Arts.

Peirce placed, within Science of Review, the work and theory of classifying the sciences (including mathematics and philosophy). His classifications, on which he worked for many years, draw on argument and wide knowledge, and are of interest both as a map for navigating his philosophy and as an accomplished polymath's survey of research in his time.
See also[edit]




Charles Sanders Peirce's type–token distinction
Continuous predicate
Entitative graph
Hypostatic abstraction
Idea#Charles Sanders Peirce




Laws of Form
List of American philosophers
Logic of information
Logical machine
Logical matrix




Mathematical psychology
Normal distribution#Naming
Peirce triangle
Peirce's law
Phaneron




Pragmatics
Problem of universals#Peirce
Quantification (science)#History
Relation algebra
Truth table




Contemporaries associated with Peirce




Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr.
Howland will forgery trial




George Herbert Mead
Ventura de los Reyes Prósper




Thorstein Veblen




Notes[edit]


^ a b c Hacking, Ian (1990), "A Universe of Chance", The Taming of Chance, pp. 200–215, Cambridge U. Pr.
^ a b c d Stigler, Stephen M. (1978). "Mathematical statistics in the early States". Annals of Statistics 6: 239–265 [248]. doi:10.1214/aos/1176344123. JSTOR&#160;2958876. MR&#160;483118.&#160;
^ a b Crease, Robert P (2009). "Charles Sanders Peirce and the first absolute measurement standard: In his brilliant but troubled life, Peirce was a pioneer in both metrology and philosophy". Physics Today 62 (12): 39–44. doi:10.1063/1.3273015.&#160;
^ a b Cadwallader, Thomas C. (1974). "Charles S. Peirce (1839-1914): The first American experimental psychologist". Journal of the History of the Behavioral Sciences 10 (3): 291. doi:10.1002/1520-6696(197407)10:3&lt;291::AID-JHBS2300100304&gt;3.0.CO;2-N.&#160;
^ a b Wible, James R. (2008), "The Economic Mind of Charles Sanders Peirce", Contemporary Pragmatism, v. 5, n. 2, December, pp. 39-67
^ a b Nöth, Winfried (2000), "Charles Sanders Peirce, Pathfinder in Linguistics", Digital Encyclopedia of Charles S. Peirce.
^ Joseph Brent (1998). Charles Sanders Peirce: A Life (2 ed.). Indiana University Press. p.&#160;18. ISBN&#160;9780253211613. Peirce had strong, though unorthodox, religious convictions. Although he was a communicant in the Episcopal church for most of his life, he expressed contempt for the theologies, metaphysics, and practices of established religions.&#160; |access-date= requires |url= (help)
^ Brent, Joseph (1998), Charles Sanders Peirce: A Life, 2nd edition, Bloomington and Indianapolis: Indiana University Press (catalog page); also NetLibrary.
^ "Peirce", in the case of C.S. Peirce, always rhymes with the English-language word "terse" and so, in most dialects, is pronounced exactly like the English-language word "&#160;purse&#160;(help·info)". See "Note on the Pronunciation of 'Peirce'", Peirce Project Newsletter, v. 1, nos. 3/4, Dec. 1994.
^ a b Peirce, C. S., "Letter, Peirce to A. Marquand", dated 1886, W 5:541–3, Google Preview. See Burks, Arthur W., "Review: Charles S. Peirce, The new elements of mathematics", Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society v. 84, n. 5 (1978), pp. 913–18, see 917. PDF Eprint. Also p. xliv in Houser, Nathan, Introduction, W 5.
^ Weiss, Paul (1934), "Peirce, Charles Sanders" in the Dictionary of American Biography. Arisbe Eprint.
^ "Peirce, Benjamin", subheading "Charles Sanders", in Webster's Biographical Dictionary (1943/1960), Springfield, MA: Merriam-Webster.
^ a b Keith Devlin (2000) The Math Gene. Basic Books.
^ Fisch, Max, "Introduction", W 1:xvii, find phrase "One episode".
^ "Peirce, Charles Sanders" (1898), The National Cyclopedia of American Biography, v. 8, p. 409.
^ B:54–6
^ B:363–4
^ B:19-20, 53, 75, 245
^ B:40
^ a b c d Burch, Robert (2001, 2010), "Charles Sanders Peirce", Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
^ B:139
^ B:61-2
^ B:69
^ B:368
^ B:79-81
^ a b c d e Moore, Edward C., and Robin, Richard S., eds., (1964), Studies in the Philosophy of Charles Sanders Peirce, Second Series, Amherst: U. of Massachusetts Press. On Peirce the astronomer, see Lenzen's chapter.
^ B:367
^ Fisch, Max (1983), "Peirce as Scientist, Mathematician, Historian, Logician, and Philosopher", Studies in Logic (new edition), see p. x.
^ See "Peirce Edition Project (UQÀM) - in short" from PEP-UQÀM.
^ Houser, Nathan, "Introduction", W 5:xxviii-xxix, find "Allison".
^ B:202
^ a b Houser, Nathan (1989), "Introduction", W 4:xxxviii, find "Eighty-nine".
^ B:150–4, 195, 279–80, 289
^ B:xv
^ B:98–101
^ B:141
^ B:148
^ Houser, Nathan, "Introduction", W 6, first paragraph.
^ B:123, 368
^ B:150–1, 368
^ In 1885 (B:369); in 1890 and 1900 (B:215, 273); in 1891 (B:215–16); and in 1892 (B:151–2, 222).
^ B:77
^ B:191-2, 217, 270, 318, 321, 337.
^ B:13
^ B:369–74
^ B:191
^ B:246
^ B:242
^ B:271
^ B:249–55
^ B:371
^ B:189
^ B:370
^ B:205–6
^ B:374–6
^ B:279–89
^ B:261–4, 290–2, 324
^ B:306–7 &amp; 315–6
^ Brent, Joseph (1998). Charles Sanders Peirce, a life. Bloomington, Indiana: Indiana University Press. p.&#160;34. ISBN&#160;0-253-21161-1.&#160;
^ Menand, Louis (2001). The Metaphysical Club. London: Flamingo. pp.&#160;161–162. ISBN&#160;0-00-712690-5.&#160;
^ Russell, Bertrand (1959), Wisdom of the West, p. 276.
^ a b Anellis, Irving H. (1995), "Peirce Rustled, Russell Pierced: How Charles Peirce and Bertrand Russell Viewed Each Other's Work in Logic, and an Assessment of Russell's Accuracy and Role in the Historiography of Logic", Modern Logic 5, 270–328. Arisbe Eprint.
^ Popper, Karl (1972), Objective Knowledge: An Evolutionary Approach, p. 212.
^ See Royce, Josiah, and Kernan, W. Fergus (1916), "Charles Sanders Peirce", The Journal of Philosophy, Psychology, and Scientific Method v. 13, pp. 701–9. Arisbe Eprint.
^ Ketner et al. (1986), Comprehensive Bibliography, see p. iii.
^ Hookway, Christopher (2008), "Pragmatism", Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
^ B:8
^ Fisch, Max (1986), Peirce, Semeiotic, and Pragmatism, Kenneth Laine Ketner and Christian J. W. Kloesel, eds., Bloomington, Indiana: Indiana U. Pr.
^ Theological Research Group in C.S. Peirce's Philosophy (Hermann Deuser, Justus-Liebig-Universität Gießen; Wilfred Härle, Philipps-Universität Marburg, Germany).
^ Burks, Arthur, Introduction, CP 7, p. xi.
^ Robin, Richard S. (1967), Annotated Catalogue of the Papers of Charles S. Peirce. Amherst MA: University of Massachusetts Press.
^ "The manuscript material now (1997) comes to more than a hundred thousand pages. These contain many pages of no philosophical interest, but the number of pages on philosophy certainly number much more than half of that. Also, a significant but unknown number of manuscripts have been lost." — Joseph Ransdell (1997), "Some Leading Ideas of Peirce's Semiotic", end note 2, 1997 light revision of 1977 version in Semiotica 19:157–78.
^ Houser, Nathan, "The Fortunes and Misfortunes of the Peirce Papers", Fourth Congress of the IASS, Perpignan, France, 1989. Signs of Humanity, v. 3, 1992, pp. 1259–68. Eprint
^ Memorandum to the President of Charles S. Peirce Society by Ahti-Veikko Pietarinen, U. of Helsinki, March 29, 2012. Eprint.
^ See for example "Collections of Peirce's Writings" at Commens, U. of Helsinki.
^ See 1987 review by B. Kuklick (of Peirce by Christopher Hookway), in British Journal for the Philosophy of Sciencev. 38, n. 1, pp. 117-19. First page.
^ Auspitz, Josiah Lee (1994), "The Wasp Leaves the Bottle: Charles Sanders Peirce", The American Scholar, v. 63, n. 4, autumn, 602–18. Arisbe Eprint.
^ a b Burks, Arthur W., "Review: Charles S. Peirce, The new elements of mathematics", Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society v. 84, n. 5 (1978), pp. 913–18 (PDF).
^ Peirce (1860 MS), "Orders of Infinity", News from the Peirce Edition Project, September 2010 (PDF), p. 6, with the manuscript's text. Also see logic historian Irving Anellis's November 11, 2010 comment at peirce-l.
^ Peirce (MS, winter of 1880–81), "A Boolean Algebra with One Constant", CP 4.12–20, W 4:218-21. Google Preview. See Roberts, Don D. (1973), The Existential Graphs of Charles S. Peirce, p. 131.
^ Peirce (1881), "On the Logic of Number", American Journal of Mathematics v. 4, pp. 85-95. Reprinted (CP 3.252–88), (W 4:299–309). See See Shields, Paul (1997), "Peirce's Axiomatization of Arithmetic", in Houser et al., eds., Studies in the Logic of Charles S. Peirce.
^ a b Peirce (1885), "On the Algebra of Logic: A Contribution to the Philosophy of Notation", American Journal of Mathematics 7, two parts, first part published 1885, pp. 180–202 (see Houser in linked paragraph in "Introduction" in W 4). Presented, National Academy of Sciences, Newport, RI, 14–17 October 1884 (see EP 1, Headnote 16). 1885 is the year usually given for this work. Reprinted CP 3.359–403, W 5:162–90, EP 1:225–8, in part.
^ a b c Putnam, Hilary (1982), "Peirce the Logician", Historia Mathematica 9, 290–301. Reprinted, pp. 252–60 in Putnam (1990), Realism with a Human Face, Harvard. Excerpt with article's last five pages.
^ It was in Peirce's 1885 "On the Algebra of Logic". See Byrnes, John (1998), "Peirce's First-Order Logic of 1885", Transactions of the Charles S. Peirce Society v. 34, n. 4, pp. 949-76.
^ Brady, Geraldine (2000), From Peirce to Skolem: A Neglected Chapter in the History of Logic, North-Holland/Elsevier Science BV, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
^ See Peirce (1898), Lecture 3, "The Logic of Relatives" (not the 1897 Monist article), Reasoning and the Logic of Things , pp. 146–64, see 151.
^ Peirce (1898), "The Logic of Mathematics in Relation to Education" in Educational Review v. 15, pp. 209–16 (via Internet Archive). Reprinted CP 3.553–62. See also his "The Simplest Mathematics" (1902 MS), CP 4.227–323.
^ Lewis, Clarence Irving (1918), A Survey of Symbolic Logic, see ch. 1, §7 "Peirce", pp. 79–106, see p. 79 (Internet Archive). Note that Lewis's bibliography lists works by Frege, tagged with asterisks as important.
^ Avery, John (2003) Information theory and evolution, p. 167; also Mitchell, Melanie, "My Scientific Ancestry".
^ Beil, Ralph G. and Ketner, Kenneth (2003), "Peirce, Clifford, and Quantum Theory", International Journal of Theoretical Physics v. 42, n. 9, pp. 1957-1972.
^ Houser, Roberts, and Van Evra, eds. (1997), Studies in the Logic of Charles Sanders Peirce, Indiana U., Bloomington, IN.
^ Misak, ed. (2004), The Cambridge Companion to Peirce, Cambridge U., UK.
^ Peirce (1893-1894, MS 949, p. 1)
^ Peirce (1903 MS), CP 6.176: "But I now define a pseudo-continuum as that which modern writers on the theory of functions call a continuum. But this is fully represented by [...] the totality of real values, rational and irrational [...]."
^ Peirce (1902 MS) and Ransdell, Joseph, ed. (1998), "Analysis of the Methods of Mathematical Demonstration", Memoir 4, Draft C, MS L75.90–102, see 99–100. (Once there, scroll down).
^ See:

Peirce (1908), "Some Amazing Mazes (Conclusion), Explanation of Curiosity the First", The Monist, v. 18, n. 3, pp. 416-64, see 463-4. Reprinted CP 4.594-642, see 642.
Havenel, Jérôme (2008), "Peirce's Clarifications on Continuity", Transactions Winter 2008 pp. 68–133, see 119. Abstract.


^ Peirce condemned the use of "certain likelihoods" (EP 2:108–9) even more strongly than he criticized Bayesian methods. Indeed Peirce used a bit of Bayesian inference in criticizing parapsychology (W 6:76).
^ Miller, Richard W. (1975), "Propensity: Popper or Peirce?", British Journal for the Philosophy of Science (site), v. 26, n. 2, pp. 123–32. doi:10.1093/bjps/26.2.123. Eprint.
^ Haack, Susan and Kolenda, Konstantin (1977), "Two Fallibilists in Search of the Truth", Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Supplementary Volumes, v. 51, pp. 63–104. JSTOR&#160;4106816
^ Peirce CS, Jastrow J. On Small Differences in Sensation. Memoirs of the National Academy of Sciences 1885;3:73-83.
^ a b Peirce (1897) "Fallibilism, Continuity, and Evolution", CP 1.141–75 (Eprint), placed by the CP editors directly after "F.R.L." (1899, CP 1.135–40).
^ a b Peirce (1903), CP 1.180-202 Eprint and (1906) "The Basis of Pragmaticism", EP 2:372–3, see "Philosophy" at CDPT.
^ See in "Firstness", "Secondness", and "Thirdness" in CDPT.
^ Peirce (1893), "The Categories" MS 403. Arisbe Eprint, edited by Joseph Ransdell, with information on the re-write, and interleaved with the 1867 "New List" for comparison.
^ "Minute Logic", CP 2.87, c.1902 and A Letter to Lady Welby, CP 8.329, 1904. See relevant quotes under "Categories, Cenopythagorean Categories" in Commens Dictionary of Peirce's Terms (CDPT), Bergman &amp; Paalova, eds., U. of Helsinki.
^ See quotes under "Firstness, First [as a category]" in CDPT.
^ a b The ground blackness is the pure abstraction of the quality black. Something black is something embodying blackness, pointing us back to the abstraction. The quality black amounts to reference to its own pure abstraction, the ground blackness. The question is not merely of noun (the ground) versus adjective (the quality), but rather of whether we are considering the black(ness) as abstracted away from application to an object, or instead as so applied (for instance to a stove). Yet note that Peirce's distinction here is not that between a property-general and a property-individual (a trope). See "On a New List of Categories" (1867), in the section appearing in CP 1.551. Regarding the ground, cf. the Scholastic conception of a relation's foundation, Google limited preview Deely 1982, p. 61
^ A quale in this sense is a such, just as a quality is a suchness. Cf. under "Use of Letters" in §3 of Peirce's "Description of a Notation for the Logic of Relatives", Memoirs of the American Academy, v. 9, pp. 317–78 (1870), separately reprinted (1870), from which see p. 6 via Google books, also reprinted in CP 3.63:

Now logical terms are of three grand classes. The first embraces those whose logical form involves only the conception of quality, and which therefore represent a thing simply as “a —.” These discriminate objects in the most rudimentary way, which does not involve any consciousness of discrimination. They regard an object as it is in itself as such (quale); for example, as horse, tree, or man. These are absolute terms. (Peirce, 1870. But also see "Quale-Consciousness", 1898, in CP 6.222–37.)


^ See quotes under "Secondness, Second [as a category]" in CDPT.
^ See quotes under "Thirdness, Third [as a category]" in CDPT.
^ "Charles S. Peirce on Esthetics and Ethics: A Bibliography" (PDF) by Kelly A. Parker in 1999.
^ Peirce (1902 MS), Carnegie Application, edited by Joseph Ransdell, Memoir 2, see table.
^ See Esthetics at CDPT.
^ a b c Peirce (1899 MS), "F.R.L." [First Rule of Logic], CP 1.135–40, Eprint
^ a b Peirce (1882), "Introductory Lecture on the Study of Logic" delivered September 1882, Johns Hopkins University Circulars, v. 2, n. 19, pp. 11–12 (via Google), November 1882. Reprinted (EP 1:210–14; W 4:378–82; CP 7.59–76). The definition of logic quoted by Peirce is by Peter of Spain.
^ Peirce (1878), "The Doctrine of Chances", Popular Science Monthly, v. 12, pp. 604–15 (CP 2.645–68, W 3:276–90, EP 1:142–54).

...death makes the number of our risks, the number of our inferences, finite, and so makes their mean result uncertain. The very idea of probability and of reasoning rests on the assumption that this number is indefinitely great. .... ...logicality inexorably requires that our interests shall not be limited. .... Logic is rooted in the social principle.


^ Peirce, CP 5.448 footnote, from "The Basis of Pragmaticism" in 1906.
^ a b c Peirce, (1868), "Questions concerning certain Faculties claimed for Man", Journal of Speculative Philosophy v. 2, n. 2, pp. 103-14. On thought in signs, see p. 112. Reprinted CP 5.213-63 (on thought in signs, see 253), W 2:193-211, EP 2:11-27. Arisbe Eprint.
^ a b See rhetoric definitions at CDPT.
^ Peirce (1902), The Carnegie Institute Application, Memoir 10, MS L75.361-2, Arisbe Eprint.
^ a b c d e Peirce (1868), "Some Consequences of Four Incapacities", Journal of Speculative Philosophy v. 2, n. 3, pp. 140-57. Reprinted CP 5.264-317, W 2:211-42, EP 1:28-55. Arisbe Eprint.
^ a b Peirce, "Grounds of Validity of the Laws of Logic: Further Consequences of Four Incapacities", Journal of Speculative Philosophy v. II, n. 4, pp. 193-208. Reprinted CP 5.318-357, W 2:242-272 (PEP Eprint), EP 1:56-82.
^ Peirce (1905), "What Pragmatism Is", The Monist, v. XV, n. 2, pp. 161-81, see 167. Reprinted CP 5.411-37, see 416. Arisbe Eprint.
^ Peirce 1907, CP 5.484. Reprinted, EP 2:411 in "Pragmatism" (398–433).
^ See "Quasi-mind" in CDPT.
^ Peirce (1867), "Upon Logical Comprehension and Extension" (CP 2.391–426), (W 2:70–86).
^ a b See pp. 404–9 in "Pragmatism" in EP 2. Ten quotes on collateral experience from Peirce provided by Joseph Ransdell can be viewed here at peirce-l's Lyris archive. Note: Ransdell's quotes from CP 8.178–9 are also in EP 2:493–4, which gives their date as 1909; and his quote from CP 8.183 is also in EP 2:495–6, which gives its date as 1909.
^ Peirce, letter to William James, dated 1909, see EP 2:492.
^ a b c See "76 definitions of the sign by C.S.Peirce", collected by Robert Marty (U. of Perpignan, France).
^ Peirce, A Letter to Lady Welby (1908), Semiotic and Significs, pp. 80–1:

I define a Sign as anything which is so determined by something else, called its Object, and so determines an effect upon a person, which effect I call its Interpretant, that the latter is thereby mediately determined by the former. My insertion of "upon a person" is a sop to Cerberus, because I despair of making my own broader conception understood.


^ "Representamen", properly with the 'a' long and stressed (/rɛprəzɛnˈteɪmən/ rep-rə-zen-TAY-mən), was adopted (not coined) by Peirce as his technical term for the sign as covered in his theory, in case a divergence should come to light between his theoretical version and the popular senses of the word "sign". He eventually stopped using "representamen". See EP 2:272–3 and Semiotic and Significs p. 193, quotes in "Representamen" at CDPT.
^ Eco, Umberto (1984). Semiotics and the Philosophy of Language. Bloomington &amp; Indianapolis: Indiana University Press. p.&#160;15. ISBN&#160;978-0-253-20398-4.&#160;
^ a b Peirce (1909), A Letter to William James, EP 2:492-502. Fictional object, 498. Object as universe of discourse, 492. See "Dynamical Object" at CDPT.
^ See "Immediate Object", etc., at CDPT.
^ a b Peirce (1903 MS), "Nomenclature and Divisions of Triadic Relations, as Far as They Are Determined", under other titles in Collected Papers (CP) v. 2, paragraphs 233–72, and reprinted under the original title in Essential Peirce (EP) v. 2, pp. 289–99. Also see image of MS 339 (August 7, 1904) supplied to peirce-l by Bernard Morand of the Institut Universitaire de Technologie (France), Département Informatique.
^ a b On the varying terminology, look up in CDPT.
^ Popular Science Monthly, v. 13, pp. 470–82, see 472 or the book at Wikisource. CP 2.619–44, see 623.
^ See, under "Abduction" at CDPT, the following quotes:

On correction of "A Theory of Probable Inference", see quotes from "Minute Logic", CP 2.102, c. 1902, and from the Carnegie Application (L75), 1902, Historical Perspectives on Peirce's Logic of Science v. 2, pp. 1031–1032.
On new logical form for abduction, see quote from Harvard Lectures on Pragmatism, 1903, CP 5.188–189.

See also Santaella, Lucia (1997) "The Development of Peirce's Three Types of Reasoning: Abduction, Deduction, and Induction", 6th Congress of the IASS. Eprint.
^ "Lectures on Pragmatism", 1903, CP 5.171.
^ A Letter to J. H. Kehler (dated 1911), The New Elements of Mathematics v. 3, pp. 203–4, see in "Retroduction" at CDPT.
^ James, William (1897), The Will to Believe, see p. 124.
^ See Pragmaticism#Pragmaticism's name for discussion and references.
^ a b "That the rule of induction will hold good in the long run may be deduced from the principle that reality is only the object of the final opinion to which sufficient investigation would lead", in Peirce (1878 April), "The Probability of Induction", p. 718 (via Internet Archive ) in Popular Science Monthly, v. 12, pp. 705–18. Reprinted in CP 2.669–93, W 3:290–305, EP 1:155–69, elsewhere.
^ Peirce (1902), CP 5.13 note 1.
^ See CP 1.34 Eprint (in "The Spirit of Scholasticism"), where Peirce ascribed the success of modern science less to a novel interest in verification than to the improvement of verification.
^ See Joseph Ransdell's comments and his tabular list of titles of Peirce's proposed list of memoirs in 1902 for his Carnegie application, Eprint
^ Peirce (1905), "Issues of Pragmaticism", The Monist, v. XV, n. 4, pp. 481-99. Reprinted CP 5.438-63. Also important: CP 5.497-525.
^ Peirce, "Philosophy and the Conduct of Life", Lecture 1 of the 1898 Cambridge (MA) Conferences Lectures, CP 1.616–48 in part and Reasoning and the Logic of Things, 105–22, reprinted in EP 2:27–41.
^ a b Peirce (1908), "A Neglected Argument for the Reality of God", published in large part, Hibbert Journal v. 7, 90–112. Reprinted with an unpublished part, CP 6.452–85, Selected Writings pp. 358–79, EP 2:434–50, Peirce on Signs 260–78.
^ See also Nubiola, Jaime (2004), "Il Lume Naturale: Abduction and God", Semiotiche I/2, 91–102.
^ Peirce (c. 1906), "PAP (Prolegomena to an Apology for Pragmatism)" (MS 293), The New Elements of Mathematics v. 4, pp. 319–20, first quote under "Abduction" at CDPT.
^ Peirce (1903), "Pragmatism – The Logic of Abduction", CP 5.195–205, especially 196. Eprint.
^ Peirce, Carnegie application, MS L75.279-280: Memoir 27, Draft B.
^ a b See MS L75.329–330, from Draft D of Memoir 27 of Peirce's application to the Carnegie Institution:

Consequently, to discover is simply to expedite an event that would occur sooner or later, if we had not troubled ourselves to make the discovery. Consequently, the art of discovery is purely a question of economics. The economics of research is, so far as logic is concerned, the leading doctrine with reference to the art of discovery. Consequently, the conduct of abduction, which is chiefly a question of heuretic and is the first question of heuretic, is to be governed by economical considerations.


^ Peirce, C. S., "On the Logic of Drawing Ancient History from Documents", EP 2, see 107-9. On Twenty Questions, see 109:

Thus, twenty skillful hypotheses will ascertain what 200,000 stupid ones might fail to do.


^ Peirce believed in God. See section #Philosophy: metaphysics.
^ However, Peirce disagreed with Hegelian absolute idealism. See for example CP 8.131.
^ Peirce (1868), "Nominalism versus Realism", Journal of Speculative Philosophy v. 2, n. 1, pp. 57-61. Reprinted (CP 6.619–24), (W 2:144–53).
^ On developments in Peirce's realism, see:

Peirce (1897), "The Logic of Relatives", The Monist v. VII, n. 2 pp. 161–217, see 206 (via Google). Reprinted CP 3.456–552.
Peirce (1905), "Issues of Pragmaticism", The Monist v. XV, n. 4, pp. 481–99, see 495–6 (via Google). Reprinted (CP 5.438–63, see 453–7).
Peirce (c. 1905), Letter to Signor Calderoni, CP 8.205–13, see 208.
Lane, Robert (2007), "Peirce's Modal Shift: From Set Theory to Pragmaticism", Journal of the History of Philosophy, v. 45, n. 4.


^ Peirce in his 1906 "Answers to Questions concerning my Belief in God", CP 6.495, Eprint, reprinted in part as "The Concept of God" in Philosophical Writings of Peirce, J. Buchler, ed., 1940, pp. 375–8:

I will also take the liberty of substituting "reality" for "existence." This is perhaps overscrupulosity; but I myself always use exist in its strict philosophical sense of "react with the other like things in the environment." Of course, in that sense, it would be fetichism to say that God "exists." The word "reality," on the contrary, is used in ordinary parlance in its correct philosophical sense. [....] I define the real as that which holds its characters on such a tenure that it makes not the slightest difference what any man or men may have thought them to be, or ever will have thought them to be, here using thought to include, imagining, opining, and willing (as long as forcible means are not used); but the real thing's characters will remain absolutely untouched.


^ See his "The Doctrine of Necessity Examined" (1892) and "Reply to the Necessitarians" (1893), to both of which editor Paul Carus responded.
^ Peirce (1891), "The Architecture of Theories", The Monist v. 1, pp. 161–76, see p. 170, via Internet Archive. Reprinted (CP 6.7–34) and (EP 1:285–97, see p. 293).
^ See "tychism", "tychasm", "tychasticism", and the rest, at CDPT.
^ Peirce (1893), "Evolutionary Love", The Monist v. 3, pp. 176–200. Reprinted CP 6.278–317, EP 1:352–72. Arisbe Eprint
^ See p. 115 in Reasoning and the Logic of Things (Peirce's 1898 lectures).


External links[edit]



Find more about
Charles Sanders Peirce
at Wikipedia's sister projects




Definitions from Wiktionary



Media from Commons



Quotations from Wikiquote



Source texts from Wikisource


Charles Sanders Peirce bibliography has external links throughout to such materials as biographical and overview articles on Peirce at encyclopedias, study sites, etc.; individual works by Peirce; and collections, bibliographies, and Peirce's definitions in the Baldwin dictionary.
Other useful sets of links:

Existential graph references and external links.
Pragmatism external links.
Semiotics external links.


Peirce sites



Arisbe: The Peirce Gateway, Joseph Ransdell, ed. Over 100 online writings by Peirce as of 11/24/10, with annotations. 100s of online papers on Peirce. The peirce-l e-forum. Much else.
Center for Applied Semiotics (CAS) (1998–2003), Donald Cunningham &amp; Jean Umiker-Sebeok, Indiana U.
Centro de Estudos Peirceanos (CeneP) and Centro Internacional de Estudos Peirceanos (CIEP), Lucia Santaella et al., Pontifical Catholic U. of São Paulo (PUC-SP), Brazil. In Portuguese, some English.
Centro Studi Peirce, Carlo Sini, Rossella Fabbrichesi, et al., U. of Milan, Italy. In Italian and English. Part of Pragma.
Charles S. Peirce Foundation. Co-sponsoring the 2014 Peirce International Centennial Congress (100th anniversary of Peirce's death).
Charles S. Peirce Society
—Transactions of the Charles S. Peirce Society. Quarterly journal of Peirce studies since spring 1965. Table of Contents of all issues.
Charles S. Peirce Studies, Brian Kariger, ed.
Charles Sanders Peirce at the Mathematics Genealogy Project
Collegium for the Advanced Study of Picture Act and Embodiment: The Peirce Archive. Humboldt U, Berlin, Germany. Cataloguing Peirce's innumerable drawings &amp; graphic materials. More info (Prof. Aud Sissel Hoel).
Digital Encyclopedia of Charles S. Peirce, João Queiroz (now at UFJF) &amp; Ricardo Gudwin (at Unicamp), eds., U. of Campinas, Brazil, in English. 84 authors listed, 51 papers online &amp; more listed, as of 1/31/09.
Existential Graphs, Jay Zeman, ed., U. of Florida. Has 4 Peirce texts.
Grupo de Estudios Peirceanos (GEP) / Peirce Studies Group, Jaime Nubiola, ed., U. of Navarra, Spain. Big study site, Peirce &amp; others in Spanish &amp; English, bibliography, more.
Helsinki Peirce Research Center (HPRC), Ahti-Veikko Pietarinen et al., U. of Helsinki, with Commens: Virtual Centre for Peirce Studies, Mats Bergman &amp; Sami Paavola, eds. 23 papers by 11 authors as of 11/24/10.
—Commens Dictionary of Peirce's Terms (CDPT): Peirce's own definitions, often many per term across the decades.
His Glassy Essence. Autobiographical Peirce. Kenneth Laine Ketner.
Institute for Studies in Pragmaticism, Kenneth Laine Ketner, Clyde Hendrick, et al., Texas Tech U. Peirce's life and works.
International Research Group on Abductive Inference, Uwe Wirth et al., eds., Goethe U., Frankfurt, Germany. Uses frames. Click on link at bottom of its home page for English. Moved to U. of Gießen, Germany, home page not in English but see Artikel section there.
L'I.R.S.C.E. (1974–2003)—Institut de Recherche en Sémiotique, Communication et Éducation, Gérard Deledalle, Joëlle Réthoré, U. of Perpignan, France.
Minute Semeiotic, Vinicius Romanini, U. of São Paulo, Brazil. English, Portuguese.
Peirce at Signo: Theoretical Semiotics on the Web, Louis Hébert, director, supported by U. of Québec. Theory, application, exercises of Peirce's Semiotics and Esthetics. English, French.
Peirce Edition Project (PEP), Indiana U.-Purdue U. Indianapolis (IUPUI). André De Tienne, Nathan Houser, et al. Editors of the Writings of Charles S. Peirce (W) and The Essential Peirce (EP) v. 2. Many study aids such as the Robin Catalog of Peirce's manuscripts &amp; letters and:
—Biographical introductions to EP&#160;1–2 and W&#160;1–6 &amp; 8
—Most of W 2 readable online.
—PEP's branch at Université du Québec à Montréal (UQÀM). Working on W 7: Peirce's work on the Century Dictionary. Definition of the week.
Peirce's Existential Graphs, Frithjof Dau, Germany
Peirce's Theory of Semiosis: Toward a Logic of Mutual Affection, Joseph Esposito. Free online course.
Pragmatism Cybrary, David Hildebrand &amp; John Shook.
Research Group on Semiotic Epistemology and Mathematics Education (late 1990s), Institut für Didaktik der Mathematik (Michael Hoffman, Michael Otte, Universität Bielefeld, Germany). See Peirce Project Newsletter v. 3, n. 1, p. 13.
Semiotics according to Robert Marty, with 76 definitions of the sign by C.&#160;S. Peirce.










v
t
e


Notable logicians









Anderson
Aristotle
Averroes
Avicenna
Bain
Barwise
Bernays
Boole
Boolos
Cantor
Carnap
Church
Chrysippus
Cohen
Curry
De Morgan
Dummett
Frege
Geach
Gentzen
Gödel
Hintikka
Hilbert
Kleene
Kripke
Leibniz
Lewis
Löwenheim
Łukasiewicz
Barcan Marcus
Peano
Peirce
Prior
Putnam
Quine
Russell
Schröder
Scott
Scotus
Skolem
Smullyan
Tarski
Turing
Whitehead
William of Ockham
Wittgenstein
Zermelo
















v
t
e


Statistics









Outline
Index












&#160;
Descriptive statistics










Continuous data




Location



Mean

arithmetic
geometric
harmonic


Median
Mode








Dispersion



Range
Standard deviation
Coefficient of variation
Percentile
Interquartile range








Shape



Variance
Skewness
Kurtosis
Moments
L-moments











Count data



Index of dispersion








Summary tables



Grouped data
Frequency distribution
Contingency table








Dependence



Pearson product-moment correlation
Rank correlation

Spearman's rho
Kendall's tau


Partial correlation
Scatter plot








Statistical graphics



Bar chart
Biplot
Box plot
Control chart
Correlogram
Fan chart
Forest plot
Histogram
Pie chart
Q–Q plot
Run chart
Scatter plot
Stem-and-leaf display
Radar chart


















&#160;
Data collection










Study design



Effect size
Standard error
Statistical power
Sample size determination








Survey methodology



Sampling

stratified
cluster


Opinion poll
Questionnaire








Controlled experiments



Design

control
optimal


Controlled trial
Randomized
Random assignment
Replication
Blocking
Factorial experiment








Uncontrolled studies



Observational study
Natural experiment
Quasi-experiment


















&#160;
Statistical inference










Statistical theory



Sampling distribution
Order statistic
Scan statistic
Record value
Sufficiency
Completeness
Exponential family
Permutation test&#160;(Randomization test)
Empirical distribution
Bootstrap
U statistic
Efficiency
Asymptotics
Robustness








Frequentist inference







Confidence interval
Testing hypotheses
Power








Unbiased estimators



Mean unbiased minimum-variance
Median unbiased








Biased estimators



Maximum likelihood
Method of moments
Minimum distance
Density estimation








Parametric tests



Likelihood-ratio
Wald
Score











Specific tests







Z (normal)
Student's t-test
F
Shapiro–Wilk
Kolmogorov–Smirnov








Goodness of fit



Chi-squared
G
Sample source (Anderson–Darling)
Sample normality (Shapiro–Wilk)
Skewness&#160;/ kurtosis normality (Jarque-Bera)
Model comparison (Likelihood-ratio)
Model quality (Akaike criterion)








Signed-rank



1-sample (Wilcoxon)
2-sample (Mann–Whitney U)
1-way anova (Kruskal–Wallis)











Bayesian inference



Bayesian probability

prior
posterior


Credible interval
Bayes factor
Bayesian estimator
Maximum posterior estimator


















&#160;



Correlation
Regression analysis













Correlation



Pearson product–moment
Partial correlation
Confounding variable
Coefficient of determination








Regression analysis



Errors and residuals
Regression model validation
Mixed effects models
Simultaneous equations models
Multivariate adaptive regression splines (MARS)








Linear regression



Simple linear regression
Ordinary least squares
General linear model
Bayesian regression








Non-standard predictors



Nonlinear regression
Nonparametric
Semiparametric
Isotonic
Robust
Heteroscedasticity
Homoscedasticity








Generalized linear model



Exponential families
Logistic (Bernoulli)&#160;/ Binomial&#160;/ Poisson regressions








Partition of variance



Analysis of variance (ANOVA, anova)
Analysis of covariance
Multivariate ANOVA
Degrees of freedom


















&#160;
Categorical&#160;/ Multivariate&#160;/ Time-series&#160;/ Survival analysis










Categorical



Cohen's kappa
Contingency table
Graphical model
Log-linear model
McNemar's test








Multivariate



Multivariate regression
Principal components
Factor analysis
Cluster analysis
Classification
Copulas








Time-series




General



Decomposition
Trend
Stationarity
Seasonal adjustment
Exponential smoothing
Cointegration
Structural break
Granger causality








Specific tests



Dickey–Fuller
Johansen
Q-statistic (Ljung–Box)
Durbin–Watson
Breusch–Godfrey








Time domain



Autocorrelation (ACF)

partial (PACF)


Cross-correlation (XCF)
ARMA model
ARIMA model (Box–Jenkins)
Autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity (ARCH)
Vector autoregression (VAR)








Frequency domain



Spectral density estimation
Fourier analysis
Wavelet











Survival




Survival function



Kaplan–Meier estimator (product limit)
Proportional hazards models
Accelerated failure time (AFT) model
First hitting time








Hazard function



Nelson–Aalen estimator








Test



Log-rank test





















&#160;
Applications










Biostatistics



Bioinformatics
Clinical trials&#160;/ studies
Epidemiology
Medical statistics








Engineering statistics



Chemometrics
Methods engineering
Probabilistic design
Process&#160;/ quality control
Reliability
System identification








Social statistics



Actuarial science
Census
Crime statistics
Demography
Econometrics
National accounts
Official statistics
Population
Psychometrics








Spatial statistics



Cartography
Environmental statistics
Geographic information system
Geostatistics
Kriging

















Category
Portal
Commons
 WikiProject
















v
t
e


Philosophy of science










Concepts



Analysis
Analytic–synthetic distinction
A priori and a posteriori
Causality
Commensurability
Consilience
Construct
Creative synthesis
Demarcation problem
Empirical evidence
Explanatory power
Fact
Falsifiability
Feminist method
Ignoramus et ignorabimus
Inductive reasoning
Intertheoretic reduction
Inquiry
Nature
Objectivity
Observation
Paradigm
Problem of induction
Scientific law
Scientific method
Scientific revolution
Scientific theory
Testability
Theory choice
Theory-ladenness
Underdetermination
Unity of science








Metatheory
of science



Coherentism
Confirmation holism
Constructive empiricism
Constructive realism
Constructivist epistemology
Contextualism
Conventionalism
{Deductive-nomological model
Hypothetico-deductive model
Inductionism}
Epistemological anarchism
Fallibilism
Foundationalism
Instrumentalism
Pragmatism
Model-dependent realism
Naturalism
Physicalism
Positivism-Reductionism-Determinism
Rationalism&#160;/ Empiricism
Received view&#160;/ Semantic view of theories
Scientific realism&#160;/ Anti-realism
Scientific essentialism
Scientific formalism
Scientific skepticism
Scientism
Structuralism
Uniformitarianism
Vitalism








Philosophy of



Physics

thermal and statistical
Motion


Chemistry
Biology
Environment
Geography
Social science
Technology

Engineering
Artificial intelligence
Computer science


Information
Mind
Psychology
Perception
Space and time








Related topics



Alchemy
Criticism of science
Epistemology
Faith and rationality
History and philosophy of science
History of science
History of evolutionary thought
Logic
Metaphysics
Pseudoscience
Relationship between religion and science
Rhetoric of science
Sociology of scientific knowledge
Sociology of scientific ignorance















&#160;
Philosophers of science by era










Ancient



Plato
Aristotle
Stoicism
Epicurians








Medieval



Averroes
Avicenna
Roger Bacon
William of Ockham
Hugh of Saint Victor
Dominicus Gundissalinus
Robert Kilwardby








Early modern



Francis Bacon
Thomas Hobbes
René Descartes
Galileo Galilei
Pierre Gassendi
Isaac Newton
David Hume








Late modern



Immanuel Kant
Friedrich Schelling
Auguste Comte
William Whewell
Wilhelm Windelband
John Stuart Mill
Herbert Spencer
Pierre Duhem
Henri Poincaré
Wilhelm Wundt








Contemporary



Albert Einstein
Bertrand Russell
Alfred North Whitehead
Rudolf Carnap
W.V.O. Quine
Bas van Fraassen
Carl Gustav Hempel
Charles Sanders Peirce
Daniel Dennett
Hans Reichenbach
Ian Hacking
Imre Lakatos
Jürgen Habermas
Karl Pearson
Karl Popper
Larry Laudan
Michael Polanyi
Otto Neurath
Paul Feyerabend
Thomas Kuhn

















Portal
Category
















v
t
e


Metaphysics






Metaphysicians



Parmenides
Plato
Aristotle
Plotinus
Duns Scotus
Thomas Aquinas
Francisco Suárez
Nicolas Malebranche
René Descartes
John Locke
David Hume
Thomas Reid
Immanuel Kant
Isaac Newton
Arthur Schopenhauer
Baruch Spinoza
Georg W. F. Hegel
George Berkeley
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz
Henri Bergson
Friedrich Nietzsche
Charles Sanders Peirce
Joseph Maréchal
Ludwig Wittgenstein
Martin Heidegger
Alfred N. Whitehead
Bertrand Russell
Dorothy Emmet
G. E. Moore
Jean-Paul Sartre
Gilbert Ryle
Hilary Putnam
P. F. Strawson
R. G. Collingwood
Adolph Stöhr
Rudolf Carnap
Saul Kripke
Willard V. O. Quine
G. E. M. Anscombe
Donald Davidson
Michael Dummett
David Malet Armstrong
David Lewis
Alvin Plantinga
Peter van Inwagen
Derek Parfit
more ...








Theories



Abstract object theory
Action theory
Anti-realism
Determinism
Dualism
Enactivism
Essentialism
Existentialism
Free will
Idealism
Libertarianism
Liberty
Materialism
Meaning of life
Monism
Naturalism
Nihilism
Phenomenalism
Realism
Physicalism
Pirsig's metaphysics of Quality
Platonic idealism
Relativism
Scientific realism
Solipsism
Subjectivism
Substance theory
Type theory








Concepts



Abstract object
Anima mundi
Being
Category of being
Causality
Choice
Cogito ergo sum
Concept
Embodied cognition
Entity
Essence
Existence
Experience
Hypostatic abstraction
Idea
Identity
Identity and change
Information
Insight
Intelligence
Intention
Linguistic modality
Matter
Meaning
Memetics
Mental representation
Mind
Motion
Necessity
Notion
Object
Pattern
Perception
Physical body
Principle
Property
Qualia
Quality
Reality
Soul
Subject
Substantial form
Thought
Time
Truth
Type–token distinction
Universal
Unobservable
Value
more ...








Related topics



Axiology
Cosmology
Epistemology
Interpretations of quantum mechanics
Meta-
Ontology
Philosophy of mind
Philosophy of psychology
Philosophy of self
Philosophy of space and time
Teleology
Theoretical physics











 Category
 Portal
 WikiProject













Authority control



WorldCat
VIAF: 89203252
LCCN: n79034265
ISNI: 0000 0001 0792 3463
GND: 118592459
SELIBR: 83058
SUDOC: 028387023
BNF: cb12027958b (data)
ULAN: 500272519
MGP: 24099
NLA: 36519514
NDL: 00452428
NKC: jn19990006446
BNE: XX953828















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Charles_Sanders_Peirce&amp;oldid=689357289"					
				Categories: Charles Sanders Peirce1839 births1914 deathsPeople from Cambridge, MassachusettsAmerican EpiscopaliansPragmatistsMembers of the United States National Academy of Sciences19th-century American mathematicians20th-century American mathematicians19th-century philosophers20th-century philosophersAmerican statisticiansAmerican logiciansPhilosophers of languageAmerican philosophersJohns Hopkins University facultyLogiciansAmerican semioticiansPhilosophers of educationHarvard School of Engineering and Applied Sciences alumniLattice theoristsModal logiciansFellows of the American Academy of Arts and SciencesChristian philosophersCommunication scholarsThe Nation (U.S. magazine) peopleHidden categories: Pages using citations with accessdate and no URLArticles with hAudio microformatsWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesAll articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from March 2013Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with ULAN identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiers				
							
		
		
			