


		
		
		
			

							
						


			Confucius
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				For other uses, see Confucius (disambiguation).


Confucius
孔子



A portrait of Confucius by the Tang dynasty artist Wu Daozi (680–740)



Born
September 28, 551 BC
Zou, Lu state


Died
479 BC (aged 71–72)
Lu state


Nationality
Lu state, Zhou China





Era
Ancient philosophy


Region
Chinese philosophy


School
Founder of Confucianism



Main interests

Moral philosophy, social philosophy, ethics



Notable ideas

Confucianism




Influences


I Ching, Book of Rites








Influenced


Many Chinese philosophers, particularly Mencius, Xun Zi, the Neotaoists and the Neoconfucians; François Quesnay; Christian Wolff; Robert Cummings Neville; Ezra Pound








Confucius


Chinese
孔夫子


Literal meaning
"Master Kong"





Transcriptions


Standard Mandarin


Hanyu Pinyin
Kǒng fūzǐ


Wade–Giles
K'ung3 fu1-tzu3


IPA
[kʰùŋ&#160;fútsɨ̀]


Gwoyeu Romatzyh
Koong futzyy


Wu


Romanization
Khon fu-tzy


Yue: Cantonese


Jyutping
Hung2 fu1-zi2


Yale Romanization
Húng fū-jí


Southern Min


Hokkien POJ
Khóng hu-chú


Middle Chinese


Middle Chinese
Khúwng pju-tsí


Old Chinese


Baxter-Sagart
*Kʰˤongʔ pa tsəʔ





Alternative Chinese name


Chinese
孔丘


Literal meaning
(given name)





Transcriptions


Standard Mandarin


Hanyu Pinyin
Kǒng Qiū


Wade–Giles
K'ung3 Ch'iu1


IPA
[kʰùŋ&#160;tɕʰjú]


Gwoyeu Romatzyh
Koong Chiou


Wu


Romanization
Khon Chieu


Hakka


Romanization
Kung3 Hiu1


Yue: Cantonese


Yale Romanization
Hung2 Yau1


Southern Min


Hokkien POJ
Khóng Khiu


Middle Chinese


Middle Chinese
Khúwng Khjuw


Old Chinese


Baxter-Sagart
*Kʰˤongʔ Kʷʰə





Confucius (/kənˈfjuːʃəs/; September 28, 551 – 479 BC)[1][2] was a Chinese teacher, editor, politician, and philosopher of the Spring and Autumn period of Chinese history.
The philosophy of Confucius emphasized personal and governmental morality, correctness of social relationships, justice and sincerity. His followers competed successfully with many other schools during the Hundred Schools of Thought era only to be suppressed in favor of the Legalists during the Qin Dynasty. Following the victory of Han over Chu after the collapse of Qin, Confucius's thoughts received official sanction and were further developed into a system known as Confucianism.
Confucius is traditionally credited with having authored or edited many of the Chinese classic texts including all of the Five Classics, but modern scholars are cautious of attributing specific assertions to Confucius himself. Aphorisms concerning his teachings were compiled in the Analects, but only many years after his death.
Confucius's principles had a basis in common Chinese tradition and belief. He championed strong family loyalty, ancestor worship, respect of elders by their children and of husbands by their wives. He also recommended family as a basis for ideal government. He espoused the well-known principle "Do not do to others what you do not want done to yourself", the Golden Rule.



Contents


1 Names
2 Family background
3 Biography

3.1 Early life
3.2 Political career
3.3 Exile
3.4 Return home


4 Philosophy

4.1 Ethics
4.2 Politics


5 Disciples
6 Legacy
7 Visual portraits
8 Death and legacy

8.1 Memorials of Confucius
8.2 Descendants


9 See also
10 Notes
11 References
12 Bibliography

12.1 Hard copy
12.2 Online


13 Further reading
14 External links



Names
Confucius' family and personal name respectively was Kong Qiu (孔丘 Kǒng Qiū).[3] His courtesy name was Zhongni (仲尼 Zhòngní).[3] In Chinese, he is most often known as Kongzi (孔子 Kǒng Zǐ, literally "Master Kong").[4][5] He is also known by the honorific Kong Fuzi (孔夫子 Kǒng Fūzǐ, literally "Grand Master Kong").[5] In the Wade–Giles system of romanization, the honorific name is rendered as "K'ung Fu-tzu". The Latinized name "Confucius" is derived from "Kong Fuzi", and was first coined by 16th-century Jesuit missionaries to China, most probably by Matteo Ricci.[5]
Within the Analects, he is often referred to simply as "the Master" (子 Zǐ). In 1 AD, Confucius was given his first posthumous name, the "Laudably Declarable Lord Ni" (褒成宣尼公). In 1530, he was declared the "Extremely Sage Departed Teacher" (至聖先師). He is also known separately as the "Great Sage" (至聖), "First Teacher" (先師), and "Model Teacher for Ten Thousand Ages" (萬世師表).[6]
Family background
Main article: Family tree of Confucius in the main line of descent
According to tradition, three generations before Confucius' time, his ancestors had migrated from the Song state to the Lu state.[7] Confucius was a descendant of the Shang dynasty Kings through the Dukes of Song.[8][9][10]
Biography
Early life




Lu can be seen in China's northeast.


It is generally thought that Confucius was born on September 28, 551 BC.[1][11] His birthplace was in Zou, Lu state (near present-day Qufu, Shandong Province).[11][12] His father Kong He (孔紇), also known as Shuliang He (叔梁紇), was an officer in the Lu military. Kong He died when Confucius was three years old, and Confucius was raised by his mother Yan Zhengzai (顏徵在) in poverty.[13] His mother would later die at less than 40 years of age.[13] At age 19 he married his wife, surnamed Qiguan (亓官), and a year later the couple had their first child, Kong Li (孔鯉)[13] who was later known as "Boyu", which means "Top Fish" in Chinese.[14] Qiguan and Confucius would later have two daughters together, one of whom is thought to have died early in her life as a child.[15]
Confucius was educated at schools for commoners, where he studied and learned the Six Arts.[16]
Confucius was born into the class of shi (士), between the aristocracy and the common people. He is said to have worked in various government jobs during his early 20s, and also worked as a bookkeeper and a caretaker of sheep and horses, which he used the proceeds from to give his mother a proper burial.[13][14] When his mother died, Confucius (aged 23) is said to have mourned for three years as was the tradition.[14]
Political career
The Lu state was headed by a ruling ducal house.[17] Under the duke were three aristocratic families, whose heads bore the title of viscount and held hereditary positions in the Lu bureaucracy.[18] The Ji family held the position "Minister over the Masses", who was also the "Prime Minister"; the Meng family held the position "Minister of Works"; and the Shu family held the position "Minister of War".[18] In the winter of 505 BC, Yang Hu—a retainer of the Ji family—rose up in rebellion and seized power from the Ji family.[18] However, by the summer of 501 BC, the three hereditary families had succeeded in expelling Yang Hu from Lu.[18] By then, Confucius had built up a considerable reputation through his teachings, while the families came to see the value of proper conduct and righteousness, so they could achieve loyalty to a legitimate government.[19] Thus, that year (501 BC), Confucius came to be appointed to the minor position of governor of a town.[19] Eventually, he rose to the position of Minister of Crime.[19]
Confucius desired to return the authority of the state to the duke by dismantling the fortifications of the city-strongholds belonging to the three families.[20] This way, he could establish a centralized government.[20] However, Confucius relied solely on diplomacy as he had no military authority himself.[20] In 500 BC, Hou Fan—the governor of Hou—revolted against his lord of the Shu family.[20] Although the Meng and Shu families unsuccessfully besieged Hou, a loyalist official rose up with the people of Hou and forced Hou Fan to flee to the Qi state.[20] The situation may have been in favor for Confucius as this likely made it possible for Confucius and his disciples to convince the aristocratic families to dismantle the fortifications of their cities.[20] Eventually, after a year and a half, Confucius and his disciples succeeded in convincing the Shu family to raze the walls of Hou, the Ji family in razing the walls of Bi, and the Meng family in razing the walls of Cheng.[20] First, the Shu family led an army towards their city Hou and tore down its walls in 498 BC.[20] Soon thereafter, Gongshan Furao[a]—a retainer of the Ji family—revolted and took control of the forces at Bi.[21][22] He immediately launched an attack and entered the capital Lu.[20]
Earlier, Gongshan had approached Confucius to join him, which Confucius considered.[21] Even though he disapproved the use of a violent revolution, the Ji family dominated the Lu state force for generations and had exiled the previous duke.[21] Although he wanted the opportunity to put his principles in practice, Confucius gave up on this idea in the end.[21] Creel (1949) states that, unlike the rebel Yang Hu before him, Gongshan may have sought to destroy the three hereditary families and restore the power of the duke.[23] However, Dubs (1946) is of the view that Gongshan was encouraged by Viscount Ji Huan to invade the Lu capital in an attempt to avoid dismantling the Bi fortified walls.[22] Whatever the situation may have been, Gongshan was considered an upright man who continued to defend the state of Lu, even after he was forced to flee.[23][24]
During the revolt by Gongshan, Zhong You (仲由) had managed to keep the duke and the three viscounts together at the court.[24] Zhong You was one of the disciples of Confucius and Confucius had arranged for him to be given the position of governor by the Ji family.[25] When Confucius heard of the raid, he requested that Viscount Ji Huan allow the duke and his court to retreat to a stronghold on his palace grounds.[26] Thereafter, the heads of the three families and the duke retreated to the Ji's palace complex and ascended the Wuzi Terrace.[27] Confucius ordered two officers to lead an assault against the rebels.[27] At least one of the two officers was a retainer of the Ji family, but they were unable to refuse the orders while in the presence of the duke, viscounts, and court.[26] The rebels were pursued and defeated at Gu.[27] Immediately after the revolt was defeated, the Ji family razed the Bi city walls to the ground.[27]
The attackers retreated after realizing that they would have to become rebels against the state and against their own lord.[26] Through Confucius' actions, the Bi officials had inadvertently revolted against their own lord, thus forcing Viscount Ji Huan's hand in having to dismantle the walls of Bi (as it could have harbored such rebels) or confess to instigating the event by going against proper conduct and righteousness as an official.[26] Dubs (1949) suggests that the incident brought to light Confucius' foresight, practical political ability and his insight into human character.[26]
When it was time to dismantle the city walls of the Meng family, the governor was reluctant to have his city walls torn down and convinced the head of the Meng family not to do so.[27] The Zuo Zhuan recalls that the governor advised against razing the walls to the ground as he said that it made Cheng vulnerable to the Qi state and cause the destruction of the Meng family.[26] Even though Viscount Meng Yi gave his word not to interfere with an attempt, he went back on his earlier promise to dismantle the walls.[26]
Later in 498 BC, Duke Ding personally went with an army to lay siege to Cheng in an attempt to raze its walls to the ground, but he did not succeed.[28] Thus, Confucius could not achieve the idealistic reforms that he wanted including restoration of the legitimate rule of the duke.[29] He had made powerful enemies within the state, especially with Viscount Ji Huan, due to his successes so far.[30] According to accounts in the Zuo Zhuan and Shiji, Confucius departed his homeland in 497 BC after his support for the failed attempt of dismantling the fortified city walls of the powerful Ji, Meng, and Shu families.[31] He left the state of Lu without resigning, remaining in self-exile and unable to return as long as Viscount Ji Huan was alive.[30]
Exile
The Shiji states that the neighboring Qi state was worried that Lu was becoming too powerful while Confucius was involved in the government of the Lu state. According to this account, Qi decided to sabotage Lu's reforms by sending 100 good horses and 80 beautiful dancing girls to the Duke of Lu. The Duke indulged himself in pleasure and did not attend to official duties for three days. Confucius was deeply disappointed and resolved to leave Lu and seek better opportunities, yet to leave at once would expose the misbehavior of the Duke and therefore bring public humiliation to the ruler Confucius was serving. Confucius therefore waited for the Duke to make a lesser mistake. Soon after, the Duke neglected to send to Confucius a portion of the sacrificial meat that was his due according to custom, and Confucius seized upon this pretext to leave both his post and the Lu state.
After Confucius' resignation, he began a long journey or set of journeys around the small kingdoms of north-east and central China, traditionally including the states of Wei, Song, Chen, and Cai. At the courts of these states, he expounded his political beliefs but did not see them implemented.
Return home
According to the Zuo Zhuan, Confucius returned home to his native Lu when he was 68, after he was invited to do so by Ji Kangzi, the chief minister of Lu.[32] The Analects depict him spending his last years teaching 72 or 77 disciples and transmitting the old wisdom via a set of texts called the Five Classics.
During his return, Confucius sometimes acted as an advisor to several government officials in Lu, including Ji Kangzi, on matters including governance and crime.[32]
Philosophy
Main article: Confucianism




The Dacheng Hall, the main hall of the Temple of Confucius in Qufu


Although Confucianism is often followed in a religious manner by the Chinese, many argue that its values are secular and therefore it isn't a religion, but more akin to a secular morality. Proponents argue that despite the secular nature of Confucianism's teachings, it is based on a worldview that is religious.[33] Confucianism discusses elements of the afterlife and views concerning Heaven, but it is relatively unconcerned with some spiritual matters often considered essential to religious thought, such as the nature of souls. However, Confucius is said to have believed in astrology saying: "Heaven sends down its good or evil symbols and wise men act accordingly".[34]




The Analects of Confucius


In the Analects, Confucius presents himself as a "transmitter who invented nothing". He puts the greatest emphasis on the importance of study, and it is the Chinese character for study (學) that opens the text. Far from trying to build a systematic or formalist theory, he wanted his disciples to master and internalize the old classics, so that their deep thought and thorough study would allow them to relate the moral problems of the present to past political events (as recorded in the Annals) or the past expressions of commoners' feelings and noblemen's reflections (as in the poems of the Book of Odes).
Ethics
One of the deepest teachings of Confucius may have been the superiority of personal exemplification over explicit rules of behavior. His moral teachings emphasized self-cultivation, emulation of moral exemplars, and the attainment of skilled judgment rather than knowledge of rules. Confucian ethics may be considered a type of virtue ethics. His teachings rarely rely on reasoned argument and ethical ideals and methods are conveyed more indirectly, through allusion, innuendo, and even tautology. His teachings require examination and context in order to be understood. A good example is found in this famous anecdote:



廄焚。子退朝，曰：“傷人乎？” 不問馬。
When the stables were burnt down, on returning from court Confucius said, "Was anyone hurt?" He did not ask about the horses.









Analects X.11 (tr. Waley), 10–13 (tr. Legge), or X-17 (tr. Lau)













By not asking about the horses, Confucius demonstrates that the sage values human beings over property; readers are led to reflect on whether their response would follow Confucius' and to pursue self-improvement if it would not have. Confucius, as an exemplar of human excellence, serves as the ultimate model, rather than a deity or a universally true set of abstract principles. For these reasons, according to many commentators, Confucius' teachings may be considered a Chinese example of humanism.
One of his teachings was a variant of the Golden Rule sometimes called the "Silver Rule" owing to its negative form:



己所不欲，勿施於人。
"What you do not wish for yourself, do not do to others."






子貢問曰：“有一言而可以終身行之者乎”？子曰：“其恕乎！己所不欲、勿施於人。”
Zi Gong [a disciple] asked: "Is there any one word that could guide a person throughout life?"
The Master replied: "How about 'reciprocity'! Never impose on others what you would not choose for yourself."









Analects XV.24, tr. David Hinton













Often overlooked in Confucian ethics are the virtues to the self: sincerity and the cultivation of knowledge. Virtuous action towards others begins with virtuous and sincere thought, which begins with knowledge. A virtuous disposition without knowledge is susceptible to corruption and virtuous action without sincerity is not true righteousness. Cultivating knowledge and sincerity is also important for one's own sake; the superior person loves learning for the sake of learning and righteousness for the sake of righteousness.
The Confucian theory of ethics as exemplified in Lǐ (禮) is based on three important conceptual aspects of life: (a) ceremonies associated with sacrifice to ancestors and deities of various types, (b) social and political institutions, and (c) the etiquette of daily behavior. It was believed by some that lǐ originated from the heavens, but Confucius stressed the development of lǐ through the actions of sage leaders in human history. His discussions of lǐ seem to redefine the term to refer to all actions committed by a person to build the ideal society, rather than those simply conforming with canonical standards of ceremony.
In the early Confucian tradition, lǐ was doing the proper thing at the proper time, balancing between maintaining existing norms to perpetuate an ethical social fabric, and violating them in order to accomplish ethical good. Training in the lǐ of past sages cultivates in people virtues that include ethical judgment about when lǐ must be adapted in light of situational contexts.
In Confucianism, the concept of li is closely related to yì (義), which is based upon the idea of reciprocity. Yì can be translated as righteousness, though it may simply mean what is ethically best to do in a certain context. The term contrasts with action done out of self-interest. While pursuing one's own self-interest is not necessarily bad, one would be a better, more righteous person if one's life was based upon following a path designed to enhance the greater good. Thus an outcome of yì is doing the right thing for the right reason.
Just as action according to Lǐ should be adapted to conform to the aspiration of adhering to yì, so yì is linked to the core value of rén (仁).Rén consists of 5 basic virtues: seriousness, generosity, sincerity, diligence and kindness.[35] Rén is the virtue of perfectly fulfilling one's responsibilities toward others, most often translated as "benevolence" or "humaneness"; translator Arthur Waley calls it "Goodness" (with a capital G), and other translations that have been put forth include "authoritativeness" and "selflessness." Confucius' moral system was based upon empathy and understanding others, rather than divinely ordained rules. To develop one's spontaneous responses of rén so that these could guide action intuitively was even better than living by the rules of yì. Confucius asserts that virtue is a means between extremes. For example, the properly generous person gives the right amount—not too much and not too little.[35]
Politics
Confucius' political thought is based upon his ethical thought. He argued that the best government is one that rules through "rites" (lǐ) and people's natural morality, and not by using bribery and coercion. He explained that this is one of the most important analects: "If the people be led by laws, and uniformity sought to be given them by punishments, they will try to avoid the punishment, but have no sense of shame. If they be led by virtue, and uniformity sought to be given them by the rules of propriety, they will have the sense of the shame, and moreover will become good." (Translated by James Legge) in the Great Learning (大學). This "sense of shame" is an internalisation of duty, where the punishment precedes the evil action, instead of following it in the form of laws as in Legalism.
Confucius looked nostalgically upon earlier days, and urged the Chinese, particularly those with political power, to model themselves on earlier examples. In times of division, chaos, and endless wars between feudal states, he wanted to restore the Mandate of Heaven (天命) that could unify the "world" (天下, "all under Heaven") and bestow peace and prosperity on the people. Because his vision of personal and social perfections was framed as a revival of the ordered society of earlier times, Confucius is often considered a great proponent of conservatism, but a closer look at what he proposes often shows that he used (and perhaps twisted) past institutions and rites to push a new political agenda of his own: a revival of a unified royal state, whose rulers would succeed to power on the basis of their moral merits instead of lineage. These would be rulers devoted to their people, striving for personal and social perfection, and such a ruler would spread his own virtues to the people instead of imposing proper behavior with laws and rules.
Confucius did not believe in the concept of "democracy", which is itself an Athenian concept unknown in ancient China, but could be interpreted by Confucius' principles recommending against individuals electing their own political leaders to govern them, or that anyone is capable of self-government. He expressed fears that the masses lacked the intellect to make decisions for themselves, and that, in his view, since not everyone is created equal, not everyone has a right of self-government.[36]
While he supported the idea of government ruling by a virtuous king, his ideas contained a number of elements to limit the power of rulers. He argued for representing truth in language, and honesty was of paramount importance. Even in facial expression, truth must always be represented. Confucius believed that if a ruler were to lead correctly, by action, that orders would be deemed unnecessary in that others will follow the proper actions of their ruler. In discussing the relationship between a king and his subject (or a father and his son), he underlined the need to give due respect to superiors. This demanded that the subordinates must give advice to their superiors if the superiors were considered to be taking the course of action that was wrong. Confucius believed in ruling by example, if you lead correctly, orders by force or punishment isn't necessary.[37]
Disciples
Main article: Disciples of Confucius
There is not much known of Confucius' disciples and a little over half of them had their surnames recorded in the Zuo Zhuan.[38] The Analects records 22 names that are most likely Confucius' disciples, while the Mencius records 24 names, although it is quite certain that there have been many more disciples whose name were not recorded.[38] Most of Confucius' disciples were from the Lu state, while others were from neighboring states.[38] For example, Zigong was from the Wey state and Sima Niu was from the Song state.[38] Confucius' favorite disciple was Yan Hui, most probably one of the most impoverished of them all.[38] Sima Niu, in contrast to Yan Hui, was from a hereditary noble family hailing from the Song state.[38] Under Confucius' teachings, the disciples became well-learned in the principles and methods of government.[39] He often engaged in discussion and debate with his students and gave high importance to their studies in history, poetry, and ritual.[39] Confucius advocated loyalty to principle rather than to individual acumen, in which reform was to be achieved by persuasion rather than violence.[39] Even though Confucius denounced them for their practices, the aristocracy was likely attracted to the idea of having trustworthy officials who were studied in morals as the circumstances of the time made it desirable.[39] In fact, the disciple Zilu even died defending his ruler in Wei.[39]
Yang Hu, who was a subordinate of the Ji family, had dominated the Lu government from 505 to 502 and even attempted a coup, which narrowly failed.[39] As a likely consequence, it was after that that the first disciples of Confucius were appointed to government positions.[39] A few of Confucius' disciples went on to attain official positions of some importance, some of which were arranged by Confucius.[40] By the time Confucius was 50 years old, the Ji family had consolidated their power in the Lu state over the ruling ducal house.[41] Even though the Ji family had practices with which Confucius disagreed and disapproved, they nonetheless gave Confucius' disciples many opportunities for employment.[41] Confucius continued to remind his disciples to stay true to their principles and renounced those who did not, all the while being openly critical of the Ji family.[42]
Legacy
Confucius' teachings were later turned into an elaborate set of rules and practices by his numerous disciples and followers, who organized his teachings into the Analects. Confucius' disciples and his only grandson, Zisi, continued his philosophical school after his death. These efforts spread Confucian ideals to students who then became officials in many of the royal courts in China, thereby giving Confucianism the first wide-scale test of its dogma.
Two of Confucius' most famous later followers emphasized radically different aspects of his teachings. In the centuries after his death, Mencius (孟子) and Xun Zi (荀子) both composed important teachings elaborating in different ways on the fundamental ideas associated with Confucius. Mencius (4th century BC) articulated the innate goodness in human beings as a source of the ethical intuitions that guide people towards rén, yì, and lǐ, while Xun Zi (3rd century BC) underscored the realistic and materialistic aspects of Confucian thought, stressing that morality was inculcated in society through tradition and in individuals through training. In time, their writings, together with the Analects and other core texts came to constitute the philosophical corpus of Confucianism.
This realignment in Confucian thought was parallel to the development of Legalism, which saw filial piety as self-interest and not a useful tool for a ruler to create an effective state. A disagreement between these two political philosophies came to a head in 223 BC when the Qin state conquered all of China. Li Si, Prime Minister of the Qin Dynasty convinced Qin Shi Huang to abandon the Confucians' recommendation of awarding fiefs akin to the Zhou Dynasty before them which he saw as being against to the Legalist idea of centralizing the state around the ruler. When the Confucian advisers pressed their point, Li Si had many Confucian scholars killed and their books burned—considered a huge blow to the philosophy and Chinese scholarship.
Under the succeeding Han Dynasty and Tang dynasty, Confucian ideas gained even more widespread prominence. Under Wudi, the works of Confucius were made the official imperial philosophy and required reading for civil service examinations in 140 BC which was continued nearly unbroken until the end of the 19th Century. As Moism lost support by the time of the Han, the main philosophical contenders were Legalism, which Confucian thought somewhat absorbed, the teachings of Laozi, whose focus on more spiritual ideas kept it from direct conflict with Confucianism, and the new Buddhist religion, which gained acceptance during the Southern and Northern Dynasties era. Both Confucian ideas and Confucian-trained officials were relied upon in the Ming Dynasty and even the Yuan Dynasty, although Kublai Khan distrusted handing over provincial control to them.
During the Song dynasty, the scholar Zhu Xi (AD 1130–1200) added ideas from Daoism and Buddhism into Confucianism. In his life, Zhu Xi was largely ignored, but not long after his death his ideas became the new orthodox view of what Confucian texts actually meant. Modern historians view Zhu Xi as having created something rather different, and call his way of thinking Neo-Confucianism. Neo-Confucianism held sway in China, Japan, Korea and Vietnam until the 19th century.




Life and Works of Confucius by Prospero Intorcetta, 1687.


The works of Confucius were translated into European languages through the agency of Jesuit scholars stationed in China.[b] Matteo Ricci started to report on the thoughts of Confucius, and father Prospero Intorcetta published the life and works of Confucius into Latin in 1687.[43] It is thought that such works had considerable importance on European thinkers of the period, particularly among the Deists and other philosophical groups of the Enlightenment who were interested by the integration of the system of morality of Confucius into Western civilization.[43][44]
In the modern era Confucian movements, such as New Confucianism, still exist but during the Cultural Revolution, Confucianism was frequently attacked by leading figures in the Communist Party of China. This was partially a continuation of the condemnations of Confucianism by intellectuals and activists in the early 20th Century as a cause of the ethnocentric close-mindedness and refusal of the Qing Dynasty to modernize that led to the tragedies that befell China in the 19th Century.
Confucius' works are studied by scholars in many other Asian countries, particularly those in the Chinese cultural sphere, such as Korea, Japan and Vietnam. Many of those countries still hold the traditional memorial ceremony every year.
The Ahmadiyya Muslim Community believes Confucius was a Divine Prophet of God, as were Lao-Tzu and other eminent Chinese personages.[45]
In modern times, Asteroid 7853, "Confucius", was named after the Chinese thinker.
Visual portraits
No contemporary painting or sculpture of Confucius survives, and it was only during the Han Dynasty that he was portrayed visually. Carvings often depict his legendary meeting with Laozi. Since that time there have been many portraits of Confucius as the ideal philosopher.
In former times, it was customary to have a portrait in Confucius Temples; however, during the reign of Hongwu Emperor (Taizu) of the Ming dynasty it was decided that the only proper portrait of Confucius should be in the temple in his home town, Qufu in Shandong. In other temples, Confucius is represented by a memorial tablet. In 2006, the China Confucius Foundation commissioned a standard portrait of Confucius based on the Tang dynasty portrait by Wu Daozi.
Death and legacy




Tomb of Confucius in Kong Lin cemetery, Qufu, Shandong Province


Burdened by the loss of both his son and his favorite disciples, he died at the age of 71 or 72. He died from natural causes. Confucius was buried in Kong Lin cemetery which lies in the historical part of Qufu in the Shandong Province. The original tomb erected there in memory of Confucius on the bank of the Sishui River had the shape of an axe. In addition, it has a raised brick platform at the front of the memorial for offerings such as sandalwood incense and fruit.
Memorials of Confucius
Soon after Confucius' death, Qufu, his home town became a place of devotion and remembrance. The Han dynasty Records of the Grand Historian records that it had already become a place of pilgrimage for ministers. It is still a major destination for cultural tourism, and many people visit his grave and the surrounding temples. In pan-China cultures, there are many temples where representations of the Buddha, Laozi and Confucius are found together. There are also many temples dedicated to him, which have been used for Confucianist ceremonies.
The Chinese have a tradition of holding spectacular memorial ceremonies of Confucius (祭孔) every year, using ceremonies that supposedly derived from Zhou Li (周禮) as recorded by Confucius, on the date of Confucius' birth. This tradition was interrupted for several decades in mainland China, where the official stance of the Communist Party and the State was that Confucius and Confucianism represented reactionary feudalist beliefs which held that the subservience of the people to the aristocracy is a part of the natural order. All such ceremonies and rites were therefore banned. Only after the 1990s did the ceremony resume. As it is now considered a veneration of Chinese history and tradition, even Communist Party members may be found in attendance.
In Taiwan, where the Nationalist Party (Kuomintang) strongly promoted Confucian beliefs in ethics and behavior, the tradition of the memorial ceremony of Confucius (祭孔) is supported by the government and has continued without interruption. While not a national holiday, it does appear on all printed calendars, much as Father's Day does in the West.
Descendants
See also: Family tree of Confucius in the main line of descent
Confucius' descendants were repeatedly identified and honored by successive imperial governments with titles of nobility and official posts. They were honored with the rank of a marquis thirty-five times since Gaozu of the Han Dynasty, and they were promoted to the rank of duke forty-two times from the Tang dynasty to the Qing Dynasty. Emperor Xuanzong of Tang first bestowed the title of "Duke Wenxuan" on Kong Suizhi of the 35th generation. In 1055, Emperor Renzong of Song first bestowed the title of "Duke Yansheng" on Kong Zongyuan of the 46th generation.
During the Southern Song dynasty the Duke Yansheng Kong Duanyou fled south with the Song Emperor to Quzhou in Zhejiang, while the newly established Jin dynasty (1115–1234) in the north appointed Kong Duanyou's brother Kong Duancao who remained in Qufu as Duke Yansheng. From that time up until the Yuan dynasty, there were two Duke Yanshengs, once in the north in Qufu and the other in the south at Quzhou. During the Yuan dynasty, the Emperor Kublai Khan invited the southern Duke Yansheng Kong Zhu to returned to Qufu. Kong Zhu refused, and gave up the title, so the northern branch of the family kept the title of Duke Yansheng. The southern branch still remained in Quzhou where they lived to this day. Confucius's descendants in Quzhou alone number 30,000.[46][47]
Despite repeated dynastic change in China, the title of Duke Yansheng was bestowed upon successive generations of descendants until it was abolished by the Nationalist Government in 1935. The last holder of the title, Kung Te-cheng of the 77th generation, was appointed Sacrificial Official to Confucius. Kung Te-cheng died in October 2008, and his son, Kung Wei-yi, the 78th lineal descendant, had died in 1989. Kung Te-cheng's grandson, Kung Tsui-chang, the 79th lineal descendant, was born in 1975; his great-grandson, Kung Yu-jen, the 80th lineal descendant, was born in Taipei on January 1, 2006. Te-cheng's sister, Kong Demao, lives in mainland China and has written a book about her experiences growing up at the family estate in Qufu. Another sister, Kong Deqi, died as a young woman.[48] Many descendants of Confucius still live in Qufu today.
Confucius' family, the Kongs, have the longest recorded extant pedigree in the world today. The father-to-son family tree, now in its 83rd generation,[49] has been recorded since the death of Confucius. According to the Confucius Genealogy Compilation Committee, he has 2 million known and registered descendants, and there are an estimated 3 million in all.[50] Of these, several tens of thousands live outside of China.[50] In the 14th century, a Kong descendant went to Korea, where an estimated 34,000 descendants of Confucius live today.[50] One of the main lineages fled from the Kong ancestral home in Qufu during the Chinese Civil War in the 1940s, and eventually settled in Taiwan.[48] There are also branches of the Kong family who have converted to Islam after marrying Muslim women, in Dachuan in Gansu province in the 1800s,[51] and in 1715 in Xuanwei city in Yunnan province.[52] Kong Dejun (孔德軍) is a prominent Islamic scholar and Arabist from Qinghai province and a 77th generation descendant of Confucius.
Because of the huge interest in the Confucius family tree, there was a project in China to test the DNA of known family members of the collateral branches in mainland China.[53] Among other things, this would allow scientists to identify a common Y chromosome in male descendants of Confucius. If the descent were truly unbroken, father-to-son, since Confucius' lifetime, the males in the family would all have the same Y chromosome as their direct male ancestor, with slight mutations due to the passage of time.[54] The aim of the genetic test was the help members of collateral branches in China who lost their genealogical records to prove their descent. However, in 2009, many of the collateral branches decided not to agree to DNA testing.[55] Bryan Sykes, professor of genetics at Oxford University, understands this decision: "The Confucius family tree has an enormous cultural significance," he said. "It's not just a scientific question."[55] The DNA testing was originally proposed to add new members, many of whose family record books were lost during 20th-century upheavals, to the Confucian family tree.[56] The main branch of the family which fled to Taiwan was never involved in the proposed DNA test at all.
In 2013 a DNA test performed on multiple different families who claimed descent from Confucius found that they shared the same Y chromosome as reported by Fudan University.[57]
The fifth and most recent edition of the Confucius genealogy was printed by the Confucius Genealogy Compilation Committee (CGCC).[58][59] It was unveiled in a ceremony at Qufu on September 24, 2009.[58][59] Women are now included for the first time.[60]
There is also a "Sacrificial Official to Mencius" for a descendant of Mencius, a "Sacrificial Official to Zengzi" for a descendant of Zengzi, and a "Sacrificial Official to Yan Hui" for a descendant of Yan Hui.
See also




China portal



Biography portal



Philosophy portal



Religion portal




Classic of Poetry
Confucius Institute


Notes


^ Gongshan Furao is also known as Gongshan Buniu.
^ The first was Michele Ruggieri who had returned from China to Italy in 1588, and carried on translating in Latin Chinese classics, while residing in Salerno.


References


^ a b Hugan, Yong (2013). Confucius: A Guide for the Perplexed. A&amp;C Black. p.&#160;3. Retrieved August 12, 2015.&#160;
^ Riegel 2012, online.
^ a b Chin 2007, 2.
^ Rainey 2010, 1.
^ a b c Phan 2012, 170
^ Kögel, Eduard (2015). The Grand Documentation: Ernst Boerschmann and Chinese Religious Architecture. Walter de Gruyter GmbH &amp; Co KG. Retrieved August 17, 2015.&#160;
^ Creel 1949, 26.
^ Yao 1997, 29.
^ Yao 2000, 23.
^ Rainey 2010, 66.
^ a b Creel 1949, 25.
^ Rainey 2010, 16.
^ a b c d Huang, Yong (2013). Confucius: A Guide for the Perplexed. A&amp;C Black. p.&#160;4. Retrieved August 12, 2015.&#160;
^ a b c Burgan, Michael (2008). Confucius: Chinese Philosopher and Teacher. Capstone. p.&#160;23. Retrieved August 12, 2015.&#160;
^ Schuman, Michael (2015). Confucius: And the World He Created. Basic Books. Retrieved August 12, 2015.&#160;
^ Huang, Yong (2013). Confucius: A Guide for the Perplexed. A&amp;C Black. pp.&#160;4–5. Retrieved August 12, 2015.&#160;
^ Dubs 1946, 274–275.
^ a b c d Dubs 1946, 275.
^ a b c Dubs 1946, 275–276.
^ a b c d e f g h i Dubs 1946, 277.
^ a b c d Creel 1949, 35–36.
^ a b Dubs 1946, 277–278.
^ a b Creel 1949, 35.
^ a b Dubs 1946, 278.
^ Dubs 1946, 278–279.
^ a b c d e f g Dubs 1946, 279.
^ a b c d e Chin 2007, 30.
^ Dubs 1946, 280.
^ Dubs 1946, 280–281.
^ a b Dubs 1946, 281.
^ Riegel 1986, 13.
^ a b Huang, Yong (2013). Confucius: A Guide for the Perplexed. A&amp;C Black. pp.&#160;27–28. Retrieved August 13, 2015.&#160;
^ Berger, Peter (February 15, 2012). "Is Confucianism a Religion?". The American Interest. Retrieved August 13, 2015.&#160;
^ Parkers (1983)
^ a b Bonevac &amp; Phillips 2009, 40.
^ Schuman, Michael (2015). Confucius: And the World He Created. Basic Books. ISBN&#160;0465040578. Retrieved August 17, 2015.&#160;
^ Violatti, Cristian (August 31, 2013). "Confucianism". Ancient History Encyclopedia. Retrieved August 17, 2015.&#160;
^ a b c d e f Creel 1949, 30.
^ a b c d e f g Creel 1949, 32.
^ Creel 1949, 31.
^ a b Creel 1949, 33.
^ Creel 1949, 32–33.
^ a b Parker 1977, 25.
^ Hobson 2004, 194–195.
^ Ahmad&#160;???, online.
^ "Nation observes Confucius anniversary". China Daily. 2006-09-29.&#160;
^ "Confucius Anniversary Celebrated". China Daily. September 29, 2006.&#160;
^ a b Kong, Ke &amp; Roberts 1988.[page&#160;needed]
^ China Economic Net 2009, online.
^ a b c Yan 2008, online.
^ Jing, Jun (1998). The Temple of Memories: History, Power, and Morality in a Chinese Village. Stanford University Press. p.&#160;26. ISBN&#160;0804764921.&#160;
^ Zhou, Jing. "New Confucius Genealogy out next year". china.org.cn. Retrieved 2010-06-28.&#160;
^ Ministry of Commerce of the PRC 2006, online.
^ China Internet Information Center 2006, online.
^ a b Qiu 2008, online.
^ Bandao 2007, online.
^ Chen, Stephen (13 November 2013). "Study finds single bloodline among self-claimed Confucius descendants". South China Morning Post.&#160;
^ a b China Daily 2009, online.
^ a b Zhou 2008, online.
^ China Daily 2007, online.


Bibliography
Hard copy

Bonevac, Daniel; Phillips, Stephen (2009). Introduction to world philosophy. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN&#160;978-0-19-515231-9.&#160;
Creel, Herrlee Glessner (1949). Confucius: The man and the myth. New York: John Day Company.&#160;
Dubs, Homer H. (1946). "The political career of Confucius". Journal of the American Oriental Society 66 (4). JSTOR&#160;596405.&#160;
Hobson, John M. (2004). The Eastern origins of Western civilisation (Reprinted ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN&#160;0-521-54724-5.&#160;
Chin, Ann-ping (2007). The authentic Confucius: A life of thought and politics. New York: Scribner. ISBN&#160;978-0-7432-4618-7.&#160;
Kong, Demao; Ke, Lan; Roberts, Rosemary (1988). The house of Confucius (Translated ed.). London: Hodder &amp; Stoughton. ISBN&#160;978-0-340-41279-4.&#160;
Parker, John (1977). Windows into China: The Jesuits and their books, 1580–1730. Boston: Trustees of the Public Library of the City of Boston. ISBN&#160;0-89073-050-4.&#160;
Phan, Peter C. (2012). "Catholicism and Confucianism: An intercultural and interreligious dialogue". Catholicism and interreligious dialogue. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN&#160;978-0-19-982787-9.&#160;
Rainey, Lee Dian (2010). Confucius &amp; Confucianism: The essentials. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell. ISBN&#160;978-1-4051-8841-8.&#160;
Riegel, Jeffrey K. (1986). "Poetry and the legend of Confucius's exile". Journal of the American Oriental Society 106 (1). JSTOR&#160;602359.&#160;
Yao, Xinzhong (1997). Confucianism and Christianity: A Comparative Study of Jen and Agape. Brighton: Sussex Academic Press. ISBN&#160;1-898723-76-1.&#160;
Yao, Xinzhong (2000). An Introduction to Confucianism. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN&#160;0-521-64430-5.&#160;

Online

Ahmad, Mirza Tahir (n.d.). "Confucianism". Ahmadiyya Muslim Community. Retrieved 7 November 2010.&#160;
Baxter, William H.; Sagart, Laurent (20 February 2011). "Baxter-Sagart Old Chinese reconstruction".&#160;
"Confucius descendents say DNA testing plan lacks wisdom". Bandao. 21 August 2007.&#160;
"Confucius family tree to record female kin". China Daily. 2 February 2007.&#160;
"Confucius' Family Tree Recorded biggest". China Daily. 24 September 2009.&#160;
"Confucius family tree revision ends with 2 mln descendants". China Economic Net. 4 January 2009.&#160;
"DNA Testing Adopted to Identify Confucius Descendants". China Internet Information Center. 19 June 2006.&#160;
"DNA test to clear up Confucius confusion". Ministry of Commerce of the People's Republic of China. 18 June 2006.&#160;
Riegel, Jeffrey (2012). "Confucius". The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Stanford University.&#160;
Qiu, Jane (13 August 2008). "Inheriting Confucius". Seed Magazine.&#160;
Yan, Liang (16 February 2008). "Updated Confucius family tree has two million members". Xinhua.&#160;
Zhou, Jing (31 October 2008). "New Confucius Genealogy out next year". China Internet Information Center.&#160;

Further reading

Clements, Jonathan (2008). Confucius: A Biography. Stroud, Gloucestershire, England: Sutton Publishing. ISBN 978-0-7509-4775-6.
Confucius (1997). Lun yu, (in English The Analects of Confucius). Translation and notes by Simon Leys. New York: W.W. Norton. ISBN 0-393-04019-4.
Confucius (2003). Confucius: Analects—With Selections from Traditional Commentaries. Translated by E. Slingerland. Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing. (Original work published c. 551–479 BC) ISBN 0-87220-635-1.
Creel, Herrlee Glessner (1949). Confucius and the Chinese Way. New York: Harper.
Creel, Herrlee Glessner (1953). Chinese Thought from Confucius to Mao Tse-tung. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.&#160;
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2005). "Confucianism: An Overview". In Encyclopedia of Religion (Vol. C, pp 1890–1905). Detroit: MacMillan Reference USA.
Dawson, Raymond (1982). Confucius. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN&#160;0-19-287536-1.&#160;
Fingarette, Hebert (1998). Confucius&#160;: the secular as sacred. Long Grove, Ill.: Waveland Press. ISBN&#160;1-57766-010-2.&#160;
Ssu-ma Ch'ien (1974). Records of the Historian. Yang Hsien-yi and Gladys Yang, trans. Hong Kong: Commercial Press.&#160;
Van Norden, B.W., ed. (2001). Confucius and the Analects: New Essays. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-513396-X.
Van Norden, B.W., trans. (2006). Mengzi, in Philip J. Ivanhoe &amp; B.W. Van Norden, Readings in Classical Chinese Philosophy. 2nd ed. Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing. ISBN 0-87220-780-3.

External links



Find more about
Confucius
at Wikipedia's sister projects




Definitions from Wiktionary



Media from Commons



Quotations from Wikiquote



Source texts from Wikisource



Textbooks from Wikibooks



Confucius entry in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy

Confucius on In Our Time at the BBC. (listen now)
Multilingual web site on Confucius and the Analects
The Dao of Kongzi, introduction to the thought of Confucius.
Confucius entry by Jeffrey Riegel in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
Works by Confucius at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about Confucius at Internet Archive
Works by Confucius at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
Confucian Analects (Project Gutenberg release of James Legge's Translation)
Core philosophical passages in the Analects of Confucius.









v
t
e


Chinese philosophy






Schools of Thought



Agriculturalism
Confucianism
Taoism
Han learning
Huang-Lao
Legalism
Mohism
Neo-Confucianism
Neo-Taoism
New Confucianism
Chinese Marxist Philosophy
School of Diplomacy
School of Names
School of Naturalists
Yangism

See also: Hundred Schools of Thought







Philosophers



Confucius
Gaozi
Gongsun Long
Han Feizi
Huang Zongxi
Jin Yuelin
Laozi
Li Si
Lu Jiuyuan
Mencius
Mozi
Shang Yang
Su Qin
Sunzi
Tu Weiming
Wang Fuzhi
Wang Yangming
Xu Xing
Xunzi
Yang Zhu
Zhang Yi
Zhu Xi
Zhuangzi
Zou Yan








Concepts



Dào: Way
Dé: Virtue
Fǎ: Model
Jiān ài: Universal Love
Jing: Reverence
Jìngzuo: Meditation
Lĭ: Ritual propriety
Li: Law
Mìng: Mandate or fate
Qì: Energy
Qing: Essence
Rén: Humaneness
Shén: Spirit
Si: Reflection
Tǐ: Substance
Tiān: Divine force
Wú wéi: Nonaction
Xiào: Filial piety
Xin: Disposition or intuition
Xing: Human nature
Yì: Righteousness
Yīnyáng: Interdependent opposites
Yòng: Function
Zhèngmíng: Rectification of names
Zhì: Intention or will; Wisdom or cleverness
Zìrán: Self-so or natural








Topics



Aesthetics
Epistemology
Ethics (Role ethics
State consequentialism)
Logic
Metaphysics
Political philosophy
Social philosophy
















v
t
e


Philosophy of language






Philosophers



Plato (Cratylus)
Gorgias
Confucius
Xunzi
Aristotle
Stoics
Pyrrhonists
Scholasticism
Ibn Rushd
Ibn Khaldun
Thomas Hobbes
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz
Johann Herder
Ludwig Noire
Wilhelm von Humboldt
Fritz Mauthner
Paul Ricœur
Ferdinand de Saussure
Gottlob Frege
Franz Boas
Paul Tillich
Edward Sapir
Leonard Bloomfield
Zhuangzi
Henri Bergson
Lev Vygotsky
Ludwig Wittgenstein

Philosophical Investigations
Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus


Bertrand Russell
Rudolf Carnap
Jacques Derrida

Of Grammatology
Limited Inc


Benjamin Lee Whorf
Gustav Bergmann
J. L. Austin
Noam Chomsky
Hans-Georg Gadamer
Saul Kripke
A. J. Ayer
G. E. M. Anscombe
Jaakko Hintikka
Michael Dummett
Donald Davidson
Paul Grice
Gilbert Ryle
P. F. Strawson
Willard Van Orman Quine
Hilary Putnam
David Lewis
John Searle
Joxe Azurmendi
Scott Soames
Stephen Yablo
John Hawthorne
Stephen Neale








Theories



Causal theory of reference
Contrast theory of meaning
Contrastivism
Conventionalism
Cratylism
Deconstruction
Descriptivist theory of names
Direct reference theory
Dramatism
Expressivism
Linguistic determinism
Logical atomism
Logical positivism
Mediated reference theory
Nominalism
Non-cognitivism
Phallogocentrism
Quietism
Relevance theory
Semantic externalism
Semantic holism
Structuralism
Supposition theory
Symbiosism
Theological noncognitivism
Theory of descriptions
Verification theory








Concepts



Ambiguity
Linguistic relativity
Meaning
Language
Truth-bearer
Proposition
Use–mention distinction
Concept
Categories
Set
Class
Intension
Logical form
Metalanguage
Mental representation
Principle of compositionality
Property
Sign
Sense and reference
Speech act
Symbol
Entity
Sentence
Statement
more...








Related articles



Analytic philosophy
Philosophy of information
Philosophical logic
Linguistics
Pragmatics
Rhetoric
Semantics
Formal semantics
Semiotics











Category
Task Force
Discussion
















v
t
e


Ethics






Theories



Casuistry
Consequentialism
Deontology

Kantian ethics


Ethics of care
Existentialist ethics
Meta-ethics
Particularism
Pragmatic ethics
Role ethics
Virtue ethics








Concepts



Autonomy
Axiology
Belief
Conscience
Consent
Equality
Care
Evil
Free will
Good
Happiness
Justice
Morality
Norm
Freedom
Principles
Suffering or Pain
Stewardship
Sympathy
Trust
Value
Virtue
Wrong
full index...








Philosophers



Plato
Aristotle
Cicero
Confucius
Augustine of Hippo
Mencius
Mozi
Xunzi
Thomas Aquinas
Baruch Spinoza
David Hume
Immanuel Kant
Georg W. F. Hegel
Arthur Schopenhauer
Jeremy Bentham
John Stuart Mill
Søren Kierkegaard
Henry Sidgwick
Friedrich Nietzsche
G. E. Moore
Karl Barth
Paul Tillich
Dietrich Bonhoeffer
Philippa Foot
John Rawls
Bernard Williams
J. L. Mackie
G. E. M. Anscombe
William Frankena
Alasdair MacIntyre
R. M. Hare
Peter Singer
Derek Parfit
Thomas Nagel
Robert Merrihew Adams
Charles Taylor
Joxe Azurmendi
Christine Korsgaard
Martha Nussbaum
more...








Applied ethics



Bioethics
Business ethics
Discourse ethics
Environmental ethics
Legal ethics
Medical ethics
Nursing ethics
Professional ethics
Sexual ethics
Ethics of eating meat
Ethics of technology








Related articles



Christian ethics
Descriptive ethics
Ethics in religion
Evolutionary ethics
History of ethics
Islamic ethics
Jewish ethics
Normative ethics











Portal
Category
Task Force
Stubs
Discussion
















v
t
e


Social and political philosophy






Philosophers



Alinsky
Aristotle
Augustine
Aurobindo
Aquinas
Averroes
Azurmendi
Badiou
Bakunin
Baudrillard
Benoist
Bentham
Berlin
Bonald
Bosanquet
Burke
Camus
Chanakya
Chomsky
Cicero
Comte
Confucius
Debord
Đilas
Durkheim
Engels
Foucault
Fourier
Gandhi
Gehlen
Gentile
Al-Ghazali
Gramsci
Grotius
Habermas
Han Fei
Hobbes
Hume
Kant
Kirk
Kropotkin
Le Bon
Le Play
Leibniz
Locke
Luxemburg
Machiavelli
Maistre
Malebranche
Marcuse
Maritain
Marsilius
Marx
Mencius
Michels
Mill
Montesquieu
Möser
Mozi
Muhammad
Negri
Nietzsche
Nozick
Oakeshott
Ortega
Pareto
Plamenatz
Plato
Popper
Rand
Rawls
Renan
Rousseau
Royce
Russell
Santayana
Sarkar
Sartre
Schmitt
Searle
Shang
Smith
Sombart
Spann
Spencer
Spirito
Stirner
Strauss
Taine
Taylor
Thoreau
Vivekananda
Walzer
Žižek








Social theories



Vaisheshika
Anarchism
Authoritarianism
Collectivism
Communism
Communitarianism
Conflict theories
Confucianism
Consensus theory
Conservatism
Contractualism
Culturalism
Gandhism
Individualism
Legalism
Liberalism
Libertarianism
Mohism
National liberalism
Social constructionism
Social constructivism
Social Darwinism
Social determinism
Socialism
Utilitarianism








Social concepts



Civil disobedience
Democracy
Four occupations
Justice
Law
Mandate of Heaven
Peace
Property
Revolution
Rights
Social contract
Society
War
more...








Related articles



Jurisprudence
Philosophy and economics
Philosophy of education
Philosophy of history
Philosophy of love
Philosophy of sex
Philosophy of social science
Social epistemology











Category
Portal
Task Force
















v
t
e


Guqin (古琴)









Aesthetics
Construction
Contemporary players
History
Literature
Notation
Playing technique
Popular culture
Qinpu
Schools
Societies
Strings
Tuning
Yaji











Melodies



Ao Ai
Guangling San
Hujia Shiba-pai
Jieshi Diao Youlan
Liu Shui
Meihua Sannong
Pingsha Luoyan
Xiao Xiang Shuiyun
Yangguan Sandie








Schools



Guangling
Jiuyi
Lingnan
Mei'an
Pucheng
Shu
Yushan
Zhe
Zhucheng








Societies



London Youlan Qin Society
New York Qin Society
North American Guqin Association








Historical personages



Bo Ya
Cai Wenji
Cai Yong
Confucius
Guo Chuwang
Ruan Ji
Emperor Song Huizong
Xi Kang
Zhu Quan








Players



Cheng Yu
Gong Yi
Guan Pinghu
Li Xiangting
Lin Youren
Wang Fei
Wu Jinglüe
Wu Zhaoji
Zeng Chengwei
Zha Fuxi
Zhang Ziqian













Authority control



WorldCat
VIAF: 89664672
LCCN: n80050515
ISNI: 0000 0001 2143 0614
GND: 118565036
SELIBR: 192466
SUDOC: 026952238
BNF: cb11909957g (data)
ULAN: 500355288
MusicBrainz: f392a00c-dfd7-4165-a031-468afcbbc5e3
NLA: 35030509
NDL: 00622965
NKC: jn19981001645
BNE: XX881775















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Confucius&amp;oldid=689504982"					
				Categories: 550s BC births551 BC479 BC5th-century BC philosophers5th-century BC historiansPhilosophers from Lu (state)ConfuciusChinese ConfucianistsClassical humanistsConfucianismEducation theoryFounders of religionsGuqin playersMoral philosophersPeople from QufuZhou dynasty historians6th-century BC philosophers6th-century BC Chinese people5th-century BC Chinese people470s BC deaths551 BC birthsHidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from March 2012Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalismWikipedia protected pages without expiryArticles with hCardsArticles containing Chinese-language textWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with ULAN identifiersWikipedia articles with MusicBrainz identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiers				
							
		
		
			