


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Contemporary philosophy
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				

History of
Western philosophy





Western philosophy




By era


Pre-Socratic
Ancient
Medieval
Renaissance
Modern
Contemporary






By century


16th
17th
18th
19th
20th
21st




See also




Religious philosophy


Christian
Jewish
Islamic
Hindu
Sikh
Buddhist






Eastern philosophy


Arab
Babylonian
Indian
Iranian
Chinese
Japanese
Korean






Western culture
Western world







v
t
e





Contemporary philosophy is the present period in the history of Western philosophy beginning at the end of the 19th century with the professionalization of the discipline and the rise of analytic and continental philosophy.
The phrase "contemporary philosophy" is a piece of technical terminology in philosophy that refers to a specific period in the history of Western philosophy. However, the phrase is often confused with modern philosophy (which refers to an earlier period in Western philosophy), postmodern philosophy (which refers to continental philosophers' criticisms of modern philosophy), and with a non-technical use of the phrase referring to any recent philosophic work.



Contents


1 The professionalization of philosophy

1.1 The process of professionalization
1.2 Professional philosophy today
1.3 Maverick practicians


2 The analytic–continental divide

2.1 The beginning of the divide
2.2 Analytic philosophy
2.3 Continental philosophy


3 See also
4 Footnotes and references
5 Further reading
6 External links



The professionalization of philosophy[edit]


“
...the day of the philosopher as isolated thinker--the talented amateur with an idiosyncratic message--is effectively gone.
”



—&#160;Nicholas Rescher, "American Philosophy Today," 'Review of Metaphysics' 46 (4)



The process of professionalization[edit]
Professionalization is the social process by which any trade or occupation establishes the group norms of conduct, acceptable qualifications for membership of the profession, a professional body or association to oversee the conduct of members of the profession, and some degree of demarcation of the qualified from unqualified amateurs.[1] The transformation into a profession brings about many subtle changes to a field of inquiry, but one more readily identifiable component of professionalization is the increasing irrelevance of "the book" to the field: "research communiqués will begin to change in ways [...] whose modern end products are obvious to all and oppressive to many. No longer will [a member's] researches usually be embodied in books addressed [...] to anyone who might be interested in the subject matter of the field. Instead they will usually appear as brief articles addressed only to professional colleagues, the men whose knowledge of a shared paradigm can be assumed and who prove to be the only one able to read the papers addressed to them."[2] Philosophy underwent this process toward the end of the 19th-century and it is one of the key distinguishing features of the contemporary philosophy era in western philosophy.
Germany was the first country to professionalize philosophy.[3] At the end of 1817, Hegel was the first philosopher to be appointed Professor by the State, namely by the Prussian Minister of Education, as an effect of Napoleonic reform in Prussia. In the United States, the professionalisation grew out of reforms to the American higher-education system largely based on the German model.[4] James Campbell describes the professionalisation of philosophy in America as follows:

The list of specific changes [during the late 19th-century professionalization of philosophy] is fairly brief, but the resultant shift is almost total. [...] No longer could the [philosophy] professor function as a defender of the faith or an expounder of Truth. The new philosopher had to be a leader of inquires and a publicizer of results. This shift was made obvious when certified (often German-certified) philosophy Ph.D.'s replaced theology graduates and ministers in the philosophy classroom. The period between the time when almost no one had a Ph.D. to when almost everyone did was very brief. [...] The doctorate, moreover, was more than a license to teach: it was a certificate that the prospective philosophy instructor was well, if narrowly, trained and ready to undertake independent work in the now specializing and restricted field of academic philosophy. These new philosophers functioned in independent departments of philosophy [...] They were making real gains in their research, creating a body of philosophic work that remains central to our study even now. These new philosophers also set their own standards for success, publishing in the recognized organs of philosophy that were being founded at the time: The Monist (1890), The International Journal of Ethics (1890), The Philosophical Review (1892), and The Journal of Philosophy, Psychology, and Scientific Methods (1904). And, of course, these philosophers were banding together into societies--the American Psychological Association (1892), the Western Philosophical Association (1900), and the American Philosophical Association (1900)--to consolidate their academic positions and advance their philosophic work.[5]

Professionalization in England was similarly tied to developments in higher-education. In his work on T.H. Green, Denys Leighton discusses these changes in British philosophy and Green's claim to the title of Britain's first professional academic philosopher:

Henry Sidgwick, in a generous gesture, identified [T.H.] Green as Britain's first professional academic philosopher. Sidgwick's opinion can certainly be questioned: William Hamilton, J.F. Ferrier and Sidgwick himself are among the contenders for that honour. [...] Yet there can be no doubt that between the death of Mill (1873) and the publication of G.E.Moore's Principia Ethica (1903), the British philosophical profession was transformed, and that Green was partly responsible for the transformation. [...] Bentham, the Mills, Carlyle, Coleridge, Spencer, as well as many other serious philosophical thinkers of the nineteenth century were men of letters, administrators, active politicians, clergy with livings, but not academics. [...] Green helped separate the study of philosophical from that of literary and historical texts; and by creating a philosophy curriculum at Oxford he also established a rationale for trained teachers of philosophy. When Green began his academic career much of the serious writing on philosophical topic was published in journals of opinion devoted to a broad range of [topics] (rarely to 'pure' philosophy). He helped professionalize philosophical writing by encouraging specialized periodicals, such as 'Academy' and 'Mind', which were to serve as venues for the results of scholarly research.[6]

The end result of professionalization for philosophy has meant that work being done in the field is now almost exclusively done by university professors holding a doctorate in the field publishing in highly technical, peer-reviewed journals. While it remains common among the population at large for a person to have a set of religious, political or philosophical views that they consider their “philosophy”, these views are rarely informed or connected to the work being done in professional philosophy today. Furthermore, unlike many of the sciences for which there has come to be a healthy industry of books, magazines, and television shows meant to popularize science and communicate the technical results of a scientific field to the general populace, works by professional philosophers directed at an audience outside the profession remain rare. Philosopher Michael Sandel's book “Justice: What's the Right Thing to Do?” and Harry Frankfurt's "On Bullshit” are examples of works that hold the uncommon distinction of having been written by professional philosophers but directed at and ultimately popular among a broader audience of non-philosophers. Both works became New York Times best sellers.
Professional philosophy today[edit]




Mind is a prominent professional journal in contemporary philosophy. Three of its most famous publications, arguably, are Lewis Carroll's "What the Tortoise Said to Achilles" (1895), Bertrand Russell's "On Denoting" (1905), and Alan Turing's "Computing Machinery and Intelligence" (1950), in which he first proposed the Turing test.


Not long after their formation, the Western Philosophical Association and portions of the American Psychological Association merged with the American Philosophical Association to create what is today the main professional organization for philosophers in the United States: the American Philosophical Association. The Association has three divisions - Pacific, Central and Eastern. Each division organises a large annual conference. The biggest of these is the Eastern Division Meeting, which usually attracts around 2,000 philosophers and takes place in a different east coast city each December. The Eastern Division Meeting is also the USA's largest recruitment event for philosophy jobs, with numerous universities sending teams to interview candidates for academic posts. Among its many other tasks, the association is responsible for administering many of the profession's top honors. For example, the Presidency of a Division of the American Philosophical Association is considered to be a professional honor and the American Philosophical Association Book Prize is one of the oldest prizes in philosophy. The largest academic organization devoted to specifically furthering the study of continental philosophy is the Society for Phenomenology and Existential Philosophy.
Concerning professional journals today, a 2009 survey of mostly professional philosophers asked them to rank the highest quality "general" philosophy journals in English. The top 19 results were:



Table of prominent professional journals in contemporary philosophy[7]

1. Philosophical Review
6. Australasian Journal of Philosophy
11. Philosophers' Imprint
16. Canadian Journal of Philosophy


2. Journal of Philosophy
7. Philosophical Studies
12. Philosophical Perspectives
17. Philosophical Topics


3. Nous
8. Analysis
13. American Philosophical Quarterly
18. European Journal of Philosophy


4. Mind
9. Philosophical Quarterly
14. Pacific Philosophical Quarterly
19. Ratio


5. Philosophy &amp; Phenomenological Research
10. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society
15. The Monist





Concerning continental philosophy specifically, a 2012 survey of mostly professional philosophers asked them to rank the highest quality "continental tradition" philosophy journals in English. Listing the survey's top 6 results:



Table of prominent professional journals in continental philosophy[8]

1. European Journal of Philosophy
4. Inquiry


2. Philosophy &amp; Phenomenological Research
5. Archiv für Geschichte der Philosophie


3. Journal of the History of Philosophy
6. British Journal for the History of Philosophy




The Philosophy Documentation Center publishes a well-known "Directory of American Philosophers" which is the standard reference work for information about philosophical activity in the United States and Canada.[9] The directory is published every two years, alternating with its companion volume, the "International Directory of Philosophy and Philosophers" (the only edited source for extensive information on philosophical activity in Africa, Asia, Australasia, Europe, and Latin America).
Since the start of the 21st century, philosophers have also seen the growing utilization of blogs as a means of professional exchange. A few notable milestones in this development include an informal listing of philosophy blogs begun by philosopher David Chalmers which has since become a widely used resource by the profession,[10] the establishment of a partnership between ethics blog PEA Soup and the prominent journal Ethics to post featured articles for online discussion on the blog,[11] and the role of blogs like What is it Like to be a Woman in Philosophy? in bringing attention to the experience of women in the profession.[12][13][14]
Maverick practicians[edit]
Philosophers such as Gerd B. Achenbach (Die reine und die praktische Philosophie. Drei Vorträge zur philosophischen Praxis, 1983), Oscar Brénifier, Michel Tozzi and Michel Weber (see his Épreuve de la philosophie, 2008) also propose since the 1980s various forms of philosophical counseling claiming to bring Socratic dialogues back to life in a quasi-psychotherapeutic framework.
The analytic–continental divide[edit]
The beginning of the divide[edit]
Contemporary continental philosophy began with the work of Franz Brentano, Edmund Husserl, Adolf Reinach, and Martin Heidegger and the development of the philosophical method of phenomenology. This development was roughly contemporaneous with work by Gottlob Frege and Bertrand Russell inaugurating a new philosophical method based on the analysis of language via modern logic (hence the term "analytic philosophy").[15]
Analytic philosophy dominates in the United Kingdom, Canada, Australia, Scandinavia, the Netherlands, Germany, Austria, and, indeed, most of Europe. Continental philosophy prevails in France, Italy, Spain, and parts of the United States.
Some philosophers, such as Richard Rorty and Simon Glendinning, argue that this "continental-analytic" divide is inimical to the discipline as a whole. Others, such as John Searle, claim that continental philosophy, especially post-structuralist continental philosophy, should be expunged, on grounds that it is obscurantist and nebulous.
Analytic and continental philosophy share a common Western philosophical tradition up to Immanuel Kant. Afterwards, analytic and continental philosophers differ on the importance and influence of subsequent philosophers on their respective traditions. For instance, the German idealism school developed out of the work of Kant in the 1780s and 1790s and culminated in Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, who is viewed highly by many continental philosophers. Conversely, Hegel is viewed as a relatively minor figure for the work of analytic philosophers.[citation needed]
Analytic philosophy[edit]
Main article: Analytic philosophy
The analytic program in philosophy is ordinarily dated to the work of English philosophers Bertrand Russell and G. E. Moore in the early 20th century, building on the work of the German philosopher and mathematician Gottlob Frege. They turned away from then-dominant forms of Hegelianism (objecting in particular to its idealism and purported obscurity)[16][17] and began to develop a new sort of conceptual analysis based on recent developments in logic. The most prominent example of this new method of conceptual analysis is Russell's 1905 paper "On Denoting", a paper that is widely seen to be the exemplar of the analytic program in philosophy.[18]
Although contemporary philosophers who self-identify as "analytic" have widely divergent interests, assumptions, and methods—and have often rejected the fundamental premises that defined the analytic movement between 1900 and 1960—analytic philosophy, in its contemporary state, is usually taken to be defined by a particular style[19] characterized by precision and thoroughness about a narrow topic, and resistance to "imprecise or cavalier discussions of broad topics."[19]
Some analytic philosophers at the end of the 20th century, such as Richard Rorty, have called for a major overhaul of the analytic philosophic tradition. In particular, Rorty has argued that analytic philosophers must learn important lessons from the work of continental philosophers.[20] Some authors, such as Paul M Livingston[21] and Shaun Gallagher contend that there exist valuable insights common to both traditions while others, such as Timothy Williamson, have called for even stricter adherence to the methodological ideals of analytic philosophy:

We who classify ourselves as "analytic" philosophers tend to fall into the assumption that our allegiance automatically grants us methodological virtue. According to the crude stereotypes, analytic philosophers use arguments while "continental" philosophers do not. But within the analytic tradition many philosophers use arguments only to the extent that most "continental" philosophers do [...] How can we do better? We can make a useful start by getting the simple things right. Much even of analytic philosophy moves too fast in its haste to reach the sexy bits. Details are not given the care they deserve: crucial claims are vaguely stated, significant different formulations are treated as though they were equivalent, examples are under-described, arguments are gestured at rather than properly made, their form is left unexplained, and so on. [...] Philosophy has never been done for an extended period according to standards as high as those that are now already available, if only the profession will take them seriously to heart.[22]

The “crude stereotypes” that Williamson refers to in the above passage are these: that analytic philosophers produce carefully argued and rigorous analyses of trivially small philosophic puzzles, while continental philosophers produce profound and substantial results but only by deducing them from broad philosophical systems which themselves lack supporting arguments or clarity in their expression. Williamson himself seems to here distance himself from these stereotypes, but does accuse analytic philosophers of too often fitting the critical stereotype of continental philosophers by moving "too fast" to reach substantial results via poor arguments.








v
t
e


Analytic philosophy






Philosophers



Robert Merrihew Adams
William P. Alston
J. L. Austin
A. J. Ayer
G. E. M. Anscombe
David Malet Armstrong
Robert Audi
Robert Brandom
C. D. Broad
Tyler Burge
John P. Burgess
Rudolf Carnap
Roderick Chisholm
Patricia Churchland
Paul Churchland
David Chalmers
Noam Chomsky
Donald Davidson
Daniel Dennett
Michael Dummett
Bas van Fraassen
Gottlob Frege
Jerry Fodor
Philippa Foot
Peter Geach
A. C. Grayling
Paul Grice
Alvin Goldman
R. M. Hare
Peter Hacker
John Hawthorne
Ian Hacking
Carl Hempel
Jaakko Hintikka
Peter van Inwagen
Frank Cameron Jackson
Christine Korsgaard
Saul Kripke
David Lewis
J. L. Mackie
Norman Malcolm
John McDowell
G. E. Moore
Thomas Nagel
Robert Nozick
Derek Parfit
D. Z. Phillips
Alvin Plantinga
A. N. Prior
Hilary Putnam
W. V. O. Quine
John Rawls
Hans Reichenbach
Bertrand Russell
Gilbert Ryle
John Searle
Moritz Schlick
Wilfrid Sellars
Peter Singer
Peter Strawson
Richard Swinburne
Peter Unger
Bernard Williams
Timothy Williamson
John Wisdom
Ludwig Wittgenstein
Stephen Yablo
more&#160;...








Theories



Deflationism
Direct reference theory
Empiricism
Holism
Logical atomism
Logical positivism
Naturalism
Naturalized epistemology
Neopragmatism
Neutral monism
Particularism
Reductionism
Scientism
Skepticism
Verificationism
more&#160;...








Concepts



Analysis
Analytic–synthetic distinction
Causal&#160;/ Deductive&#160;/ Epistemic closure
Concept
Counterfactual
Denotation&#160;/ reference
Definite description
Factive
Family resemblance
Intuition
Meaning&#160;(Proposition)
Modality
Natural kind&#160;/ projectability
Necessary–sufficient conditions
Paradox of analysis
Possible world
Reduction
Reflective equilibrium
Rigid-flaccid designators
Sense data
Supervenience
Thought experiment
Truth function
Truthmaker
Truth-bearer
Type–token distinction








Related articles



Australian realism
Ordinary language philosophy
Philosophical logic
Philosophy of language
Philosophy of science
Postanalytic philosophy
more&#160;...











Category
Task force&#160;(discussion)
Philosophy stubs








Continental philosophy[edit]




Existentialism is an important school in the continental philosophical tradition. Four key existentialists pictured from top-left clockwise: Kierkegaard, Nietzsche, Kafka, Dostoevsky[23]


Main article: Continental philosophy
The history of continental philosophy is taken to begin in the early 1900s because its institutional roots descend directly from those of phenomenology.[24] As a result, Edmund Husserl has often been credited as the founding figure in continental philosophy. Although, since analytic and continental philosophy have such starkly different views of philosophy after Kant, continental philosophy is also often understood in an extended sense to include any post-Kant philosophers or movements important to continental philosophy but not analytic philosophy.
The term "continental philosophy", like "analytic philosophy", marks a broad range of philosophical views and approaches not easily captured in a definition. It has even been suggested that the term may be more pejorative than descriptive, functioning as a label for types of western philosophy rejected or disliked by analytic philosophers.[25] Indeed, continental philosophy is often characterized by its critics as philosophy that lacks the rigor of analytic philosophy.[citation needed] Nonetheless, certain descriptive rather than merely pejorative features have been seen to typically characterize continental philosophy:[26]

First, continental philosophers generally reject scientism, the view that the natural sciences are the best or most accurate way of understanding all phenomena.[27]


Second, continental philosophy usually considers experience as determined at least partly by factors such as context, space and time, language, culture, or history. Thus continental philosophy tends toward historicism, where analytic philosophy tends to treat philosophy in terms of discrete problems, capable of being analyzed apart from their historical origins.[28]


Third, continental philosophers tend to take a strong interest in the unity of theory and practice, and tend to see their philosophical inquiries as closely related to personal, moral, or political transformation.


Fourth, continental philosophy has an emphasis on metaphilosophy (i.e. the study of the nature, aims, and methods of philosophy). This emphasis can also be found in analytic philosophy, but with starkly different results.

Another approach to approximating a definition of continental philosophy is by listing some of the philosophical movements that are or have been central in continental philosophy: German idealism, phenomenology, existentialism (and its antecedents, such as the thought of Kierkegaard and Nietzsche), hermeneutics, structuralism, post-structuralism, French feminism, and the critical theory of the Frankfurt School and some other branches of Western Marxism.[29]








v
t
e


Continental philosophy






Philosophers



Theodor W. Adorno
Giorgio Agamben
Louis Althusser
Hannah Arendt
Joxe Azurmendi
Gaston Bachelard
Alain Badiou
Roland Barthes
Georges Bataille
Jean Baudrillard
Zygmunt Bauman
Simone de Beauvoir
Henri Bergson
Maurice Blanchot
Pierre Bourdieu
Judith Butler
Albert Camus
Ernst Cassirer
Cornelius Castoriadis
Gilles Deleuze
Jacques Derrida
Hubert Dreyfus
Terry Eagleton
Johann Fichte
Michel Foucault
Frankfurt School
Hans-Georg Gadamer
Antonio Gramsci
Jürgen Habermas
Georg Hegel
Martin Heidegger
Edmund Husserl
Roman Ingarden
Karl Jaspers
Immanuel Kant
Søren Kierkegaard
Alexandre Kojève
Leszek Kołakowski
François Laruelle
Claude Lévi-Strauss
Emmanuel Levinas
Gabriel Marcel
Maurice Merleau-Ponty
Friedrich Nietzsche
Paul Ricœur
Avital Ronell
Jean-Paul Sartre
Friedrich Schelling
Carl Schmitt
Arthur Schopenhauer
Peter Sloterdijk
Slavoj Žižek
more...








Theories



German idealism
Hegelianism
Critical theory
Psychoanalytic theory
Existentialism
Structuralism
Postmodernism
Poststructuralism








Concepts



Angst
Authenticity
Being in itself
Boredom
Dasein
Différance
Difference
Existential crisis
Facticity
Intersubjectivity
Ontic
Other
Self-deception
Trace
more...








Related articles



Kantianism
Phenomenology
Hermeneutics
Deconstruction











Category
Task force
Stubs
Discussion








See also[edit]

20th-century philosophy
Analytic philosophy

Experimental philosophy&#160;– An emerging field of philosophical inquiry that makes use of empirical data—often gathered through surveys which probe the intuitions of ordinary people—in order to inform research on long-standing and unsettled philosophical questions.
Logical positivism&#160;– The first and dominant school in analytic philosophy for the first half of the 20th-century.
Naturalism&#160;– The view that the scientific method (hypothesize, predict, test, repeat) is the only effective way to investigate reality.
Ordinary language philosophy&#160;– The dominant school in analytic philosophy in the middle of 20th-century.
Quietism&#160;– In metaphilosophy, the view that the role of philosophy is therapeutic or remedial.
Postanalytic philosophy&#160;– Postanalytic philosophy describes a detachment and challenge to mainstream analytic philosophy by philosophers like Richard Rorty.


Continental philosophy

Deconstruction&#160;– An approach (whether in philosophy, literary analysis, or in other fields) where one conducts textual readings with a view to demonstrate that the text is not a discrete whole, instead containing several irreconcilable, contradictory meanings.
Existentialism&#160;– Existential philosophy is the "explicit conceptual manifestation of an existential attitude"[30] that begins with a sense of disorientation and confusion in the face of an apparently meaningless or absurd world.[31][32]
Phenomenology&#160;– Phenomenology is primarily concerned with making the structures of consciousness, and the phenomena which appear in acts of consciousness, objects of systematic reflection and analysis.
Poststructuralism&#160;– Structuralism was a fashionable movement in France in the 1950s and 1960s, that studied the underlying structures inherent in cultural products (such as texts), post-structuralism derive from critique of structuralist premises. Specifically, post-structuralism holds that the study of underlying structures is itself culturally conditioned and therefore subject to myriad biases and misinterpretations.
Postmodern philosophy&#160;– Postmodern philosophy is skeptical or nihilistic toward many of the values and assumptions of philosophy that derive from modernity, such as humanity having an essence which distinguishes humans from animals, or the assumption that one form of government is demonstrably better than another.
Social constructionism&#160;– A central concept in continental philosophy, a social construction is a concept or practice that is the creation (or artifact) of a particular group.
Critical theory&#160;– Critical theory is the examination and critique of society and culture, drawing from knowledge across the social sciences and humanities.
Frankfurt School&#160;– The term "Frankfurt School" is an informal term used to designate the thinkers affiliated with the Institute for Social Research or who were influenced by it.


Western philosophy

Footnotes and references[edit]





This section may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. The specific problem is: layout and lisibility. Please help improve this section if you can. (May 2013)




^ http://ndpr.nd.edu/review.cfm?id=4281 Steven Hetcher, Norms in a Wired World, Cambridge University Press, 2004, 432pp, Reviewed by Stefan Sciaraffa, University of Arizona
^ Thomas Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, The University of Chicago Press (1962), pp. 19–20.
^ Peter Simons "Open and Cloded Culture" in Phenomenology and analysis: essays on Central European philosophy. Edited by Arkadiusz Chrudzimski and Wolfgang Huemer. Page 18.
^ Campbell, James (2006) A Thoughtful Profession, Open Court Publishing
^ Campbell, James (2006) A Thoughtful Profession, Open Court Publishing pp. 35-37
^ Leighton, Denys (2004) 'The Greenian moment' pp.70-71
^ Leiter, Brain (2009) "The Highest Quality 'General' Philosophy Journals in English" Leiter Reports, http://leiterreports.typepad.com/blog/2009/03/the-highest-quality-general-philosophy-journals-in-english.html
^ Leiter, Brain (2012) "Best English-Language Journals for Scholarship on the Continental traditions in post-Kantian Philosophy" Leiter Reports, http://leiterreports.typepad.com/blog/2012/04/best-english-language-journals-for-scholarship-on-the-continental-traditions-in-post-kantian-philoso.html
^ http://www.pdcnet.org/pages/Products/directories/ad10-11.htm
^ http://consc.net/weblogs.html
^ http://peasoup.typepad.com/peasoup/2009/11/the-next-chapter-ethics-discussions-at-pea-soup.html
^ http://beingawomaninphilosophy.wordpress.com/
^ http://gawker.com/5787195/philosophy-departments-are-full-of-sexual-harassment
^ http://www.insidehighered.com/news/2011/03/30/philosophers_consider_what_to_do_about_sexual_harassment
^ See, e.g., Michael Dummett, The Origins of Analytical Philosophy (Harvard University Press, 1994), or C. Prado, A House Divided: Comparing Analytic and Continental Philosophy (Prometheus/Humanity Books, 2003).
^ See for example Moore's A Defence of Common Sense and Russell's critique of the Doctrine of internal relations,
^ "...analytic philosophy opposed right from its beginning English neo-Hegelianism of Bradley's sort and similar ones. It did not only criticize the latter's denial of the existence of an external world (anyway an unjust criticism), but also the bombastic, obscure style of Hegel's writings." Peter Jonkers, "Perspectives on twentieth century philosophy: A Reply to Tom Rockmore," [1]
^ Ludlow, Peter, "Descriptions", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2005 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL=http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2005/entries/descriptions/
^ a b See, e.g., Brian Leiter [2] "'Analytic' philosophy today names a style of doing philosophy, not a philosophical program or a set of substantive views. Analytic philosophers, crudely speaking, aim for argumentative clarity and precision; draw freely on the tools of logic; and often identify, professionally and intellectually, more closely with the sciences and mathematics, than with the humanities." Cite error: Invalid &lt;ref&gt; tag; name "autogenerated2" defined multiple times with different content (see the help page).
^ Rorty, Richard. (1979) Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature.
^ http://ndpr.nd.edu/news/30207-the-politics-of-logic-badiou-wittgenstein-and-the-consequences-of-formalism/ Paul M. Livingston, The Politics of Logic: Badiou, Wittgenstein, and the Consequences of Formalism, Routledge, 2012
^ Williamson, Timothy "The Philosophy of Philosophy"
^ Hubben, William. (1952) Four Prophets of Our Destiny.
^ E.g., the largest academic organization devoted to furthering the study of continental philosophy is the Society for Phenomenology and Existential Philosophy.
^ Glendinning, The Idea of Continental Philosophy, p. 12.
^ The following list of four traits is adapted from Michael Rosen, "Continental Philosophy from Hegel", in A.C. Grayling (ed.), Philosophy 2: Further through the Subject, p. 665.
^ Simon Critchley, Continental Philosophy: A Very Short Introduction, p. 115.
^ Critchley, Continental Philosophy, p. 57.
^ The above list includes only those movements common to both lists compiled by Critchley 2001, p.&#160;13 and Glendinning 2006, pp.&#160;58–65.
^ Solomon, Robert C. (1987). From Hegel to Existentialism. Oxford University Press. p.&#160;238. ISBN&#160;0-19-506182-9.&#160;
^ Robert C. Solomon, Existentialism (McGraw-Hill, 1974, pages 1–2)
^ D.E. Cooper Existentialism: A Reconstruction (Basil Blackwell, 1999, page 8).


Further reading[edit]



Wikisource has original text related to this article:
On Denoting



The professionalization of philosophy

Campbell, James, A Thoughtful Profession: The Early Years of the American Philosophical Association. Open Court Publishing (2006)

The Analytic / Continental divide

James Chase &amp; Jack Reynolds, "Analytic versus Continental: Arguments on the Methods and Value of Philosophy" Durham: Acumen (2011)
James Luchte,‘Martin Heidegger and Rudolf Carnap: Radical Phenomenology, Logical Positivism and the Roots of the Continental/Analytic Divide,’ Philosophy Today, Vol. 51, No. 3, 241-260 (Fall, 2007)
Levy, Neil "Analytic and Continental Philosophy: Explaining the Differences", Metaphilosophy. Vol. 34, No. 3, April (2003)
Prado, C. G. A House Divided: Comparing Analytic and Continental Philosophy Humanity Books (2003)

Analytic Philosophy

Dummett, Michael Origins of Analytical Philosophy. Harvard University Press (1996)
Floyd, Juliet Future Pasts: The Analytic Tradition in Twentieth-Century Philosoph Oxford University Press (2001)
Glock, Hans-Johann What is Analytic Philosophy?. Cambridge University Press (2008)
Martinich, A. P. Analytic Philosophy: An Anthology (Blackwell Philosophy Anthologies). Wiley-Blackwell (2001)
Martinich, A. P. A Companion to Analytic Philosophy (Blackwell Companions to Philosophy). Wiley-Blackwell (2005)
Soames, Scott, Philosophical Analysis in the Twentieth Century, Volume 1: The Dawn of Analysis. Princeton University Press (2005)
Soames, Scott, Philosophical Analysis in the Twentieth Century, Volume 2: The Age of Meaning. Princeton University Press (2005)
Stroll, Avrum Twentieth-Century Analytic Philosophy. Columbia University Press (2001)
Williamson, Timothy The Philosophy of Philosophy (The Blackwell / Brown Lectures in Philosophy). Wiley-Blackwell (2008)

Continental Philosophy

Simon Critchley, Continental Philosophy: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford University Press (2001) ISBN 0-19-285359-7
Cutrofello, Andrew Continental Philosophy: A Contemporary Introduction. Routledge (2005)
Glendinning, Simon The Idea of Continental Philosophy Edinburgh University Press (2006)

External links[edit]

Contemporary philosophy at the Indiana Philosophy Ontology Project
Contemporary philosophy at PhilPapers
The Philosophical Gourmet Report's description of “Analytic” and “Continental” philosophy









v
t
e


Philosophy










&#160;
Branches










Traditional



Metaphysics
Epistemology
Logic
Ethics
Aesthetics








Philosophy of



Action
Art

Culture
Design
Music
Film


Being
Business
Dialogue
Education
Environment
Futility
Happiness
Healthcare
History
Human nature
Humor
Language
Literature
Mathematics
Mind

Pain
Psychology


Philosophy
Religion
Science

Physics
Chemistry
Biology
Geography


Sexuality
Social science

Economics
Justice
Law
Politics
Society


Space and time
Sport
Technology

Computer science
Engineering
Information


War


















&#160;
Schools of thought










By era



Ancient
Western

Medieval
Renaissance
Early modern
Modern
Contemporary










Ancient




Chinese



Agriculturalism
Confucianism
Legalism
Logicians
Mohism
Chinese naturalism
Neotaoism
Taoism
Yangism
Zen








Greco-Roman



Aristotelianism
Cynicism
Epicureanism
Hermeneutics
Neoplatonism
Peripatetic
Platonism
Presocratic
Pythagoreanism
Sophism
Stoicism








Indian



Buddhist
Cārvāka
Hindu
Jain








Persian



Mazdakism
Zoroastrianism
Zurvanism











Medieval
9th–16th
century





European



Christian philosophy
Scholasticism
Thomism
Renaissance humanism








East Asian



Korean Confucianism
Edo Neo-Confucianism
Neo-Confucianism








Indian



Navya-Nyāya
Vishishtadvaita
Dvaita








Islamic



Averroism
Avicennism
Persian Illuminationism
Ilm al-Kalam
Sufi








Jewish



Judeo-Islamic











Modern
17th–19th
century





people



Neo-Scholasticism
Cartesianism
Kantianism
Neo-Kantianism
Hegelianism
Marxism








Ideal&#160;/ Material



Idealism
Absolute idealism
Rationalism
Empiricism
Utilitarianism
Pragmatism








Other



Liberalism
Anarchism
Modernism
Phenomenology
Transcendentalism
Existentialism
Kokugaku
New Confucianism











Contemporary
20th–21st
century





Analytic



Analytic feminism
Consequentialism
Experimental philosophy
Internalism and Externalism
Falsificationism
Foundationalism&#160;/ Coherentism
Logical positivism
Legal positivism
Quinean Naturalism
Ordinary language philosophy
Quietism
Rawlsian
Reformed epistemology
Postanalytic philosophy
Contemporary utilitarianism
Neo-Aristotelian
Vienna Circle
Wittgensteinian








Continental



Critical theory
Deconstruction
Existentialism
Feminist
Frankfurt School
Postmodernism
Post-structuralism
Social constructionism
Structuralism








Other



Kyoto School
Objectivism
Russian cosmism
more...





















&#160;
Positions










Aesthetics



Formalism
Institutionalism
Aesthetic response








Ethics



Consequentialism
Deontology
Virtue








Free will



Compatibilism
Determinism
Libertarianism








Metaphysics



Atomism
Dualism
Monism
Naturalism








Epistemology



Constructivism
Empiricism
Idealism
Particularism
Fideism
Rationalism&#160;/ Reasonism
Skepticism
Solipsism








Mind



Behaviorism
Eliminativism
Epiphenomenalism
Functionalism
Objectivism
Subjectivism








Normativity



Absolutism
Particularism
Relativism
Nihilism
Skepticism
Universalism








Ontology



Action
Event
Process








Reality



Anti-realism
Conceptualism
Idealism
Materialism
Naturalism
Nominalism
Realism


















&#160;



Philosophy by region
Philosophy-related lists













By region



African
Ethiopian
Aztec
Native America
Eastern
Chinese
Egyptian
Czech
Indian
Indonesian
Iranian
Japanese
Korean
Vietnam
Pakistani
Western
American
British
Danish
French
German
Greek
Italian
Polish
Romanian
Russian
Slovene








Lists



Outline
Index
Years
Problems
Schools
Glossary
Philosophers
Movements
Publications

















Portal
Category
WikiProject
Changes















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Contemporary_philosophy&amp;oldid=687629227"					
				Categories: History of philosophyPhilosophy by periodContemporary philosophyHidden categories: Pages with reference errorsPages with duplicate reference namesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from September 2010Articles with unsourced statements from June 2009Articles needing cleanup from May 2013All articles needing cleanupCleanup tagged articles with a reason field from May 2013Wikipedia pages needing cleanup from May 2013				
							
		
		
			