


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Deep ecology
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				




This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2012)







Environment





Human impact
Issues
Environmentalism
Environmental studies








Environment in


Education
Humanities
Law
Policy
Science
Social science








Article index
Lists
Portal







 Category
 Commons







v
t
e







Part of a series on


Green politics







Core topics


Green politics
Green party
List of topics








Four Pillars


Ecological wisdom
Social justice
Grassroots democracy
Nonviolence








Perspectives


Bright green environmentalism
Deep ecology
Eco-capitalism
Ecofascism
Eco-feminism
Eco-socialism
Green anarchism
Green conservatism
Green left
Green liberalism
Green libertarianism
Green syndicalism
Social ecology
Green Zionism








Organizations


Asia Pacific Greens Federation
European Green Party
Federation of Green Parties of Africa
Federation of the Green Parties of the Americas
Federation of Young European Greens
Global Greens
Global Young Greens








Related topics


Anti-environmentalism
Climate change politics
Conservation movement
Eco-terrorism
Ecocentrism
Ecological modernization
Environmental issues
Environmental justice
Environmental movement
Environmentalism








 Politics portal
 Environment portal







v
t
e





Deep ecology is a contemporary ecological and environmental philosophy characterized by its advocacy of the inherent worth of living beings regardless of their instrumental utility to human needs, and advocacy for a radical restructuring of modern human societies in accordance with such ideas. Deep ecology argues that the natural world is a subtle balance of complex inter-relationships in which the existence of organisms is dependent on the existence of others within ecosystems.[1] Human interference with or destruction of the natural world poses a threat therefore not only to humans but to all organisms constituting the natural order.
Deep ecology's core principle is the belief that the living environment as a whole should be respected and regarded as having certain inalienable legal rights to live and flourish, independent of its utilitarian instrumental benefits for human use. Though this contradicts the definition of an environment, as the term means "the surroundings and/or conditions of a specific person or object as it relates to that specific person or object" this definition of the term does not however endorse any primary rights for humans, the "deep" in "deep ecology" is suggestive of a deep inquiry into this human derived ethical hierarchy. It describes itself as "deep" because it regards itself as looking more deeply into the actual reality of humanity's relationship with the natural world arriving at philosophically more profound conclusions than that of the prevailing view of ecology as a branch of biology. The movement does not subscribe to anthropocentric environmentalism (which is concerned with conservation of the environment only for exploitation by and for human purposes) since deep ecology is grounded in a quite different set of philosophical assumptions. Deep ecology takes a more holistic view of the world human beings live in and seeks to apply to life the understanding that the separate parts of the ecosystem (including humans) function as a whole. This philosophy provides a foundation for the environmental, ecology and green movements and has fostered a new system of environmental ethics advocating wilderness preservation, human population control and simple living.[2]



Contents


1 Principles
2 Development
3 Sources

3.1 Scientific
3.2 Spiritual
3.3 Philosophical roots

3.3.1 Spinoza




4 Criticism and debate

4.1 Knowledge of non-human interests
4.2 "Deepness"
4.3 Bookchin's criticisms
4.4 Botkin's criticism


5 Ecofeminist response
6 Links with other philosophies
7 Early influences
8 Notable advocates of deep ecology
9 Relevant journals
10 See also
11 References
12 Bibliography
13 Further reading



Principles[edit]
Proponents of deep ecology believe that the world does not exist as a resource to be freely exploited by humans. The ethics of deep ecology hold that the survival of any part is dependent upon the well-being of the whole. Proponents of deep ecology offer an eight-tier platform to elucidate their claims:[3]



The well-being and flourishing of human and nonhuman life on Earth have value in themselves (synonyms: intrinsic value, inherent value). These values are independent of the usefulness of the nonhuman world for human purposes.
Richness and diversity of life forms contribute to the realization of these values and are also values in themselves.
Humans have no right to reduce this richness and diversity except to satisfy vital human needs.
The flourishing of human life and cultures is compatible with a substantial decrease of the human population. The flourishing of nonhuman life requires such a decrease.
Present human interference with the nonhuman world is excessive, and the situation is rapidly worsening.
Policies must therefore be changed. These policies affect basic economic, technological, and ideological structures. The resulting state of affairs will be deeply different from the present.
The ideological change is mainly that of appreciating life quality (dwelling in situations of inherent value) rather than adhering to an increasingly higher standard of living. There will be a profound awareness of the difference between big and great.
Those who subscribe to the foregoing points have an obligation directly or indirectly to try to implement the necessary changes.



These principles can be refined down into three simple propositions:

Wilderness and biodiversity preservation;
Human population control;
Simple living (or treading lightly on the planet).[2]

Development[edit]
The phrase "deep ecology" was coined by the Norwegian philosopher Arne Næss in 1973.[4] Næss rejected the idea that beings can be ranked according to their relative value. For example, judgments on whether an animal has an eternal soul, whether it uses reason or whether it has consciousness (or indeed higher consciousness) have all been used to justify the ranking of the human animal as superior to other animals. Næss states that from an ecological point of view "the right of all forms [of life] to live is a universal right which cannot be quantified. No single species of living being has more of this particular right to live and unfold than any other species."
This metaphysical idea is elucidated in Warwick Fox's claim that humanity and all other beings are "aspects of a single unfolding reality".[5] As such Deep Ecology would support the view of Aldo Leopold in his book A Sand County Almanac that humans are "plain members of the biotic community". They also would support Leopold's "Land Ethic": "a thing is right when it tends to preserve the integrity, stability and beauty of the biotic community. It is wrong when it tends otherwise." Daniel Quinn in Ishmael showed that an anthropocentric myth underlies our current view of the world.[6]
Deep ecology offers a philosophical basis for environmental advocacy which may, in turn, guide human activity against perceived self-destruction. Deep ecology and environmentalism hold that the science of ecology shows that ecosystems can absorb only limited change by humans or other dissonant influences. Further, both hold that the actions of modern civilization threaten global ecological well-being. Ecologists have described change and stability in ecological systems in various ways, including homeostasis, dynamic equilibrium, and "flux of nature".[7] Regardless of which model is most accurate, environmentalists[citation needed] contend that massive human economic activity has pushed the biosphere far from its "natural" state through reduction of biodiversity, climate change, and other influences. As a consequence, civilization is causing mass extinction, at a rate of between 100 species a day, or possibly 140,000 species per year, a rate that is 10,000 times the background rate of extinction. Deep ecologists hope to influence social and political change through their philosophy. Næss has proposed, as Nicholas Goodrick-Clarke writes, "that the earth’s human population should be reduced to about 100 million."[8]
Sources[edit]
Scientific[edit]




Old-growth forest in Biogradska Gora National Park, Montenegro


Næss and Fox do not claim to use logic or induction to derive the philosophy directly from scientific ecology[9] but rather hold that scientific ecology directly implies the metaphysics of deep ecology, including its ideas about the self and further, that deep ecology finds scientific underpinnings in the fields of ecology and system dynamics.
In their 1985 book Deep Ecology,[10] Bill Devall and George Sessions describe a series of sources of deep ecology. They include the science of ecology itself, and cite its major contribution as the rediscovery in a modern context that "everything is connected to everything else." They point out that some ecologists and natural historians, in addition to their scientific viewpoint, have developed a deep ecological consciousness—for some a political consciousness and at times a spiritual consciousness. This is a perspective beyond the strictly human viewpoint, beyond anthropocentrism. Among the scientists they mention specifically are Rachel Carson, Aldo Leopold, John Livingston, Paul R. Ehrlich and Barry Commoner, together with Frank Fraser Darling, Charles Sutherland Elton, Eugene Odum and Paul Sears.
A further scientific source for deep ecology adduced by Devall and Sessions is the "new physics", which they describe as shattering Descartes's and Newton's vision of the universe as a machine explainable in terms of simple linear cause and effect. They propose that Nature is in a state of constant flux and reject the idea of observers as existing independent of their environment. They refer to Fritjof Capra's The Tao of Physics and The Turning Point for their characterisation of how the new physics leads to metaphysical and ecological views of interrelatedness, which, according to Capra, should make deep ecology a framework for future human societies. Devall and Sessions also credit the American poet and social critic Gary Snyder—with his devotion to Buddhism, Native American studies, the outdoors, and alternative social movements—as a major voice of wisdom in the evolution of their ideas.
The Gaia hypothesis was also an influence on the development of deep ecology.
Spiritual[edit]
The central spiritual tenet of deep ecology is that the human species is a part of the Earth, not separate from it, and as such human existence is dependent on the diverse organisms within the natural world each playing a role in the natural economy of the biosphere. Coming to an awareness of this reality involves a transformation of an outlook that presupposes humanity's superiority over the natural world. This self-realisation or "re-earthing"[11] is used for an individual to intuitively gain an ecocentric perspective. The notion is based on the idea that the more we expand the self to identify with "others" (people, animals, ecosystems), the more we realize ourselves. Transpersonal psychology has been used by Warwick Fox to support this idea. Deep ecology has influenced the development of contemporary Ecospirituality.[12]
A number of spiritual and philosophical traditions including Native American, Buddhist and Jain are drawn upon in a continuing critique of the philosophical assumptions of the modern European mind which has enabled and led to what is seen as an increasingly unsustainable level of disregard to towards the rights and needs of the natural world and its ability to continue to support human life. In relation to the Judeo-Christian tradition, Næss offers the following criticism: "The arrogance of stewardship [as found in the Bible] consists in the idea of superiority which underlies the thought that we exist to watch over nature like a highly respected middleman between the Creator and Creation."[13] This theme had been expounded in Lynn Townsend White, Jr.'s 1967 article "The Historical Roots of Our Ecological Crisis",[14] in which however he also offered as an alternative Christian view of man's relation to nature that of Saint Francis of Assisi, who he says spoke for the equality of all creatures, in place of the idea of man's domination over creation. Næss' further criticizes the reformation's view of creation as property to be put into maximum productive use: a view used frequently in the past to exploit and dispossess native populations. Many Protestant sects today regard the Bible's call for man to have stewardship of the earth as a call for the care for creation, rather than for exploitation.
The original Christian teachings on property support the Franciscan/stewardship interpretation of the Bible. Against this view, Martin Luther condemned church ownership of lands because "they did not want to use that property in an economically productive fashion. At best they used it to produce prayers. Luther, and other Reformation leaders insisted that it should be used, not to relieve men from the necessity of working, but as a tool for making more goods. The attitude of the Reformation was practically, "not prayers, but production." And production, not for consumption, but for more production." This justification was offered to support secular takings of church endowments and properties.[15]
Philosophical roots[edit]
Spinoza[edit]
Arne Næss, who first wrote about the idea of deep ecology, from the early days of developing this outlook conceived Baruch Spinoza as a philosophical source.[16]
Others have followed Naess' inquiry, including Eccy de Jonge, in Spinoza and Deep Ecology: Challenging Traditional Approaches to Environmentalism,[17] and Brenden MacDonald, in Spinoza, Deep Ecology, and Human Diversity—Realization of Eco-Literacies[citation needed].
One of the topical centres of inquiry connecting Spinoza to Deep Ecology is "self-realization." See Arne Næss in The Shallow and the Deep, Long-Range Ecology movement and Spinoza and the Deep Ecology Movement for discussion on the role of Spinoza's conception of self-realization and its link to deep ecology.
Criticism and debate[edit]
Knowledge of non-human interests[edit]
Animal rights activists state that for an entity to require rights and protection intrinsically, it must have interests.[18] Deep ecology is criticised for assuming that living things such as plants, for example, have their own interests as they are manifested by the plant's behavior—for instance, self-preservation being considered an expression of a will to live. Deep ecologists claim to identify with non-human nature, and in doing so, deny those who claim that non-human (or non-sentient) lifeforms' needs or interests are nonexistent or unknowable. The criticism is that the interests that a deep ecologist attributes to non-human organisms such as survival, reproduction, growth, and prosperity are really human interests. This is sometimes construed as a pathetic fallacy or anthropomorphism, in which "the earth is endowed with 'wisdom', wilderness equates with 'freedom', and life forms are said to emit 'moral' qualities."[19][20]
"Deepness"[edit]
Deep ecology is criticised for its claim to being deeper than alternative theories, which by implication are shallow. When Arne Næss coined the term deep ecology, he compared it favourably with shallow environmentalism which he criticized for its utilitarian and anthropocentric attitude to nature and for its materialist and consumer-oriented outlook.[21] Against this is Arne Næss's own view that the "depth" of deep ecology resides in the persistence of its penetrative questioning, particularly in asking "Why?" when faced with initial answers.
Writer William D. Grey believes that developing a non-anthropocentric set of values is "a hopeless quest". He seeks an improved "shallow" view, writing, "What's wrong with shallow views is not their concern about the well-being of humans, but that they do not really consider enough in what that well-being consists. We need to develop an enriched, fortified anthropocentric notion of human interest to replace the dominant short-term, sectional and self-regarding conception."[22]
Bookchin's criticisms[edit]
Some critics, particularly social ecologist Murray Bookchin, have interpreted deep ecology as being hateful toward humanity, due in part to the characterization of humanity by some deep ecologists, such as David Foreman of Earth First!, as a pathological infestation on the Earth.[8] Bookchin[23][24] therefore asserts that "deep ecology, formulated largely by privileged male white academics, has managed to bring sincere naturalists like Paul Shepard into the same company as patently antihumanist and macho mountain men like David Foreman who preach a gospel that humanity is some kind of cancer in the world of life."[23] Bookchin mentions that some, like Foreman, defend seemingly anti-human measures, such as severe population control and the claim regarding the Third World that "the best thing would be to just let nature seek its own balance, to let the people there just starve".[23] However, Bookchin himself later admitted that "statements made by Earth First! activists are not to be confused with those made by deep ecology theorists."[25] Ecophilosopher Warwick Fox similarly "warns critics not to commit the fallacy of 'misplaced misanthropy.' That is, just because deep ecology criticizes an arrogant anthropocentrism does not mean that deep ecology is misanthropic."[25] Likewise, The Deep Ecology Movement: An Introductory Anthology attempts to clarify that "deep ecologists have been the strongest critics of anthropocentrism, so much so that they have often been accused of a mean-spirited misanthropy"; however, "deep ecology is actually vitally concerned with humans realizing their best potential" and "is explicit in offering a vision of an alternative way of living that is joyous and enlivening."[26]
Murray Bookchin's second major criticism is that deep ecology fails to link environmental crises with authoritarianism and hierarchy. Social ecologists like him believe that environmental problems are firmly rooted in the manner of human social interaction, and suggest that deep ecologists fail to recognise the potential for human beings to solve environmental issues through a change of cultural attitudes. According to Bookchin, it is a social reconstruction alone that "can spare the biosphere from virtual destruction."[23] Though some deep ecologists may reject the argument that ecological behavior is rooted in the social paradigm (which, according to their view, would be an anthropocentric fallacy), others in fact embrace this argument, such as the adherents to the deep ecologist movement Deep Green Resistance.
Botkin's criticism[edit]
Daniel Botkin[27] has likened deep ecology to its antithesis, the wise use movement, when he says that they both "misunderstand scientific information and then arrive at conclusions based on their misunderstanding, which are in turn used as justification for their ideologies. Both begin with an ideology and are political and social in focus." Elsewhere, though, he asserts that deep ecology must be taken seriously in the debate about the relationship between humans and nature because it challenges the fundamental assumptions of Western philosophy. Botkin has also criticized Næss's restatement and reliance upon the balance of nature idea and the perceived contradiction between his argument that all species are morally equal and his disparaging description of pioneering species.
Ecofeminist response[edit]
Both ecofeminism and deep ecology put forward a new conceptualization of the self. Some ecofeminists, such as Marti Kheel,[28] argue that self-realization and identification with all nature places too much emphasis on the whole, at the expense of the independent being. Similarly, some ecofeminists place more emphasis on the problem of androcentrism rather than anthropocentrism. To others, like Karen J. Warren, the domination of women is tethered conceptually and historically to the domination of nature. Ecofeminism denies abstract individualism and embraces the interconnectedness of the living world; relationships, including our relationship with non-human nature, are not extrinsic to our identity and are essential in defining what it means to be human. Warren argues that hierarchical classifications in general, such as racism or speciesism, are all forms of discrimination and are no different from sexism. Thus, anthropocentrism is simply another form of discrimination as a result of our flawed value structure and should be abolished.[29]
Links with other philosophies[edit]
Parallels have been drawn between deep ecology and other philosophies, in particular those of the animal rights movement, Earth First!, Deep Green Resistance, and anarcho-primitivism.
Peter Singer's 1975 book Animal Liberation critiqued anthropocentrism and put the case for animals to be given moral consideration. This can be seen as a part of a process of expanding the prevailing system of ethics to wider groupings. However, Singer has disagreed with deep ecology's belief in the intrinsic value of nature separate from questions of suffering, taking a more utilitarian stance.[30] The feminist and civil rights movements also brought about expansion of the ethical system for their particular domains. Likewise deep ecology brought the whole of nature under moral consideration.[31] The links with animal rights are perhaps the strongest, as "proponents of such ideas argue that 'All life has intrinsic value'".[32]
Many in the radical environmental direct-action movement Earth First! claim to follow deep ecology, as indicated by one of their slogans No compromise in defence of mother earth. In particular, David Foreman, the co-founder of the movement, has also been a strong advocate for deep ecology, and engaged in a public debate with Murray Bookchin on the subject.[33][34] Judi Bari was another prominent Earth Firster who espoused deep ecology. Many Earth First! actions have a distinct deep ecological theme; often these actions will be to save an area of old growth forest, the habitat of a snail or an owl, even individual trees. Actions are often symbolic or have other political aims. At one point Arne Næss also engaged in environmental direct action, though not under the Earth First! banner, when he chained himself to rocks in front of Mardalsfossen, a waterfall in a Norwegian fjord, in a successful protest against the building of a dam.[35]
There are also anarchist currents in the movement, especially in the United Kingdom. For example Robert Hart, pioneer of forest gardening in temperate climates, wrote the essay "Can Life Survive?" in Deep Ecology &amp; Anarchism.[36]
Robert Greenway and Theodore Roszak have employed the deep ecology platform as a means to argue for ecopsychology.[citation needed] Although ecopsychology is a highly differentiated umbrella that encompasses many practices and perspectives, its ethos is generally consistent with deep ecology.[citation needed] As this now almost forty-year-old "field" expands and continues to be reinterpreted by a variety of practitioners, social and natural scientists, and humanists, "ecopsychology" may change to include these novel perspectives.
Heidegger’s critique of technology has certainly inspired environmentalist and postmodernist of our time. Deep ecologists, like Heidegger, allege that certain metaphysical presuppositions are responsible for ecological destruction, and also contend that any transformation can be brought about only through a renewed awareness about the world. Then the key to environmental crisis, require an ontological shift: from an anthropocentric and utilitarian understanding of world to an understanding which lets things be. A non-anthropocentric humanity would probably initiate attitudes, practices, and institutions that would exhibit respect and care for all beings.
Early influences[edit]




Mary Hunter Austin
Rachel Carson
Ralph Waldo Emerson
Aldo Leopold




John Muir
Henry David Thoreau
Friedrich Nietzsche
Baruch Spinoza
Leo Tolstoy




Notable advocates of deep ecology[edit]




David Abram
Michael Asher
Judi Bari
Thomas Berry
Wendell Berry
Leonardo Boff
Fritjof Capra
Savitri Devi[8]
Michael Dowd
Vivienne Elanta
David Foreman
Warwick Fox
Chellis Glendinning
Edward Goldsmith
Félix Guattari
Paul Hawken
Martin Heidegger
Julia Butterfly Hill
Derrick Jensen
Bernie Krause
Satish Kumar
Dolores LaChapelle
Gilbert LaFreniere




Pentti Linkola
John Livingston
Joanna Macy
Jerry Mander
Freya Mathews
Terence McKenna
W. S. Merwin
Arne Næss
Peter Newman
David Orton
Val Plumwood
Theodore Roszak
John Seed
Paul Shepard
Vandana Shiva
Gary Snyder
Richard Sylvan
Douglas Tompkins
Oberon Zell-Ravenheart
John Zerzan




Relevant journals[edit]

Environmental Ethics
Environmental Values
Resurgence &amp; Ecologist

See also[edit]








Sustainable development portal
Ecology portal
Environment portal
Evolutionary biology portal












ATWA
Biocentrism (ethics)
Biophilia hypothesis
Coupled human-environment system
Earth liberation
Ecocentrism
Eco-communalism
Ecotheology
Ecosophy
Ecosystem-based management
Environmental psychology




Human ecology
Intrinsic value (animal ethics)
Negative Population Growth
Neotribalism
Population Connection
Sustainable development
The Revenge of Gaia
Voluntary Human Extinction Movement




References[edit]


^ Ecosystems are also considered to be dependent on other ecosystems within the biosphere.
^ a b John Barry; E. Gene Frankland (2002). International Encyclopedia of Environmental Politics. Routledge. p.&#160;161. ISBN&#160;9780415202855.&#160;
^ Devall and Sessions, op. cit., p. 70.
^ Næss, Arne (1973) 'The Shallow and the Deep, Long-Range Ecology Movement.' Inquiry 16: 95-100
^ Fox, Warwick, (1990) Towards a Transpersonal Ecology (Shambhala Books)
^ Quinn, Daniel (1995), "Ishmael: An Adventure of the Mind and Spirit" (Bantam)
^ Botkin, Daniel B. (1990). Discordant Harmonies: A New Ecology for the Twenty-First Century. Oxford Univ. Press, NY, NY. ISBN 0-19-507469-6.
^ a b c Nicholas Goodrick-Clarke (1998). Hitler's Priestess: Savitri Devi, the Hindu-Aryan Myth, and Neo-Nazism. NY: New York University Press, ISBN 0-8147-3110-4
^ The Shallow and the Deep, Long Range Ecology movements A summary by Arne Naess (contains added words and commas to the original which can by misleading)
^ Devall, Bill; Sessions, George (1985). Deep Ecology. Gibbs M. Smith. ISBN&#160;0-87905-247-3.&#160; pp. 85-88
^ "Deep Ecology &amp; re-earthing ~ Q&amp;A". http://www.users.on.net/~arachne/index.html. Retrieved 9 December 2011.&#160;
^ Aburrow, Yvonne. "Eco-spirituality and theology". Sermons from the Mound. Pantheos. Retrieved 7 January 2014.&#160;
^ Næss, Arne. (1989). Ecology, Community and Lifestyle: Outline of an Ecosophy. p. 187. ISBN 0-521-34873-0
^ White, Jr, Lynn Townsend (March 1967). "The Historical Roots of Our Ecological Crisis". Science 155 (3767): 1203–1207. doi:10.1126/science.155.3767.1203. PMID&#160;17847526.&#160; (HTML copy, PDF copy).
^ Schlatter, Richard (1951). Private Property: the History of an Idea. (Rutgers Press)
^ Naess, A. (1977). "Spinoza and ecology". Philosophia 7: 45–54. doi:10.1007/BF02379991.&#160;
^ . ISBN&#160;978-0754633273.&#160; Missing or empty |title= (help)
^ Feinberg, Joel. "The Rights of Animals and Future Generations". Retrieved 2006-04-25.&#160;
^ Joff (2000). "The Possibility of an Anti-Humanist Anarchism". Retrieved 2006-04-25.&#160;
^ Pister, E. Phil (1995). "The Rights of Species and Ecosystems". Fisheries 20 (4). Retrieved 2006-04-25.&#160;
^ Great River Earth Institute. "Deep Ecology: Environmentalism as if all beings mattered". Retrieved 2006-04-25.&#160;
^ Anthropocentrism and Deep Ecology by William Grey
^ a b c d Bookchin, Murray (1987). "Social Ecology versus Deep Ecology: A Challenge for the Ecology Movement". Green Perspectives/Anarchy Archives.&#160;
^ AtKisson, Allan (1989). "Introduction To Deep Ecology: Deep ecology is a new way to think about our relationship to the Earth - and thinking is a prelude to action". Context Institute.&#160;
^ a b Zimmerman, Michael E (1993). "Rethinking the Heidegger-Deep Ecology Relationship" (PDF). Environmental Ethics.&#160;
^ Alan Drengson and Yuichi Inoue, ed. (1995). The Deep Ecology Movement. Berkeley, CA: North Atlantic Books. p.&#160;262. ISBN&#160;9781556431982.&#160;
^ Botkin, Daniel B. (2000). No Man's Garden: Thoreau and a New Vision for Civilization and Nature. Shearwater Books. pp.&#160;42, 39. ISBN&#160;1-55963-465-0.&#160;
^ Kheel, Marti. (1990): Ecofeminism and Deep Ecology; reflections on identity and difference from: Diamond, Irene. Orenstein. Gloria (editors), Reweaving the World; The emergence of ecofeminism. Sierra Club Books. San Francisco. pp 128-137. ISBN 0-87156-623-0
^ Warren, Karen J. (2008). "The Power and the Promise of Ecological Feminism". In Pojman, Louis P.; Pojman, Paul. Environmental Ethics: Readings in Theory and Application (5th ed.). Belmont, CA: Thomson Wadsworth. pp.&#160;33–48. ISBN&#160;978-0-495-09503-3.&#160;
^ Kendall, Gillian (May 2011 ). The Greater Good: Peter Singer On How To Live An Ethical Life. Sun Magazine, The Sun Interview, Issue 425. Retrieved on: 2011-12-02
^ Alan AtKisson. "Introduction To Deep Ecology, an interview with Michael E. Zimmerman". In Context (22). Retrieved 2006-05-04.&#160;
^ Wall, Derek (1994). Green History. Routledge. ISBN&#160;0-415-07925-X.&#160;
^ David Levine, ed. (1991). Defending the Earth: a dialogue between Murray Bookchin and Dave Foreman.&#160;
^ Bookchin, Murray; Graham Purchace; Brian Morris; Rodney Aitchtey; Robert Hart; Chris Wilbert (1993). Deep Ecology and Anarchism. Freedom Press. ISBN&#160;0-900384-67-0.&#160;
^ J. Seed, J. Macy, P. Flemming, A. Næss, Thinking like a mountain: towards a council of all beings, Heretic Books (1988), ISBN 0-946097-26-7, ISBN 0-86571-133-X.
^ Deep Ecology &amp; Anarchism. Freedom Press. 1993.&#160;


Bibliography[edit]

Bender, F. L. 2003. The Culture of Extinction: Toward a Philosophy of Deep Ecology Amherst, New York: Humanity Books.
Devall, W. and G. Sessions. 1985. Deep Ecology: Living As if Nature Mattered Salt Lake City: Gibbs M. Smith, Inc.
Drengson, Alan. 1995. The Deep Ecology Movement
Katz, E., A. Light, et al. 2000. Beneath the Surface: Critical Essays in the Philosophy of Deep Ecology Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
LaChapelle, D. 1992. Sacred Land, Sacred Sex: Rapture of the Deep Durango: Kivakí Press.
Næss, A. 1989. Ecology, Community and Lifestyle: Outline of an Ecosophy Translated by D. Rothenberg. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Nelson, C. 2006. Ecofeminism vs. Deep Ecology, Dialogue, San Antonio, TX: Saint Mary's University Dept. of Philosophy.
Passmore, J. 1974. Man’s Responsibility for Nature London: Duckworth.
Sessions, G. (ed) 1995. Deep Ecology for the Twenty-first Century Boston: Shambhala.
Taylor, B. and M. Zimmerman. 2005. Deep Ecology" in B. Taylor, ed., Encyclopedia of Religion and Nature, v 1, pp.&#160;456–60, London: Continuum International.

Further reading[edit]

Abram, David 1996. The Spell of the Sensuous: Perception and Language in a More-than-Human World. Pantheon Books.
Conesa-Sevilla, J. 2006. The Intrinsic Value of the Whole: Cognitive and utilitarian evaluative processes as they pertain to ecocentric, deep ecological, and ecopsychological "valuing." The Trumpeter, 22(2): 26-42.
Curry, Patrick. 2011. Ecological Ethics: An Introduction. Polity. ISBN 978-0-7456-5125-5.
Glasser, Harold (ed.) 2005. The Selected Works of Arne Næss, Volumes 1-10. Springer, ISBN 1-4020-3727-9. (review)

Griffin, Susan. Woman and Nature.Harper Collins 1978.

Keulartz, Jozef 1998. Struggle for nature&#160;: a critique of radical ecology, London [etc.]&#160;: Routledge.
Huesemann, Michael H., and Joyce A. Huesemann (2011). Technofix: Why Technology Won’t Save Us or the Environment, Chapter 12, “The Need for a Different World View”, New Society Publishers, Gabriola Island, British Columbia, Canada, ISBN 0865717044.
Kull, Kalevi 2011. Foundations for ecosemiotic deep ecology. In: Peil, Tiina (ed.), The Space of Culture – the Place of Nature in Estonia and Beyond. (Approaches to Culture Theory 1.) Tartu: Tartu University Press, 69–75.
Merchant, Carolyn 1990. The Death of Nature, HarperOne. ISBN 0-06-250595-5, ISBN 978-0-06-250595-8.
Sylvan, Richard 1985a. "A Critique of Deep Ecology, Part I." Radical Philosophy 40: 2–12.
Sylvan, Richard 1985b. "A Critique of Deep Ecology, Part II." Radical Philosophy 41: 1–22.
Tobias, Michael (ed.) 1988 (1984). Deep Ecology. Avant Books. ISBN 0-932238-13-0.
Turner, Jack 1996. The Abstract Wild. Tucson, Univ of Arizona Press.
de Steiguer, J.E. 2006. The Origins of Modern Environmental Thought. University of Arizona Press 246 pp.










v
t
e


Environmental humanities






Art



Crop art
Environmental art
Environmental sculpture
Land art
Landscape painting
Photography

conservation
landscape
nature
wildlife


Sculpture trail
Site-specific art
Sustainable art











Culture



Cultural ecology
Cultural landscape
Ecolinguistics
Ecological anthropology
Ecosemiotics
Environmental anthropology
Ethnoecology
Traditional ecological knowledge








Literature



Ecocomposition
Ecocriticism
Ecopoetry
Geocriticism
Nature writing
Outdoor literature
Zoopoetics








Philosophy



Constructivism
Cosmology
Critical realism
Deep ecology
Ecofeminism
Ecophenomenology
Ecosophy
Environmental ethics
Environmental justice
Environmental philosophy
Materialism
Natural philosophy
Philosophy of mind
Philosophy of science
Social ecology








Religion



Ecotheology
Environmental theology
Religion and environmentalism
Spiritual ecology
Stewardship








Other



Anthrozoology
Ecomusicology
Environmental communication
Environmental education

adult
arts-based


Environmental history
Environmental interpretation
Environmental journalism
Environmental law
Outdoor education
Psychogeography
Thematic interpretation








Related



Animal studies
Bioethics
Biophilia hypothesis
Do it yourself (ethic)
Natural history (museums)
Popular science
Property theory (common property)
Science, technology and society

science studies


Simple living
Slow food
Spirit of place
Sustainability studies








Applied



Arts and Crafts movement
Acoustic ecology
Biomimicry
Ecodesign
Ecological design
Ecomuseum
Educational trail
Environmental design
Landscape architecture

assessment
planning


Nature center
New Urbanism
Sustainable architecture
Sustainable design
Sustainable fashion
Themed walk
Transition design
Urban acupuncture











 Environment portal
 Category
 Commons
Journals
Degrees
Institutions
















v
t
e


Environmental social science






Fields



Ecological anthropology
Ecological economics
Environmental anthropology
Environmental economics
Environmental communication
Environmental history
Environmental politics
Environmental psychology
Environmental sociology
Human ecology
Human geography
Political ecology
Regional science











Related



Agroecology
Anthrozoology
Behavioral geography
Community studies
Demography
Design

ecological
environmental


Ecological humanities
Economics

energy
thermo


Environmental

education
ethics
law
science
studies


Ethnobiology

botany
ecology
zoology


Forestry
Industrial ecology
Integrated geography
Permaculture
Rural sociology
Science, technology and society

science studies


Sustainability

science
studies


Systems ecology
Urban

ecology
geography
metabolism
studies










Applied



Architecture

landscape
sustainable


Ecopsychology
Engineering

ecological
environmental


Green criminology
Health

environmental
epidemiology
occupational
public


Management

environmental
fisheries
forest
natural resource
waste


Planning

environmental
land use
regional
spatial
urban


Policy

energy
environmental













 Environment portal
 Category
Concepts
Degrees
Institutions
Journals
Research institutes
Scholars
















v
t
e


Human/World population






Major topics



Biocapacity
Optimum population
Overpopulation

Malthusian catastrophe


Population
Population ethics
Population momentum
Sustainable development
Women's reproductive rights
Zero population growth








Biological and
related topics



Family planning

Pledge two or fewer


Human population control

One-child policy
Two-child policy


Population biology
Population decline
Population density

Physiological density


Population dynamics
Population growth
Population model
Population pyramid
Projections of population growth








Human impact on
the environment



Deforestation
Desalination
Desertification
Environmental impact

of agriculture
of aviation
of biodiesel
of concrete
of electricity generation
of the energy industry
of fishing
of irrigation
of mining
of off-roading
of oil shale industry
of palm oil
of paper
of the petroleum industry
of reservoirs
of shipping
of war


Industrialisation
Land degradation
Land reclamation
Overconsumption
Pollution
Quarrying
Urbanization

Loss of green belts
Urban sprawl


Waste
Water scarcity

Overdrafting











Population
ecology




Carrying capacity
Deep ecology
Earth's energy budget
Food security
Habitat destruction
I = P × A  × T
Malthusian growth model
Overshoot (population)
World energy consumption
World energy resources
World3 model








Literature



A Modest Proposal
An Essay on the Principle of Population
How Much Land Does a Man Need?
Operating Manual for Spaceship Earth
Population Control: Real Costs, Illusory Benefits
The Limits to Growth
The Population Bomb
The Skeptical Environmentalist
The Ultimate Resource








Publications



Population and Environment
Population and Development Review
Population and housing censuses by country








Lists



Metropolitan areas by population
World population milestones









Events and
organizations




7 Billion Actions
International Conference on Population and Development
Population Action International
Population Connection
Population Matters
Population Research Institute
United Nations Population Fund
Voluntary Human Extinction Movement
World Population Day
World Population Foundation








Related topics



Classic Maya collapse
Fertility and intelligence
Green Revolution
Holocene extinction
Migration











 Commons
 Human overpopulation
Environmental issues with population
Human migration
















v
t
e


Sustainability






Principles



Ecological modernization
Environmentalism
Human impact on the environment
Planetary boundaries
Stewardship
Sustainable development








Consumption



Anthropization
Anti-consumerism
Ecological footprint
Ethical
Over-consumption
Simple living
Sustainability advertising
Sustainability brand
Sustainability marketing myopia
Sustainable
Systemic change resistance
Tragedy of the commons








Population



Birth control
Family planning
Control
Overpopulation
Zero growth








Technology



Appropriate
Environmental
Sustainable








Biodiversity



Biosecurity
Biosphere
Conservation biology
Deep ecology
Endangered species
Holocene extinction
Invasive species








Energy



Carbon footprint
Climate change mitigation
Conservation
Descent
Efficiency
Emissions trading
Fossil-fuel phase-out
Peak oil
Renewable








Food



Forest gardening
Local
Permaculture
Security
Sustainable agriculture
Sustainable fishery
Urban horticulture








Water



Conservation
Crisis
Efficiency
Footprint








Accountability



Sustainability accounting
Sustainability measurement
Sustainability metrics and indices
Sustainability reporting
Standards and certification
Sustainable yield








Applications



Advertising
Architecture
Art
Business
City
College programs
Community
Design
Ecovillage
Education for Sustainable Development
Fashion
Gardening
Geopark
Green marketing
Industries
Landscape architecture
Living
Low-impact development
Sustainable market
Organizations
Packaging
Practices
Procurement
Tourism
Transport
Urban drainage systems
Urban infrastructure
Urbanism








Management



Environmental
Fisheries
Forest
Natural resource
Planetary
Waste








Agreements



UN Conference on the Human Environment (Stockholm 1972)
Brundtlandt Commission Report (1983)
Our Common Future (1987)
Earth Summit (1992)
Rio Declaration on Environment and Development
Agenda 21 (1992)
Convention on Biological Diversity (1992)
ICPD Programme of Action (1994)
Earth Charter
Lisbon Principles
UN Millennium Declaration (2000)
Earth Summit 2002 (Rio+10, Johannesburg)
United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20, 2012)
Sustainable Development Goals (pending, September 2015)











Category
Lists
Outline
Portal
Science
Studies
Degrees
















v
t
e


Simple living






Practices



Barter
DIY ethic
Downshifting
Dry toilet
Forest gardening
Freeganism
Frugality
Gift economy
Intentional community
Local currency
Low-impact development
No frills
Off-the-grid
Permaculture
Self-sufficiency
Subsistence agriculture
Sustainable living
Sustainable sanitation
Veganism
Vegetarianism
War tax resistance
WWOOF








Religious and spiritual



Asceticism
Aparigraha
Cynicism
Detachment
Jesus movement
Mendicant
Mindfulness
Monasticism
New Monasticism
Plain dress
Plain people
Quakers
Rastafari movement
Temperance
Testimony of simplicity
Tolstoyan movement








Secular movements



Back-to-the-land
Car-free
Compassionate living
Environmental
Hippie
Slow
Small house
Transition town
Open Source Ecology








Notable writers



Wendell Berry
Ernest Callenbach
Duane Elgin
Mahatma Gandhi
Richard Gregg
Tom Hodgkinson
Harlan Hubbard
Satish Kumar
Helen Nearing
Scott Nearing
Peace Pilgrim
Vicki Robin
Nick Rosen
Dugald Semple
E. F. Schumacher
Henry David Thoreau
Leo Tolstoy








Modern-day adherents



Mark Boyle
Jim Merkel
Suelo
Thomas








Media



"Anekdote zur Senkung der Arbeitsmoral"
Escape from Affluenza
The Good Life
The Moon and the Sledgehammer
Mother Earth News
The Power of Half
Small Is Beautiful
Walden








Related topics



Agrarianism
Anarcho-primitivism
Anti-consumerism
Appropriate technology
Bohemianism
Deep ecology
Degrowth
Ecological footprint
Food miles
Green anarchism
The good life
Global warming
Intentional living
Itinerant
Low-technology
Nonviolence
Peak oil
Sustainability
Work–life balance
















v
t
e


Veganism and vegetarianism






Perspectives





Veganism




Fruitarianism
Environmental veganism
History of veganism
Juice fasting
Low carbon diet
Raw veganism
Stock-free agriculture
Veganarchism
Vegan nutrition
Vegan organic gardening









Vegetarianism




Economic vegetarianism
Environmental vegetarianism
History of vegetarianism
Lacto vegetarianism
Ovo vegetarianism
Ovo-lacto vegetarianism
Vegetarianism by country
Vegetarian cuisine
Vegetarian nutrition
Vegetarian Diet Pyramid









Semi-vegetarianism




Macrobiotic diet
Pescetarianism









Lists




List of vegans
List of vegetarians
List of vegetarian festivals
List of vegetarian organizations
List of vegetarian restaurants











Ethics





Secular




Animal rights
Animal welfare
Carnism
Deep ecology
Environmental vegetarianism
Ethics of eating meat
Nonviolence
Speciesism









Religious




Ahimsa
Buddhist vegetarianism
Christian vegetarianism
Diet in Hinduism
Diet in Sikhism
Ital (Rastafari)
Jain vegetarianism
Jewish vegetarianism
Pythagorean diet
Sattvic diet











Food,
drink



Agar
Agave nectar
Meat analogue

List of meat substitutes


Miso
Mochi
Mock duck
Nutritional yeast
Plant cream
Plant milk
Quinoa
Quorn
Seitan
Soy yogurt
Tempeh
Tofu
Tofurkey
Vegan cheese
Vegetarianism and beer
Vegetarianism and wine
Veggie burger
Vegetarian hot dog
Vegetarian sausage








Groups,
events,
companies





Vegan




American Vegan Society
Beauty Without Cruelty
Go Vegan
Movement for Compassionate Living
Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine
Plamil Foods
Vegan Awareness Foundation
Vegan Ireland
Vegan Outreach
Vegan Prisoners Support Group
The Vegan Society
Veganz
World Vegan Day









Vegetarian




American Vegetarian Party
Boston Vegetarian Society
Christian Vegetarian Association
European Vegetarian Union
Hare Krishna Food for Life
International Vegetarian Union
Jewish Vegetarians of North America
Linda McCartney Foods
Meat-free days

Meatless Monday


Swissveg
Toronto Vegetarian Association
Vegetarian Society
Vegetarian Society (Singapore)
Veggie Pride
Veggies of Nottingham
Viva! Health
World Esperantist Vegetarian Association
World Vegetarian Day











Books,
reports



Thirty-nine Reasons Why I Am a Vegetarian (1903)
The Benefits of Vegetarianism (1927)
Diet for a Small Planet (1971)
Moosewood Cookbook (1977)
Fit for Life (1985)
Diet for a New America (1987)
The Vegan Sourcebook (1998)
The China Study (2004)
The World Peace Diet (2005)
Skinny Bitch (2005)
The Bloodless Revolution (2006)
Livestock's Long Shadow (2006)
Eating Animals (2009)
Skinny Bastard (2009)
The Kind Diet (2009)
Why We Love Dogs, Eat Pigs, and Wear Cows (2009)
Eat &amp; Run (2012)
Meat Atlas (annual)








Films



Devour the Earth (1995)
Meet Your Meat (2002)
Peaceable Kingdom (2004)
Earthlings (2005)
Supercharge Me! 30 Days Raw (2006)
A Sacred Duty (2007)
A Delicate Balance&#160;– The Truth (2008)
Simply Raw: Reversing Diabetes in 30 Days (2009)
Fat, Sick and Nearly Dead (2010)
Planeat (2010)
Forks Over Knives (2011)
Vegucated (2011)
Live and Let Live (2013)
Cowspiracy (2014)








Physicians,
academics



Neal D. Barnard
T. Colin Campbell
Caldwell Esselstyn
Gary Francione
Joel Fuhrman
Michael Greger
Melanie Joy
Stephen R. Kaufman
Michael Klaper
John A. McDougall
Reed Mangels
Dean Ornish
Richard H. Schwartz













Authority control



GND: 4689428-7















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Deep_ecology&amp;oldid=689478092"					
				Categories: Deep ecologyEnvironmental ethicsSubfields of ecologyEnvironmental social science conceptsHidden categories: Pages with citations lacking titlesArticles needing additional references from June 2012All articles needing additional referencesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from October 2007Articles with unsourced statements from April 2015Articles with unsourced statements from June 2012Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers				
							
		
		
			