


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Deity
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								  (Redirected from Gods)
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				"Gods" redirects here. For the word, see God (word). For other uses, see Gods (disambiguation).
This article is about the generic concept in comparative religious studies.  For the concept of a singular deity, see God.  For the fictional character, see Mr. Deity.




Depictions of various deities on the entrance tower of Sri Mariamman Temple, Singapore, dedicated to the Hindu goddess of rain; Mariamman.


In religious belief, a deity (i/ˈdiː.ɨti/ or i/ˈdeɪ.ɨti/)[1] is either a natural or supernatural being, who is thought of as holy, divine, or sacred. Some religions have one supreme deity, while others have multiple deities of various ranks.
C. Scott Littleton's Gods, Goddesses, and Mythology defined a deity as "a being with powers greater than those of ordinary humans, but who interacts with humans, positively or negatively, in ways that carry humans to new levels of consciousness beyond the grounded preoccupations of ordinary life".[2]
Deities are depicted in a variety of forms, but are also frequently expressed as having human form. Some faiths and traditions consider it blasphemous to imagine or depict the deity as having any concrete form. Deities are often thought to be immortal, and are commonly assumed to have personalities and to possess consciousness, intellects, desires, and emotions comparable but usually superior to those of humans. A male deity is a god, while a female deity is a goddess.
Historically, natural phenomena whose causes were not well understood, such as lightning and catastrophes such as earthquakes and floods, were attributed to deities. They were thought to be able to work supernatural miracles and to be the authorities and controllers of various aspects of human life (such as birth or an afterlife). Some deities were asserted to be the directors of time and fate itself, the givers of human law and morality, the ultimate judges of human worth and behavior, or designers of the Universe.



Contents


1 Etymology
2 Other words for the concept
3 Relation with humanity
4 Forms of theism
5 Ancient religions
6 Buddhist deities
7 Hindu deities
8 Psychological interpretations
9 See also
10 References
11 External links



Etymology[edit]
Main articles: Dyeus and God (word)
Further information: Deva (Hinduism)




Searching the Seas with the Tenkei (ca. 1885) by Kobayashi Eitaku, with the god Izanagi (right) and Izanami, a goddess of creation and death in Japanese mythology


The word "deity" derives from the Latin deus ("god"), which is related through a common Indo-European origin to Sanskrit deva ("god"), devi ("goddess"), divya ("transcendental", "spiritual"). The root is related to words for "sky", such as Latin dies ("day"), and the Sanskrit div, divus, diu ("sky", "day", "shine"). Also related are "divine" and "divinity," from the Latin "divinus," from "divus." Khoda (Persian: خدا ) translates to God from Persian.
Other words for the concept[edit]
ʾIlāh (Arabic: إله‎; plural: آلهة ʾālihah) is an Arabic term meaning "deity". The feminine is ʾilāhah (إلاهة, meaning "goddess"); with the article, it appears as al-ʾilāhah الإلاهة. It appears in the name of the monotheistic god of Islam as al-Lāh, that is, translated, "the god". ʾIlāh is cognate to Northwest Semitic ʾēl and East Semitic forms such as Akkadian ilu. The word is from a Proto-Semitic biliteral Semitic root ʔ-L meaning "god" (possibly with a wider meaning of "strong"), which was extended to a regular triliteral by the addition of a h as in Hebrew ʾelōah and ʾelōhim. The word is spelled either إله with an optional diacritic alif to mark the ā only in Quranic texts or (more rarely) with a full alif, إلاه. The term is used throughout the Quran in passages detailing the existence of God and of the beliefs of non-Muslims in other divinities. Notably, the first statement of the shahada or Muslim confession of faith is "there is no ʾilāh but al-Lāh" "there is no god but God".
Allah is used by Arabic-speaking Christians and Jews, although other terms are in use as well, such as Rabb "Lord", a title also used by Muslims for God, similar to the Jewish use of Adonai, which is the most-frequently used term for God along with HaShem, literally "the Name". Amongst Christians, Yasu—an Arabic transliteration of the name of the Christian Jesus and Shaddai are common, with some other names and titles generally borrowed as transliterations from Hebrew, Aramaic, and Greek.
In Malaysia, many States have laws prohibiting non-Muslims from using the word Allah, but these have been ruled unconstitutional insofar as they do not involve the propagation of non-Muslim religions to Muslims.[3]
The Persian word Khuda (Persian: خدا ) can be translated as god, lord or king, and is also used today to refer to God in Islam by Persian and Urdu speakers. The Turkic word for god is Tengri; it exists as Tanrı in Turkish.
Relation with humanity[edit]





This section does not cite any references (sources). Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2013)






Panel from an ancient Roman sarcophagus depicting the creation of humans by Prometheus, with deities including Minerva (Roman Athena) and Mercury (Hermes) looking on


Theories and myths about, and modes of worship of, deities are largely a matter of religion. At present, the majority of humans are at least nominal adherents of some religion,[4] and this has been true throughout recorded human history.[5] Human burials from between 50,000 and 30,000 B.C. provide evidence of human belief in an afterlife and possibly in deities, although it is not clear when human belief in deities became the dominant view.
Some deities are thought to be invisible or inaccessible to humans, dwelling mainly in otherworldly, remote or secluded and holy places, such as the concepts of Heaven, and Hell, the sky, the underworld, under the sea, in the high mountains or deep forests, or in a supernatural plane or celestial sphere. Typically, they rarely reveal or manifest themselves to humans, and make themselves known mainly through their effects. Monotheistic deities are often thought of as being omnipresent, though invisible.
Often people feel an obligation or submission to their deity, although some view their deity as something that serves them.




Ivory figure of Wen Chang, a Chinese god of culture and literature (Ming Dynasty, ca. 1550–1644)


Folk religions usually contain active and worldly deities.
In polytheism, deities are conceived of as a counterpart to humans: humans are defined by their station subject to the deities, nourishing them with prayers or sacrifices, and deities are defined by their sovereignty over humans, punishing and rewarding them, but also dependent on their worship.[citation needed] This same concept is also present in monotheistic and henotheistic religions.
The boundary between human and divine in most cultures is by no means absolute. Demigods are the offspring from a union of a human with a deity, and most royal houses in Antiquity claimed divine ancestors.
Beginning with Djedefra (26th century BC), the Egyptian pharaohs called themselves "Son of Ra" as well as "Bull (son) of his Mother" among their many titles. One, Hatshepsut, who ruled from 1479 BC to 1458 BC, traced her heritage not only to her father, Thutmose I, who would have become deified upon his death—but also to the deity, Mut, as a direct ancestor.
Some human rulers, such as the Kings of Egypt, the Japanese Tennos, and some Roman Emperors have been worshipped by their subjects as deities while still alive. The earliest ruler known to have claimed divinity is Naram-Sin of Akkad (22nd century BC). In many cultures, rulers and other prominent or holy persons may be thought to become deities upon death (see Osiris, ancestor worship, canonization).
Forms of theism[edit]
Main article: theism





This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2009)







This article duplicates the scope of other articles. Please discuss this issue on the talk page and conform with Wikipedia's Manual of Style by replacing the section with a link and a summary of the repeated material, or by spinning off the repeated text into an article in its own right. (October 2014)


Theism is the view that at least one deity exists. Some religions are monotheistic and assert the existence of a unique deity. In the English language, the common noun god is equivalent to deity, while the proper noun God (capitalized) references the unique deity of monotheism. Pantheism considers the universe itself to be a deity. Dualism is the view that there are two deities: a deity of good who is opposed and thwarted by a deity of evil, of equal power. Manichaeism, Zoroastrianism, and Gnostic sects of Christianity are, or were, dualist. Polytheism asserts the existence of several deities, who together form a pantheon. Monolatry is a type of polytheism in which the existence of multiple deities is recognized, but worship is given only to one. Henotheism is a form of polytheism in which only one deity is worshipped. Animism is the belief that spirits inhabit every existing thing, including plants, minerals, animals, and, including all the elements, air, water, earth, and fire. The anthropologist E. B. Tylor argued that religion originally took an animist form.
Adherents of polytheistic religions, such as certain schools of Hinduism, may regard all deities in the pantheon as manifestations, aspects, or multiple personalities of the single supreme deity, and the religions may be more akin to pantheism, monotheism, or henotheism than is initially apparent to an observer.
The many religions do not generally agree on which deities exist, although sometimes the pantheons may overlap, or be similar except for the names of the deities. It is frequently argued that Judaism, Christianity, and Islam all worship the same monotheistic deity, although they differ in many important details. Comparative religion studies the similarities and contrasts in the views and practices of various religions. Philosophy of religion discusses philosophical issues related to theories about deities. Anthropology of religion studies religious institutions in relation to other social institutions, the comparison of religious beliefs and practices across cultures, and describes each religion as a cultural product, created by the human community that worships it. Narratives about deities and their deeds are referred to as myths, the study of which is mythology. The word "myth" has an overtone of fiction, so religious people commonly (although not invariably) refrain from using this term in relation to the stories about deities which they themselves believe in.
Ancient religions[edit]
Further information: Bronze Age religion, Iron Age religion and Religions of the Ancient Near East
Further information: Dingir, Ilah and Neṯer
The emergence of the concept of deities out of the ancestor or nature spirits known in animism is prehistorical, presumably taking place in Neolithic religion; at the time of the setting in of the earliest written records in the Early Bronze Age, the concept is fully developed in the religions of the Ancient Near East.
Neolithic figurines, such as the "bird goddess" type, and even paleolithic "Venus figurines" have been identified as depicting deities, but in the absence of textual evidence this is necessarily speculation based on archaeological artefacts and open to debate.
Buddhist deities[edit]




Buddhist temple image of Damun Cheonwang (Vaiśravaṇa), one of the Four Heavenly Kings (Ssangbongsa, South Korea)


Further information: God in Buddhism
In Buddhist mythology, devas are beings inhabiting certain happily placed worlds of Buddhist cosmology. These beings are mortal (being part of saṃsāra), numerous, and are respected but not worshipped; it is also common for iṣṭadevatās to be called deities, although the nature of Yidams are distinct from what is normally meant by the term.
The Madhyamikas argue strongly against the existence of a creator deity or essential being (such as Brahman). Some Prasaṅgikas hold that even the conventional existence of an essential being is a non-existent, whereas others consider that the conventional existence of such a being is an existent.
Though this may seem a rather weak basis of existence for some, as many Buddhists (such as the Yogacara school) deny any objective existence (of e.g. a chair), and many more deny any sort of essential existence of phenomena at all, the distinction between the existence and non-existence of consensual entities is important to Buddhist philosophy.
Hindu deities[edit]




Ganesha at Morgaon, aṣṭavināyaka complex


Main article: God in Hinduism
In Hinduism, the concept of God varies from one sect to another and from one book to another. Hinduism is set in a diverse system of thought with beliefs spanning henotheism, monotheism, polytheism, panentheism, pantheism and monism among others.[6][7][8][9] It is often aptly termed monistic theism and even open monotheism by some scholars, but is not purely polytheistic as outsiders perceive it to be.
The philosophical system of Advaita or nondualism is categorically explained in Vedas and Upanishads, and is popular among schools of Shaivism such as Kashmir Shaivism. The concept was also spread by Adi Shankara in the 9th century, within the framework of the Vedanta school of classical Hindu philosophy. This nondualism postulates the identity of the Self or Atman with the Whole or Brahman, and can be described as monism or pantheism.
Forms of explicit monotheism find mention in the canonical Bhagavad Gita. Explicit monotheism in the form of emotional or ecstatic devotion (bhakti) to a single external and personal deity (in the form of Shiva or Vishnu) became popular in South India in the early medieval period. Ecstatic devotion to Krishna, a form of Vishnu, gained popularity throughout India during the Middle Ages and gave rise to schools of Vaishnavism. Ecstatic devotion to Goddess Durga became popular in some parts of India in the later medieval and early modern ages.
Today, most Hindus are polytheistic or monotheistic but open to believing in and praying to several gods. Vaishnavism, particularly Krishnaism, Shaktism and some forms of Shaivism remain the most explicit forms of monotheistic worship of a personal God within Hinduism. Hindus who practice Shaivism tend to assume the existence of a singular God, but do not necessarily associate God with aspects of a personality. Rather they envisage God as an impersonal Absolute (Brahman), who can be worshipped only in part in a human form.
The term Ishvara may refer to any of the monotheistic or monistic conceptions within Hinduism, depending on context.
Psychological interpretations[edit]
See also: Evolutionary origin of religions, Evolutionary psychology of religion and Neurotheology
Pascal Boyer argues that while there is a wide array of supernatural concepts found around the world, in general, supernatural beings tend to behave much like people. The construction of gods and spirits like persons (anthropomorphism) is one of the oldest characteristics of religion. He cites examples from Greek mythology which is, in his opinion, more like a modern soap opera than other religious systems. The anthropologist Stewart Elliott Guthrie contends that people project human features onto non-human aspects of the world because it makes those aspects more familiar.[10] Sigmund Freud also suggested that god concepts are projections of one's father.[11] Likewise, Émile Durkheim was one of the earliest to suggest that gods represent an extension of human social life to include supernatural beings. In line with this reasoning, psychologist Matt Rossano contends that when humans began living in larger groups, they may have created gods as a means of enforcing morality. In small groups, morality can be enforced by social forces such as gossip or reputation. However it is much harder to enforce morality using social forces in much larger groups. He indicates that by including ever watchful gods and spirits, humans discovered an effective strategy for restraining selfishness and building more cooperative groups.[12]
More recently, neurotheology, a term which was originally introduced by Aldous Huxley, studies religious experience of god and spirituality in terms of cognitive neuroscience. Closely related, evolutionary psychology hypothesizes on the reason for the existence of these cognitive processes by examining the survival and reproductive functions they might serve. It is hypothesized that deities are generally accepted by people because it is an extension to the human need to socialize with individuals of the same community.
See also[edit]

Apotheosis
List of deities
Euhemerism
Hero cult
Imperial cult
Mukkulathor
Non-physical entity
Sacred king
Veneration of the dead

References[edit]


^ The American Heritage Book of English Usage: A Practical and Authoritative Guide to Contemporary English. 1996.
^ C. Scott Littleton, ed. (2005). Gods, Goddesses, and Mythology, Volume 11. Marshall Cavendish. p.&#160;378.&#160;
^ "High Court grants Catholic publication Herald rht right to use 'Allah' word again". The Star (Malaysia). 2010-01-01.&#160;
^ "People and Society". The World Factbook. CIA. 2012.&#160;
^ Mircea Eliade, A History of Religious Ideas, Vols. 1-3 University of Chicago Press, Chicago
^ Rogers, Peter (2009), Ultimate Truth, Book 1, AuthorHouse, p.&#160;109, ISBN&#160;978-1-4389-7968-7&#160;
^ Chakravarti, Sitansu (1991), Hinduism, a way of life, Motilal Banarsidass Publ., p.&#160;71, ISBN&#160;978-81-208-0899-7&#160;
^ "Polytheism". Encyclopædia Britannica. Encyclopædia Britannica Online. 2007. Retrieved 2007-07-05.&#160;
^ Pattanaik, Devdutt (2002), The man who was a woman and other queer tales of Hindu lore, Routledge, p.&#160;38, ISBN&#160;978-1-56023-181-3&#160;
^ Boyer, Pascal (2001). Religion Explained. New York: Basic Books. pp.&#160;142–243. ISBN&#160;0-465-00696-5.&#160;
^ Barrett, Justin (1996). "Conceptualizing a Nonnatural Entity: Anthropomorphism in God Concepts" (PDF).&#160;
^ Rossano, Matt (2007). "Supernaturalizing Social Life: Religion and the Evolution of Human Cooperation" (PDF). Retrieved 2009-06-21.&#160;


External links[edit]



Look up deity in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.










v
t
e


Theism









Deity

Divinity
Male
Female
List


God

Existence
Gender


Apatheism
Atheism

Antitheism


Binitarianism
Classical theism
Deism

Pandeism
Polydeism


Dystheism
Misotheism
Henotheism
Hylotheism
Ietsism
Kathenotheism
Monolatrism
Monotheism
Mysticism
Nontheism

Post-theism


Panentheism
Pantheism
Philosophical theism
Polytheism
Spiritualism
Theopanism
Transtheism
Trinitarianism
Unitarianism









Religion portal


















v
t
e


Theology







Outline










&#160;



Conceptions of God













Theism





forms





Deism
Dystheism
Henotheism
Hermeticism
Kathenotheism
Nontheism
Monolatrism
Monotheism
Mysticism
Panentheism
Pandeism
Pantheism
Polydeism
Polytheism
Spiritualism
Theopanism
more...









concepts





Deity
Divinity
Gender of God and gods

Male deity
Goddess


Numen











Singular god
theologies





by faith




Abrahamic religions

Judaism
Christianity
Islam


the Bahá'í Faith
Buddhism
Hinduism
Jainism
Sikhism
Zoroastrianism
more...









concepts




Absolute
Brahman
Emanationism
Logos
Supreme Being
more...









God as




the Devil
Sustainer
Time











Trinitarianism



Athanasian Creed
Comma Johanneum
Consubstantiality
Homoousian
Homoiousian
Hypostasis
Perichoresis
Shield of the Trinity
Trinitarian formula
Trinity
Trinity of the Church Fathers
Trinitarian Universalism
more...








Other concepts



Aristotelian view
Attributes of God in Christianity&#160;/ in Islam
Binitarianism
Demiurge
Divine simplicity
Divine presence
Egotheism
Godhead in Christianity

Latter-Day Saints


Great Architect of the Universe
Great Spirit
Apophatic theology
Olelbis
Open theism
Personal god
Phenomenological definition
Philo's view
Sarav viāpak
Taryenyawagon
The All
Tian
Unmoved mover
more...








Names of God in



Christianity
Hinduism
Islam
Jainism
Judaism
more...


















&#160;



Existence of God
Apologetics













Arguments on the
existence of God




For




Arguments from



Beauty
Consciousness
Degree
Desire
Love
Miracles
Morality
Proper basis
Reason
Religious experience








Other arguments



Christological
Cosmological
Ontological
Pascal's wager
Teleological
Trademark
Transcendental
Witness
more...











Against




Arguments from



Free will
Inconsistent revelation
Nonbelief
Poor design








Other arguments



God of the gaps
Incompatible properties
Noncognitivism
Omnipotence paradox
Problem of evil
Problem of Hell
more...














Apologetics




General



List of apologetic works
Polemic
Positive deconstruction
more...








Christian



Apologists
List of works
Ecumenical
Presuppositional
Epistle to Diognetus
Trilemma
Urmonotheismus
more...








Other faiths



Bahá'í
Muslim apologists





















&#160;



Criticism
Opposition
Persecution













Criticism of



Buddhism
Christianity
Hinduism
Islam
Jainism
Judaism








Opposition to



Christianity

Catholicism
Protestantism
Anti-Christian sentiment


Gnosticism
Hinduism
Islam
Judaism
Cults&#160;/ New religious movements
more...








Persecution of



Buddhists
Christians
Muslims
Zoroastrians








Related topics



Disengagement from religion
Secularism
Separation of church and state


















&#160;
Eschatology










By faith



Buddhist
Christian
Hindu
Islamic
Jewish
Norse
Taoist
Zoroastrian








Topics



Afterlife
Apocalypticism
Doomsday films
Ghosts
Ghost Dance movement
Heaven
Personifications of death
more...


















&#160;
Theologies










Christian



History
Outline
Biblical canon
Glossary
Christology
Cosmology
Ecclesiology
Ethics
Hamartiology
Law
Messianism
Movements
Nestorianism
New Testament
Old Testament
Philosophy
Practical
Sophiology
Soteriology
more...








Feminist



Buddhism
Christianity
Hinduism
Islam
Judaism
Mormonism
Goddesses
more...








Hindu



Philosophical concepts
Ayyavazhi theology
Krishnology
more...








Islamic



Oneness of God
Prophets
Holy Scriptures
Angels
Predestination
Last Judgment
more...








Jewish



Abrahamic prophecy
Aggadah
Denominations
Kabbalah
Philosophy








Other



Death of God
Exotheology
Holocaust
Pope Pius XII
Process
More...


















&#160;



Education
People and resources













Seminaries and
theological colleges



Anglican
Buddhist
Eastern Orthodox
Evangelical
Islamic
Jewish
Lutheran
Madrasa
Methodist
Reformed Church
Roman Catholic
more...








Schools by affiliation



Ahmadiyya
Anglican
Assemblies of God
Bahá'í
Buddhist
Baptist
Eastern Orthodox
Hindu
Islamic
Jewish
Latter Day Saints
Lutheran
Mennonite
Methodist
Nondenominational Christian
Presbyterian
Quaker
Roman Catholic
Seventh-Day Adventist








People and resources



Theologians
Teachers
Journals

more...























					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Deity&amp;oldid=691844176"					
				Categories: DeitiesHidden categories: Articles including recorded pronunciationsArticles containing Arabic-language textArticles needing additional references from October 2013All articles needing additional referencesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from December 2011Articles needing additional references from October 2009Articles in need of internal merging				
							
		
		
			