


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Duns Scotus
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				Not to be confused with Johannes Scotus Eriugena.


John Duns Scotus



The Subtle Doctor



Born
c. 1266
Duns, County of Berwick, Kingdom of Scotland


Died
8 November 1308 (aged&#160;41–42)
Cologne, Electorate of Cologne, Holy Roman Empire





Era
Medieval Philosophy


Region
Western Philosophy


School
Scholasticism



Main interests

Metaphysics, theology, logic, epistemology, ethics



Notable ideas

Univocity of being, haecceity as a principle of individuation, Immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary




Influences


Aristotle, St. Augustine, Anselm, Thomas Aquinas, Henry of Ghent








Influenced


Antonius Andreas, William of Ockham, Descartes, Lorenz Fuetscher, Mário Ferreira dos Santos, Heidegger, Deleuze, Charles Sanders Peirce, Gerard Manley Hopkins








Blessed John Duns Scotus, O.F.M.



A statue of John Duns Scotus by Frank Tritchler in the Public Park in the town of Duns erected in 1966



Religious and priest


Venerated&#160;in
Roman Catholic Church


Beatified
20 March 1993, Vatican City by Pope John Paul II


Major shrine
Franciscan Church, Cologne, Germany


Feast
8 November


John Duns commonly called Duns Scotus (/dʌnz ˈskoʊtəsˌ ˈskɒtəs/; c. 1266&#160;– 8 November 1308), is generally considered to be one of the three most important philosopher-theologians of the High Middle Ages.[1] Scotus has had considerable influence on both Catholic and secular thought. The doctrines for which he is best known are the "univocity of being," that existence is the most abstract concept we have, applicable to everything that exists; the formal distinction, a way of distinguishing between different aspects of the same thing; and the idea of haecceity, the property supposed to be in each individual thing that makes it an individual. Scotus also developed a complex argument for the existence of God, and argued for the Immaculate Conception of Mary.
Duns Scotus was given the medieval accolade Doctor Subtilis (Subtle Doctor) for his penetrating and subtle manner of thought. He was beatified by Pope John Paul II in 1993.



Contents


1 Life
2 Work
3 Metaphysics

3.1 Realism
3.2 Univocity of being
3.3 Individuation
3.4 Formal distinction


4 Theology

4.1 Voluntarism
4.2 Metaphysical Argument for the Existence of God
4.3 Illuminationism
4.4 Immaculate Conception


5 Veneration
6 Later reputation and influence

6.1 Later medieval period
6.2 Sixteenth to nineteenth centuries
6.3 Twentieth century


7 Bibliography
8 See also
9 Notes
10 References
11 External links



Life[edit]




Plaque commemorating Duns Scotus in the University Church, Oxford


Little is known of Duns Scotus apart from his work. His date of birth is thought to have been between 23 December 1265 and 17 March 1266, born into a leading family of the region. The site of his birth, in front of the Pavilion Lodge, near the North Lodge of Duns Castle, is now marked by a cairn which was erected in 1966 by the Franciscan friars of the United Kingdom to mark the 700th anniversary of his birth. Duns Scotus received the religious habit of the Friars Minor at Dumfries, where his uncle, Elias Duns, was guardian.[2]
Duns Scotus' age is based on the first certain date for his life, that of his ordination to the Catholic priesthood at the Church of Saint Andrew in Northampton, England, on 17 March 1291. The minimum canonical age for ordination to the Catholic priesthood is 25 and it is generally assumed that he would have been ordained as soon as it was permitted.[3][4] That his contemporaries called him Johannes Duns, after the medieval practice of calling people by their Christian name followed by their place of origin, suggests that he came from Duns, in Berwickshire, Scotland.[5]
According to tradition, Duns Scotus was educated at the Franciscan studium at Oxford, a house behind St Ebbe's Church, in a triangular area enclosed by Pennyfarthing Street and running from St Aldate's to the Castle, the Baley and the old wall,[6] where the Friars Minor had moved when the University of Paris was dispersed in 1229–30. At that time there would have been about 270 persons living there, of whom about 80 would have been friars.[7]
Duns Scotus appears to have been in Oxford by 1300, as he is listed among a group of friars for whom the Minister Provincial of the English Province (which included Scotland) requested faculties from the Bishop of Lincoln for the hearing of confessions.[8] He took part in a disputation under the regent master, Philip of Bridlington. He began lecturing on Peter Lombard's Sentences at the prestigious University of Paris towards the end of 1302. Later in that academic year, however, he was expelled from the University of Paris for siding with Pope Boniface VIII in his feud with King Philip IV of France over the taxation of church property.
Duns Scotus was back in Paris before the end of 1304, probably returning in May. He continued lecturing there until, for reasons that are still mysterious, he was dispatched to the Franciscan studium at Cologne, probably in October 1307. According to the 15th-century writer William Vorilong, his departure was sudden and unexpected. He was relaxing or talking with students in the Prato clericorum or Pre-aux-Clercs&#160;– an open area of the Left Bank used by scholars for recreation&#160;– when orders arrived from the Franciscan Minister General; Scotus left immediately, taking few or no personal belongings.[9]
Duns Scotus died unexpectedly in Cologne in November 1308; the date of his death is traditionally given as 8 November. He is buried in the Church of the Friars Minor there. His sarcophagus bears the Latin inscription:


Scotia me genuit. Anglia me suscepit. Gallia me docuit. Colonia me tenet.
(Scotland brought me forth. England sustained me. France taught me. Cologne holds me.)


The story about Duns Scotus being buried alive, in the absence of his servant who alone knew of his susceptibility to coma, is probably a myth.[10] It was reported by Sir Francis Bacon in his Historia vitae et mortis.[11]
The colophon of Codex 66 of Merton College, Oxford says that Scotus was also at Cambridge, but we do not know for certain if this is true, or if it was, when he was there.[12]
Work[edit]
Scotus’ great work is his commentary on the Sentences of Peter Lombard, which contains nearly all the philosophical views and arguments for which he is well known, including the univocity of being, the formal distinction, less-than-numerical unity, individual nature or ‘thisness' (haecceity), his critique of illuminationism and his renowned argument for the existence of God. His commentary exists in several versions. The standard version is the Ordinatio (also known as the Opus oxoniense), a revised version of lectures he gave as a bachelor at Oxford. The initial revision was probably begun in the summer of 1300 – see the remarks in the Prologue, question 2, alluding to the Third Battle of Homs in 1299, news of which probably reached Oxford in the summer of 1300. It was still incomplete when Scotus left for Paris in 1302. The original lectures were also transcribed and recently published as the Lectura.
The two other versions of the work are Scotus' notes for the Oxford lectures, recently published as the Lectura, the first book of which was probably written in Oxford in the late 1290s,[13] and the Reportatio parisiensis (or Opus parisiense), consisting of transcriptions of the lectures on the Sentences given by Scotus when he was in Paris. A reportatio is a student report or transcription of the original lecture of a master. A version that has been checked by the master himself is known as a reportatio examinata.
By the time of Scotus, these 'commentaries' on the Sentences were no longer literal commentaries. Instead, Peter Lombard's original text was used as a starting point for highly original discussions on topics of theological or philosophical interest.[14] For example, Book II Distinction 2, about the location of angels, is a starting point for a complex discussion about continuous motion, and whether the same thing can be in two different places at the same time (bilocation). In the same book, Distinction 3, he uses the question of how angels can be different from one another, given that they have no material bodies, to investigate the difficult question of individuation in general.




Colophon from the edition of Scotus' Sentences commentary edited by Thomas Penketh (died 1487) and Bartolomeo Bellati (died 1479), printed by Johannes de Colonia and Johannes Manthen, Venice in 1477. It reads Explicit Scriptum super Primum Sententiarum: editum a fratre Johanne Duns: ordinis fratrum minorum Printed versions of scholastic manuscripts became popular in the late fifteenth century.


Scotus wrote purely philosophical and logical works at an early stage of his career, consisting of commentaries on Aristotle's Organon. These are the Questions on Porphyry's Isagoge and Aristotle's Categories, Peri hermeneias, and De sophisticis elenchis, probably dating to around 1295.[15] His commentary on Aristotle's Metaphysics was probably written in stages, the first version having started around 1297,[13] with significant additions and amendments possibly after the completion of the main body of the Ordinatio.[16] His Expositio on the Metaphysics was lost for centuries but was recently rediscovered and edited by Giorgio Pini.[17]
In addition, there are 46 short disputations called Collationes, probably dating from 1300–1305; a work in natural theology (De primo principio), and his Quaestiones Quodlibetales, probably dating to Advent 1306 or Lent 1307.
A number of works once believed to have been written by Scotus are now known to have been misattributed. There were already concerns about this within two centuries of his death, when the 16th-century logician Jacobus Naveros noted inconsistencies between these texts and his commentary on the Sentences, leading him to doubt whether he had written any logical works at all.[18] The Questions on the Prior Analytics (In Librum Priorum Analyticorum Aristotelis Quaestiones) were also discovered to be mistakenly attributed.[19] In 1922, Grabmann showed that the logical work De modis significandi was actually by Thomas of Erfurt, a 14th-century logician of the modist school. Thus the claim that Martin Heidegger wrote his Habilitationsschrift on Scotus[20] is only half true, as the second part is actually based on the work by Erfurt.
Metaphysics[edit]





This article needs attention from an expert in section. Please add a reason or a talk parameter to this template to explain the issue with the article. WikiProject Section (or its Portal) may be able to help recruit an expert. (August 2012)


Realism[edit]
Scotus is generally considered to be a realist (as opposed to a nominalist) in that he treated universals as real. He attacks a position close to that later defended by Ockham, arguing that things have a common nature – for example the humanity common to both Socrates, Plato, and Plutarch.
Univocity of being[edit]
He followed Aristotle in asserting that the subject matter of metaphysics is "being qua being" (ens inquantum ens). Being in general (ens in communi), as a univocal notion, was for him the first object of the intellect. Metaphysics includes the study of the transcendentals, so called because they transcend the division of being into finite and infinite and the further division of finite being into the ten Aristotelian categories. Being itself is a transcendental, and so are the "attributes" of being—"one," "true," and "good"—which are coextensive with being, but which each add something to it.[original research?]
The doctrine of the univocity of being implies the denial of any real distinction between essence and existence. Aquinas had argued that in all finite being (i.e. all except God), the essence of a thing is distinct from its existence. Scotus rejected the distinction. Scotus argued that we cannot conceive of what it is to be something, without conceiving it as existing. We should not make any distinction between whether a thing exists (si est) and what it is (quid est), for we never know whether something exists, unless we have some concept of what we know to exist.[21]
Individuation[edit]
Scotus elaborates a distinct view on hylomorphism, with three important strong theses that differentiate him. He held: 1) that there exists matter that has no form whatsoever, or prime matter, as the stuff underlying all change, against Aquinas (cf. his Quaestiones in Metaphysicam 7, q. 5; Lectura 2, d. 12, q. un.), 2) that not all created substances are composites of form and matter (cf. Lectura 2, d. 12, q. un., n. 55), that is, that purely spiritual substances do exist, and 3) that one and the same substance can have more than one substantial form—for instance, humans have at least two substantial forms, the soul and the form of the body (forma corporeitas) (cf. Ordinatio 4, d. 11, q. 3, n. 54). He argued for an original principle of individuation (cf. Ordinatio 2, d. 3, pars 1, qq. 1–6), the "haecceity" as the ultimate unity of a unique individual (haecceitas, an entity's 'thisness'), as opposed to the common nature (natura communis), feature existing in any number of individuals. For Scotus, the axiom stating that only the individual exists is a dominating principle of the understanding of reality. For the apprehension of individuals, an intuitive cognition is required, which gives us the present existence or the non-existence of an individual, as opposed to abstract cognition. Thus the human soul, in its separated state from the body, will be capable of knowing the spiritual intuitively.
Formal distinction[edit]
Like other realist philosophers of the period (such as Aquinas and Henry of Ghent) Scotus recognised the need for an intermediate distinction that was not merely conceptual, but not fully real or mind-dependent either. Scotus argued for a formal distinction (distinctio formalis a parte rei), which holds between entities which are inseparable and indistinct in reality, but whose definitions are not identical. For example, the personal properties of the Trinity are formally distinct from the Divine essence. Similarly, the distinction between the 'thisness' or haecceity of a thing is intermediate between a real and a conceptual distinction.[22] There is also a formal distinction between the divine attributes and the powers of the soul.
Theology[edit]





This article needs attention from an expert in section. Please add a reason or a talk parameter to this template to explain the issue with the article. WikiProject Section (or its Portal) may be able to help recruit an expert. (August 2012)


Voluntarism[edit]
Scotus was an Augustinian theologian. He is usually associated with voluntarism, the tendency to emphasize God's will and human freedom in all philosophical issues. The main difference between Aquinas' rational theology and that of Scotus' is that Scotus believed certain predicates may be applied univocally&#160;– with exactly the same meaning&#160;– to God and creatures, whereas Aquinas insisted that this is impossible, and that only analogical predication can be employed, in which a word as applied to God has a meaning different from, although related to, the meaning of that same word as applied to creatures. Duns struggled throughout his works in demonstrating his univocity theory against Aquinas' analogy doctrine.
Metaphysical Argument for the Existence of God[edit]
Duns Scotus believes that it is better to construct a metaphysical argument for the existence of God, rather than the more common physical argument from motion[23] favored by Aquinas,[24] following Aristotle.[25] Though the version in De Primo Principio is the most complete and final version, the Ordinatio proof is usually offered. However, the De Primo version is fascinating and worth looking into for a wider understanding of the argument as well as Scotus' metaphysical underpinnings for his argument for God's existence, but we shall base this section of the article on the Ordinatio version. Let us briefly outline Scotus’ argument. He begins his proof by explaining that there are two angles we must take in arguing for the existence of an actually infinite being. First we must approach from the view of the Relative Properties of God; second, from the Absolute Properties of God. Relative properties are those which are predicable of God in relation to creation; absolute properties are those which belong to God whether or not He chose to create. Under the first heading of Relative Properties, Scotus argues for a triple primacy of efficiency, finality and pre-eminence. From there he shows that one primacy implies the others, and finally there can only be one nature that is the First Efficient Cause, Ultimate End, and the Most Perfect Nature. From there the Subtle Doctor discusses the Absolute Properties of God. The First Being is intellectual and volitional, and the intellect and will are identical with the essence of this supreme nature. The First Being is also infinite being. While discussing the infinity of God, Scotus resurrects Anselm’s That Than Which argument and responds to the criticism that Anselm makes an illicit leap from concept to reality. Finally, he gives a definite answer of ‘yes’ to the question of whether there exists an actually infinite being. The very next question of the Ordinatio deals with the unicity of the nature thus proved to exist. However, the De Primo Principio version concludes with this argument.
Since the argument is very long and has many parts, we shall content ourselves in this article with stating the premises for the existence of the first efficient cause, assuming that the reader will follow the citations to read the rest of the argument. The proof for the conclusion that "some efficient cause is simply first such that neither can it be an effect nor can it, by virtue of something other than itself, cause an effect" Ordinatio I.2.43 [26] runs something like this:
1) Something, A, is produced.
2) It is produced either by itself, nothing, or another.
3) Not by nothing, for nothing causes nothing.
4) Not by itself, for an effect never causes itself.
5) Therefore, by another; call it B.
6) We return to 2). B is produced either by itself, nothing, or another. The ascending series will either continue infinitely or we finally reach something which has nothing prior to it.
7) An infinite ascending series is impossible.
8) Therefore, a simply first efficient cause exists.
Scotus acknowledges two objections and deals with them accordingly. First is that he begs the question in assuming a first in the series. Here he argues that while many admit an infinite regress in an accidentally ordered series of causes, no philosopher admits infinite regress in an essentially ordered series. Scotus explains the differences between the two and offers proofs for the conclusion that an infinity of essentially order causes in a series is impossible.[27] Second, it is objected that his proof is not really a demonstration since it begins with a contingent premise. That something is produced is contingent and not necessary. Therefore, the proof proceeds from a contingent and not a necessary premise. Scotus says that while that is true, it is utterly manifest that things are produced or effected. But in order to respond, Scotus makes a modal move and reworks the argument. Now he argues from the possibility of production. "It is possible that something can be produced" is a necessary proposition. From there he is able to conclude that it is possible that the first efficient cause exists, and if it is possible that it exists, then it does exist. He assures us that the last claim will be proved later in the argument.[28] In the Lectura proof, Scotus argues the following way:
Although beings different from God are actually contingent with respect to their factual existence, nevertheless, they are not with respect to their possible existence. Hence, those entities which are called contingent with respect to their factual existence are necessary with respect to their possible existence – for instance, although “There exists a man” is contingent, nevertheless “It is possible that he exists” is necessary, because his existence does not include any contradiction. Therefore, “Something – different from God – is possible” is necessary, because being is divided into the contingent and the necessary. Just as necessity belongs to a necessary being in virtue of its condition or its quiddity, so possibility belongs to a possible being in virtue of its quiddity. If the first argument is alternatively qualified with the notion of ontological possibility, then we have necessary propositions as follows: It is possible that there is something different from God – it is not of itself (because then it would not be the case that it were possible), nor from nothing. Therefore, it is possible that it is from something else. Either it is possible that the other agent acts by virtue of itself – and not by virtue of something else, not being from something else – or it is not possible. If so, then it is possible that there is a first agent, and if it [is] possible that it exists, then it exists, just as we have proved before. If not and if there is no infinite regress, then the argument at once comes to a standstill.
More can and should be said about this fascinating argument, but we leave it to the reader to search out more of the argument. See especially http://www.logicmuseum.com/wiki/Authors/Duns_Scotus/Ordinatio/Ordinatio_I/D2/Q2B.
Illuminationism[edit]
Scotus argued against the version of illuminationism that had been defended earlier in the century by Henry of Ghent. In his Ordinatio (I.3.1.4) he argued against the sceptical consequences that Henry claimed would follow from abandoning divine illumination. Scotus argued that if our thinking were fallible in the way Henry had believed, such illumination could not, even in principle, ensure "certain and pure knowledge."[29]

When one of those that come together is incompatible with certainty, then certainty cannot be achieved. For just as from one premise that is necessary and one that is contingent nothing follows but a contingent conclusion, so from something certain and something uncertain, coming together in some cognition, no cognition that is certain follows (Ordinatio I.3.1.4 n.221).

Immaculate Conception[edit]
Perhaps the most influential point of Duns Scotus' theology was his defense of the Immaculate Conception of Mary (i.e., that Mary herself was conceived without sin). At the time, there was a great deal of argument about the subject. The general opinion was that it was appropriately deferential to the Mother of God, but it could not be seen how to resolve the problem that only with Christ's death would the stain of original sin be removed. The great philosophers and theologians of the West were divided on the subject (indeed, it appears that even Thomas Aquinas sided with those who denied the doctrine, though some Thomists dispute this). The feast day had existed in the East (though in the East, the feast is just of the Conception of Mary) since the seventh century and had been introduced in several dioceses in the West as well, even though the philosophical basis was lacking. Citing Anselm of Canterbury's principle, "potuit, decuit, ergo fecit" (He [i.e., God] could do it, it was appropriate, therefore He did it), Duns Scotus devised the following argument: Mary was in need of redemption like all other human beings, but through the merits of Jesus' crucifixion, given in advance, she was conceived without the stain of original sin. God could have brought it about (1) that she was never in original sin, (2) she was in sin only for an instant, (3) she was in sin for a period of time, being purged at the last instant. Whichever of these options was most excellent should probably be attributed to Mary.[30] This apparently careful statement provoked a storm of opposition at Paris, and suggested the line 'fired France for Mary without spot' in the famous poem "Duns Scotus's Oxford," by Gerard Manley Hopkins.
Scotus' argument appears in Pope Pius IX's 1854 declaration of the dogma of the Immaculate Conception, "at the first moment of Her conception, Mary was preserved free from the stain of original sin, in view of the merits of Jesus Christ."[31] Scotus' position was hailed as "a correct expression of the faith of the Apostles".[31]
Another of Scotus' positions also gained official approval of the Roman Catholic Church: his doctrine on the universal primacy of Christ became the underlying rationale for the feast of Christ the King instituted in 1925.[31]
During his pontificate, Pope John XXIII recommended the reading of Duns Scotus' theology to modern theology students.
Veneration[edit]
Long honored as a Blessed by the Order of Friars Minor, as well as in the Archdioceses of Edinburgh and Cologne, in the 19th-century the process was started seeking his recognition as such by the Holy See, on the basis of a cultus immemorabilis, i.e., one of ancient standing.[8] He was declared Venerable by Pope John Paul II in 1991, who officially recognized his liturgical cult, effectively beatifying him on 20 March 1993.[32]
Later reputation and influence[edit]
Later medieval period[edit]
Owing to Scotus' early and unexpected death, he left behind a large body of work in an unfinished or unedited condition. His students and disciples extensively edited his papers, often confusing them with works by other writers, in many cases leading to misattribution and confused transmission. Most thirteenth-century Franciscans followed Bonaventura, but the influence of Scotus (as well as that of his arch-rival William of Ockham) spread in the fourteenth century. Franciscan theologians in the late Middle Ages were thus divided between so-called Scotists and Ockhamists.[33] Fourteenth century followers included Francis of Mayrone (died 1325), Antonius Andreas (died 1320), William of Alnwick (died 1333), and John of Bassolis (died 1347), supposedly Scotus' favourite student.[34]
Sixteenth to nineteenth centuries[edit]
His reputation suffered during the English reformation, probably due to its association with the Franciscans. In a letter to Thomas Cromwell about his visit to Oxford in 1535, Richard Layton described how he saw the court of New College full of pages from Scotus's work "the wind blowing them into every corner".[35] John Leland described the Oxford Greyfriar's library in 1538 (just prior to its dissolution) as an accumulation of 'cobwebs, moths and bookworms'.[36]
Despite this, Scotism grew in Catholic Europe. Scotus' works were collected into many editions, particularly in the late fifteenth century with the advent of printing. His school was probably at the height of its popularity at the beginning of the seventeenth century; during the sixteenth and the seventeenth centuries there were even special Scotist chairs, e.g. at Paris, Rome, Coimbra, Salamanca, Alcalá, Padua, and Pavia. It flourished well into the seventeenth century, and its influence can be seen in such writers as Descartes and Bramhall. Interest dwindled in the eighteenth century, and the revival of scholastic philosophy, known as Neo-Scholasticism, was essentially a revival of Thomistic thinking.
Twentieth century[edit]





This article needs attention from an expert in section. Please add a reason or a talk parameter to this template to explain the issue with the article. WikiProject Section (or its Portal) may be able to help recruit an expert. (January 2013)


The twentieth century saw a resurgence of interest in Scotus, with a range of assessments of his thought.
On the one hand, Scotus has received interest from secular philosophers such as Peter King, Gyula Klima, Paul Vincent Spade and others.
For some today, Scotus is one of the most important Franciscan theologians and the founder of Scotism, a special form of Scholasticism. He came out of the Old Franciscan School, to which Haymo of Faversham (died 1244), Alexander of Hales (died 1245), John of Rupella (died 1245), William of Melitona (died 1260), St. Bonaventure (died 1274), Cardinal Matthew of Aquasparta (died 1289), John Peckham, Archbishop of Canterbury (died 1292), Richard of Middletown (died c. 1300), etc., belonged. He was known as "Doctor Subtilis" because of the subtle distinctions and nuances of his thinking. Later philosophers in the sixteenth century were less complimentary about his work, and accused him of sophistry. This led to the word "dunce", which developed from the name "Dunse" given to his followers in the 1500s, becoming used for "somebody who is incapable of scholarship".
An important question since the 1960s has revolved over whether Scotus' thought heralded a change in thinking on the nature of 'being', a change which marked a shift from Aquinas and other previous thinkers; this question has been particularly significant in recent years because it has come to be seen as a debate over the origins of 'modernity'. This line of argument first emerged in the 1960s among popular French philosophers who, in passing, singled out Duns Scotus as the figure whose theory of univocal being changed an earlier approach which Aquinas had shared with his predecessors.[37] Then, in 1990, the historian of philosophy Jean-Francois Courtine argued that, between the time of Aquinas in the mid-thirteenth century and Francisco Suárez at the turn of the seventeenth, a fundamentally new approach to being was developed, with Scotus taking a major part in its development.[38] During the 1990s, various scholars extended this argument to locate Scotus as the first thinker who succumbed to what Heidegger termed 'onto-theology'. In recent years, this criticism of Scotus has become disseminated in particular through the writings of the 'Radical Orthodox' group of theologians, centred around John Milbank and Catherine Pickstock.
Bibliography[edit]

Works in rough chronological order


Before 1295:

Parva logicalia

Quaestiones super Porphyrii Isagogem
Quaestiones in librum Praedicamentorum
Quaestiones in I et II librum Perihermeneias
Octo quaestiones in duos libros Perihermeneias
Quaestiones in libros Elenchorum




Quaestiones super libros De anima (1295–1298?)
Quaestiones super libros Metaphysicorum Aristotelis (1298–1300?; revised later)
Notabilia Scoti super Metaphysicam (a set of notes concerning books II-X and XII of Aristotle’s Metaphysics, discovered only in 1996[39])
Lectura (Early Oxford Lectures on the four books of the Sentences of Peter Lombard)

Books 1 and 2 (1300–1301)
Book 3 (probably written in Paris, 1303–04)
Book 4 (not extant)


Ordinatio or Opus Oxoniense (Oxford Lectures: a revision of the lectures given at Oxford, books 1 and 2 summer 1300-1302, books 3 and 4 1303–1304)
Collationes oxonienses (1303–04 or 1305–08)
Collationes parisienses (1302–07)
Reportatio parisiensis (Paris Lectures, 1302–07)
Quaestiones Quodlibetales (edited by Felix Alluntis in ‘’Obras del Doctor Sutil, Juan Duns Escoto’’, Madrid, Biblioteca de Autores Cristianos, 1963)
Tractatus de Primo Principio (Treatise on the First Principle) English Translation
Theoremata (uncertain date)


Dubious works


Theoremata


Spurious works


De Rerum Principio (Of the Beginning of Things) An inauthentic work once attributed to Scotus.


Latin editions


OPERA OMNIA. (Wadding Edition, so-called after its editor Luke Wadding) Lyon, 1639; reprinted Hildesheim: Georg Olms Verlagsbuchhandlung, 1968. [Despite the title, this edition does not represent all the works of Scotus. Certain works printed in it are no longer attributed to Scotus; certain works by Scotus are omitted (including his early ‘’Lectura‘’on the Sentences of Peter Lombard); what the book presents as Book I of Scotus's late ‘’Reportatio’’ is in fact an entirely separate work whose authenticity and authority are vigorously disputed.]
OPERA OMNIA. ('Vatican Edition” = VE) Civitas Vaticana: Typis Polyglottis Vaticanis, 1950–.

ORDINATIO (complete critical edition)
I, De Ordinatione Ioannis Duns Scoti disquisitio historico critica. Prologus totius operis, 1950.
II, Ordinatio. Liber Primus. Distinctiones 1-2, 1950.
III, Ordinatio. Liber Primus. Distinctio 3, 1954.
IV, Ordinatio. Liber Primus. Distinctiones 4-10, 1956.
V, Ordinatio. Liber Primus. Distinctiones 11-25, 1959.
VI, Ordinatio. Liber Primus. Distinctiones 26-48, 1963.
VII, Ordinatio. Liber Secundus. Distinctiones 1-3, 1973.
VIII, Ordinatio. Liber Secundus. Distinctiones 4-44, 2001.
IX, Ordinatio. Liber Tertius. Distinctiones 1-17, 2006.
X, Ordinatio. Liber Tertius. Distinctiones 26-40, 2007.
XI, Ordinatio. Liber Quartus. Distinctiones 1-7, 2008.
XII, Ordinatio. Liber Quartus. Distinctiones 8-13, 2010.
XIII, Ordinatio. Liber Quartus, Distinctiones 14-42, 2011.
XIV, Ordinatio. Liber Quartus, Distinctiones 43-49, 2013.
LECTURA
XVI, Lectura in Librum Primum Sententiarum. Prologus et Distinctiones 1-7, 1960.
XVII, Lectura in Librum Primum Sententiarum. Distinctiones 8-45, 1966.
XVIII, Lectura in Librum Secundum Sententiarum. Distinctiones 1-6, 1982.
XIX, Lectura in Librum Secundum Sententiarum. Distinctiones 7-44, 1993.
XX, Lectura in Librum Tertium Sententiarum. Distinctiones 1-17, 2003.
XXI, Lectura in Librum Tertium Sententiarum. Distinctiones 18-40, 2004.


OPERA PHILOSOPHICA (= OP). St. Bonaventure, NY: The Franciscan Institute:, 1997–2006:

Vol. I: Quaestiones super Porphyrius Isagoge et Aristoteles Categoriae, Franciscan Institute Publications, 1999. ISBN 978-1-57659-121-5
Vol. II: Quaestiones super Peri hermeneias et Sophistici Elenchis (along with) Theoremata, Franciscan Institute Publications, 2004, ISBN 978-1-57659-122-2.
Vol. III-IV: Quaestiones super libros Metaphysicorum Aristotelis Franciscan Institute Publications, 2004. ISBN 978-1-57659-124-6.
Vol. V: Quaestiones super Secundum et Tertium de Anima. Franciscan Institute Publications, 2006. ISBN 978-0-8132-1422-1.


The Examined Report of the Paris Lecture, Reportatio I-A, Volume 1, edited and translated by Allan B. Wolter, OFM and Oleg Bychkov. Franciscan Institute Publications, 2004 ISBN 978-1-57659-193-2
The Examined Report of the Paris Lecture, Reportatio I-A, Volume 2, edited and translated by Allan B. Wolter, OFM and Oleg Bychkov. Franciscan Institute Publications, 2008. ISBN 978-1-57659-150-5


English translations


John Duns Scotus, A Treatise on God as First Principle. Chicago: Franciscan Herald Press 1982. A Latin text and English translation of the De Primo Principio. Second edition, revised, with a commentary by Allan Wolter, (First edition 1966).
John Duns Scotus, God and Creatures. The Quodlibetal Questions, Translated by Wolter, Allan B., OFM, and Felix Alluntis, Washington, D.C.: The Catholic University of America Press, 1975.
Duns Scotus on the Will and Morality, Translated by Wolter, Allan B., OFM, Washington, DC: The Catholic University of America Press, 1986.
Duns Scotus: Philosophical Writings, Translated by Wolter, Allan B., OFM, Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Company, 1987.
Duns Scotus’ Parisian Proof for the Existence of God, edited By Allan B. Wolter and Marilyn McCord Adams, Franciscan Studies 42, 1982, pp.&#160;248–321. (Latin text and English translation).
John Duns Scotus, Contingency and Freedom. Lectura I 39, translation, commentary and introduction by A. Vos Jaczn, H. Veldhuis, A.H. Looman-Graaskamp, E. Dekker and N.W. den Bok. The New Synthese Historical Library 4. Dordrecht/Boston/London: Kluwer, 1994.
Questions on the Metaphysics of Aristotle by John Duns Scotus, Translated by Etzkorn, Girard J., and Allan B. Wolter, OFM, St. Bonaventure, NY: The Franciscan Institute, 1997–1998.
John Duns Scotus. Four Questions on Mary, Introduction with Latin text and English translation and notes by Allan B. Wolter, OFM, Franciscan Institute Publications, 2000.
John Duns Scotus. A Treatise on Potency and Act. Questions on the Metaphysics of Aristotle Book IX, Introduction with Latin text and English translation and notes by Allan B. Wolter, OFM, Franciscan Institute Publications, 2000.
John Duns Scotus. Political and Economic Philosophy, Introduction with Latin text and English translation and notes by Allan B. Wolter, OFM, Franciscan Institute Publications, 2001.
Duns Scotus on Divine Love: Texts and Commentary on Goodness and Freedom, God and Humans, translated by A. Vos, H. Veldhuis, E. Dekker, N.W. den Bok and A.J. Beck (ed.). Aldershot: Ashgate 2003.
John Duns Scotus. Early Oxford Lecture on Individuation, Introduction with Latin text and English translation and notes by Allan B. Wolter, OFM, Franciscan Institute Publications, 2005.
John Duns Scotus. Questions on Aristotle's Categories, Translated by Lloyd A. Newton, Washington, DC: Catholic University of America Press, 2014.
Duns Scotus on Time and Existence: The Questions on Aristotle's 'De interpretatione' , Translated with Introduction and Commentary by Edward Buckner and Jack Zupko, Washington, DC: Catholic University of America Press, 2014.

See also[edit]

Oxford Franciscan school
Virgin and Child with Saint Anne – early depictions of the Immaculate Conception in three generations

Notes[edit]


^ Together with Thomas Aquinas and William of Ockham. See e.g. the Plato.Stanford.edu articles "Duns Scotus" and "William of Ockham"
^ "People of Note: John Duns Scotus". Duns, Scotland.&#160;
^ Williams 2002, p. 2
^ Brampton, C. K. (1964). "Duns Scotus at Oxford, 1288–1301". Franciscan Studies 24 (Annual II): 5–20.&#160;
^ Although Vos (2006, p. 23) has objected that 'Duns' was actually his family name, as someone from Duns would have been known as 'de Duns'.
^ Vos 2006 p. 27. See also Roest, Bert (2000). A history of Franciscan education (c. 1210–1517). Brill. pp.&#160;21–24. ISBN&#160;978-90-04-11739-6.&#160;
^ Vos 2006 p. 27
^ a b "John Duns Scotus". Catholic Encyclopedia.&#160;
^ Narratur de Doctori Subtili qui in Prato clericorum, visa Generalis Ministri obedentia, dum actu Regens esse in scholis Parisiensibus, aut pauca aut nulla de rebus habita dispositione, Parisis exivit ut Coloniam iret, secundum ministri sententiam. William Vorilong, Opus super IV libros Sententiarum II, d. 44, q. 1 f. 161va.
^ Butler, Alban (1866). "St. Bonaventure, Cardinal, Bishop, and Doctor of the Church". The Lives of the Fathers, Martyrs, and Other Principal Saints VII. Dublin: James Duffy. note 15. Archived from the original on 2010. Retrieved 29 May 2014.&#160;
^ Bacon, Francis (1638). Historia Vitae et Mortis.&#160;
^ Latin text: "Haec de ordinatione ven. Fratris J. duns de ordine fratrum Minorum, qui floruit Cant Oxon et Parisius et obiit in Colonia." – quoted in Little 1932, p. 571, citing Callebaut 1928.
^ a b Pini, Giorgio (2005). "Univocity in Scotus’s Quaestiones super Metaphysicam: The Solution to a Riddle" (PDF). Medioevo 30: 69–110.&#160;
^ See e.g. Wolter 1995, p. 76 and passim
^ See the introduction to the critical edition: Duns Scoti Quaestiones in librum Porphyrii Isagoge et Quaestiones super Praedicamenta Aristotelis (Opera philosophica, I), xxix–xxxiv, xli–xlii.
^ Pini, Giorgio (2005). "Univocity in Scotus’s Quaestiones super Metaphysicam: The Solution to a Riddle" (PDF). Medioevo 30: 69–110.&#160;, although this is speculative
^ Thomas Williams (2009). "John Duns Scotus", Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (online).
^ Ashworth 1987
^ R.P.E. Longpre
^ Die Kategorien- und Bedeutungslehre des Duns Scotus ("Duns Scotus' Theory of the Categories and of Meaning", 1915)
^ Opus Oxoniense I iii 1–2, quoted in Grenz 2005, p. 55
^ Honderich p. 209
^ Lectura I, d. 2, q. 2, 40 Now efficiency can be considered either as a metaphysical or as a physical property. The metaphysical property is more extensive than the physical for “to give existence to another” is of broader scope than “to give existence by way of movement or change.” And even if all existence were given in the latter fashion, the notion of the one is still not that of the other. It is not efficiency as a physical attribute, however, but efficiency as the metaphysician considers it that provides a more effective way of proving God’s existence, for there are more attributes in metaphysics than in physics whereby the existence of God can be established. It can be shown, for example, from “composition and simplicity,” from “act and potency,” from “one and many,” from those features which are properties of being. Wherefore, if you find one extreme of the disjunction imperfectly realized in a creature, you conclude that the alternate, the perfect extreme exists in God. Averroës, therefore, in attacking Avicenna at the end of Bk. I of the Physics, 14 is incorrect when he claims that to prove that God exists is the job of the physicist alone, because this can be established only by way of motion, and in no other way —as if metaphysics began with a conclusion which was not evident in itself, but needed to be proved in physics (For Averroës asserts this falsehood at the end of the first book of the Physics). In point of fact, however, [God’s existence] can be shown more truly and in a greater variety of ways by means of those metaphysical attributes which characterize being. The proof lies in this that the first efficient cause imparts not merely this fluid existence [called motion] but existence in an unqualified sense, which is still more perfect and widespread.
^ Summa Contra Gentiles, I, 13 http://dhspriory.org/thomas/ContraGentiles1.htm#13
^ "We shall first set forth the arguments by which Aristotle proceeds to prove that God exists." SCG I, 13.2 http://dhspriory.org/thomas/ContraGentiles1.htm#13
^ http://www.logicmuseum.com/wiki/Authors/Duns_Scotus/Ordinatio/Ordinatio_I/D2/Q2B
^ See paragraphs 46-55 at http://www.logicmuseum.com/wiki/Authors/Duns_Scotus/Ordinatio/Ordinatio_I/D2/Q2B
^ See paragraph 56 at http://www.logicmuseum.com/wiki/Authors/Duns_Scotus/Ordinatio/Ordinatio_I/D2/Q2B
^ Pasnau, Robert (2011). "Divine Illumination". The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.&#160;
^ Ordinatio III, d.3, q.1
^ a b c "The Life of Blessed John Duns Scotus". EWTN.&#160;
^ "Ceremonia de Reconocimiento del Culto Litúrgico a Duns Escoto y Beatificación de Dina Bélanger". Vatican News Service. 20 March 1993.&#160;(Spanish)
^ Janz
^ Courtenay, William (January 2012). "Early Scotists at Paris: A Reconsideration". Franciscan Studies 69 (1): 175–229. doi:10.1353/frc.2012.0009.&#160;
^ R.W. Dixon, History of the Church of England from the Abolition of the Roman Jurisdiction, 1:303
^ Catto, Jeremy, "Franciscan Learning in England, 1450–1540", in The Religious Orders in Pre-Reformation England, ed. Clarke 2002
^ J Derrida, L'Écriture et la différence, (Paris, 1967), p216; G Deleuze, Différence et répétition, (Paris, 1968), pp. 52–8, cited in John Marenbon, "Aquinas, Radical Orthodoxy, and the importance of truth", in Wayne J Hankey and Douglas Hedley, eds, Deconstructing radical orthodoxy: postmodern theology, rhetoric and truth, (Ashgate, 2005), p. 56.
^ John Marenbon, "Aquinas, Radical Orthodoxy, and the importance of truth", in Wayne J Hankey and Douglas Hedley, eds, Deconstructing radical orthodoxy: postmodern theology, rhetoric and truth, (Ashgate, 2005), p. 56.
^ Giorgio Pini, ‘’Duns Scotus' Literal Commentary on the «Metaphysics» and the «Notabilia Scoti super Metaphysicam» (Milan, Biblioteca Ambrosiana, C 62 Sup, ff.51r-98r)’’, Bulletin de philosophie médiévale, 38 (1996) 141-142.


References[edit]

Bos, Egbert P. (1998). John Duns Scotus: Renewal of Philosophy. Acts of the Third Symposium organized by the Dutch Society for Medieval Philosophy Medium Aevum. Amsterdam: Rodopi. ISBN&#160;978-90-420-0081-0.&#160;
Cross, Richard (ed.), The Opera Theologica of John Duns Scotus. Proceedings of “The Quadruple Congress” on John Duns Scotus, Part 2. Archa Verbi. Subsidia 4, Franciscan Institute Publications, 2012, ISBN ISBN 978-3-402-10214-5.
Cross, Richard (2014). Duns Scotus's Theory of Cognition. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN&#160;978-0-19-968488-5.&#160;
Frank, William A.; Wolter, Allan B. (1995). Duns Scotus, Metaphysician. West Lafayette: Purdue University Press. ISBN&#160;978-1-55753-072-1.&#160;
Gracia, Jorge J. E.; Noone, Timothy B. (2003). A Companion to Philosophy in the Middle Ages. Cambridge: Blackwell Pub. ISBN&#160;978-0-631-21672-8.&#160;
Grenz, Stanley (2005). The Named God And The Question Of Being: A Trinitarian Theo-ontology. Louisville: Westminster John Knox Press. ISBN&#160;978-0-664-22204-8.&#160;
Honderich, Ted (1995). "Duns Scotus". The Oxford Companion to Philosophy. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN&#160;978-0-19-866132-0.&#160;
Honnefelder Ludger, Möhle Hannes, Speer Andreas, Kobusch Theo, Bullido del Barrio Susana (eds.), Johannes Duns Scotus 1308-2008: Die philosophischen Perspektiven seines Werkes/Investigations into his Philosophy. Proceedings of "The Quadruple Congress" on John Duns Scotus, Part 3. Archa Verbi. Subsidia 5, Franciscan Institute Publications, 2011,ISBN 978-3-402-10215-2.
Ingham, Mary Beth CSJ, and Bychkof, OLef (eds.), John Duns Scotus, Philosopher. Proceedings of “The Quadruple Congress” on John Duns Scotus, Part 1. Archa Verbi. Subsidia 3, Franciscan Institute Publications, 2010, ISBN 978-3-402-10213-8.
Ingham, Mary Beth CSJ, Scotus for Dunces: An Introduction to the Subtle Doctor, Franciscan Institute Publications, 2003.
Ingham, Mary Beth CSJ, The Harmony of Goodness: Mutuality and Moral Living According to John Duns Scotus, Franciscan Institute Publications, 1997.
Kretzmann, Norman; Kenny, Anthony; Pinborg, Jan; Stump, Eleonore (1982). The Cambridge History of Later Medieval Philosophy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN&#160;978-0-521-36933-6.&#160; Cite uses deprecated parameter |coauthors= (help)
Shannon, Thomas The Ethical Theory of John Duns Scotus, Franciscan Institute Publications, 1995.
Vos, Antonie (2006). The Philosophy of John Duns Scotus. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. ISBN&#160;978-0-7486-2462-1.&#160;
Williams, Thomas (2002). The Cambridge Companion to Duns Scotus. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN&#160;978-0-521-63563-9.&#160;
Wolter, Allan B. OFM and O'Neil, Blane OFM, John Duns Scotus: Mary's Architect, Franciscan Institute Publications, 1993.
Wolter, Allan B. OFM, The Philosophical Theology of John Duns Scotus, IUthaca, Cornell University Press, 1990.
Wolter, Allan B. OFM, Scotus and Ockham. Selected Essays, Franciscan Institute Publications, 2003.

External links[edit]



Wikisource has original text related to this article:
Duns Scotus






Wikiquote has quotations related to: Duns Scotus



Site of the International Scotistic Commission (Rome, Italy)
John Duns Scotus entry by Thomas Williams in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
John Duns Scotus (1266–1308) entry by Jeffrey Hause in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy
Bibliography on Duns Scotus from 1950 by Tobias Hoffmann
Catholic Encyclopedia article on John Duns Scotus
Site about Duns Scotus of the Research Group John Duns Scotus (Utrecht, NL)
Thomas Williams' pages on Scotus
The Realist Ontology of John Duns Scotus with an annotated bibliography
Article by Parthenius Minges on Scotists and Scotism at the Jacques Maritain Center
Local history site of Blessed John Duns Scotus' birthplace, Duns, Berwickshire, Scotland
Online Galleries, History of Science Collections, University of Oklahoma Libraries High resolution images of works by Duns Scotus in .jpg and .tiff format.









v
t
e


Catholic Church







Organizations, papacy, teachings and liturgical traditions






History



Jesus
Twelve Apostles
Early Christianity
History of the papacy
Ecumenical Councils
Missions
Great Schism of East
Crusades
Great Schism of West
Protestant Reformation
Counter-Reformation
Catholic Church by country
Vatican City

index













Hierarchy



Pope
Cardinals
Patriarchs
Major Archbishops
Primates
Metropolitans
Archbishops
Diocesan Bishops
Coadjutor Bishops
Auxiliary Bishops
Titular Bishops
Bishops Emeriti
Priesthood








Theology



Body and Soul
Divine Grace
Dogma
One, Holy, Catholic and Apostolic Church
Original sin
Saints

list


Salvation
Sermon on the Mount
The Ten Commandments
Trinity
Worship








Sacraments



Baptism
Confirmation
Eucharist
Penance
Anointing of the Sick

Last rites


Holy Orders
Matrimony








Mariology



Roman Catholic Mariology
Assumption
History of Mariology
Immaculate Conception
Mariology of the popes
Mariology of the saints
Mother of God
Perpetual Virginity
Veneration








Doctors
of the Church







Gregory the Great
Ambrose
Augustine of Hippo
Jerome
John Chrysostom
Basil of Caesarea
Gregory of Nazianzus
Athanasius of Alexandria
Cyril of Alexandria
Cyril of Jerusalem
John of Damascus
Bede the Venerable
Ephrem the Syrian
Thomas Aquinas
Bonaventure
Anselm of Canterbury
Isidore of Seville
Peter Chrysologus
Leo the Great
Peter Damian
Bernard of Clairvaux
Hilary of Poitiers
Alphonsus Liguori
Francis de Sales
Peter Canisius
John of the Cross
Robert Bellarmine
Albertus Magnus
Anthony of Padua
Lawrence of Brindisi
Teresa of Ávila
Catherine of Siena
Thérèse of Lisieux
John of Ávila
Hildegard of Bingen
Gregory of Narek











Pope Francis



Conclave
Inauguration
Theology
Canonizations
Visits








Preceding popes



Pope Benedict XVI
Pope John Paul II
Pope John Paul I
Pope Paul VI
Pope John XXIII
Pope Pius XII
Pope Pius XI
Pope Benedict XV
Pope Pius X
Pope Leo XIII
(more)








Religious institutes
and similar



Assumptionists
Augustinians
Benedictines
Capuchin Order
Carmelites
Carthusians
Congregations of Holy Cross
Dominican Order
Franciscan orders
Jesuits
Oratory of Saint Philip Neri








International Associations
of the Faithful



International Federation of Catholic Parochial Youth Movements
International Federation of Catholic Universities
International Kolping Society
Schoenstatt Movement
International Union of Catholic Esperantists
Sant'Egidio Community
(more)








Vatican II



Definition of the Church
Dei verbum
Gaudium et spes
Lumen gentium
Nostra aetate
Sacrosanctum Concilium








Particular Churches



Albanian
Armenian
Belarusian
Bulgarian
Chaldean
Coptic
Croatian
Eritrean
Ethiopian
Georgian
Greek
Hungarian
Italo-Albanian
Latin
Macedonian
Maronite
Melkite
Romanian
Russian
Ruthenian
Slovak
Syriac
Syro-Malabar
Syro-Malankara
Ukrainian








Liturgical rites



Alexandrian
Ambrosian
Anglican Use
Antiochian
Armenian
Byzantine
East Syrian
Mozarabic
Ordinariate Use
Roman
Sarum











 Catholicism portal
 Pope portal
















v
t
e


History of the Catholic Church






General



History of the Catholic Church
History of Christianity
History of the Papacy
History of the Roman Curia
Timeline of the Catholic Church
Art in Roman Catholicism
Catholic Ecumenical Councils
Catholic religious institutes
Christian monasticism
Papal States
Role of the Christian Church in civilization








Church beginnings



Jesus
Twelve Apostles
Saint Peter
Paul the Apostle
Saint Stephen
John the Apostle
Great Commission
Council of Jerusalem
Apostolic Age
Apostolic Fathers
Ignatius of Antioch
Irenaeus
Pope Victor I
Tertullian









Constantine to
Pope Gregory I




Constantine the Great and Christianity
Arianism
Archbasilica of St. John Lateran
First Council of Nicaea
Pope Sylvester I
First Council of Constantinople
Biblical canon
Jerome
Vulgate
First Council of Ephesus
Council of Chalcedon
Benedict of Nursia
Second Council of Constantinople
Pope Gregory I
Gregorian chant








Early Middle Ages



Third Council of Constantinople
Saint Boniface
Byzantine Iconoclasm
Second Council of Nicaea
Charlemagne
Pope Leo III
Fourth Council of Constantinople
East–West Schism








High Middle Ages



Pope Urban II
Investiture Controversy
Crusades
First Council of the Lateran
Second Council of the Lateran
Third Council of the Lateran
Pope Innocent III
Latin Empire
Francis of Assisi
Fourth Council of the Lateran
Inquisition
First Council of Lyon
Second Council of Lyon
Bernard of Clairvaux
Thomas Aquinas








Late Middle Ages



Pope Boniface VIII
Avignon Papacy
Pope Clement V
Council of Vienne
Knights Templar
Catherine of Siena
Pope Alexander VI









Protestant Reformation
Counter-Reformation




Protestant Reformation
Counter-Reformation
Thomas More
Pope Leo X
Society of Jesus
Ignatius of Loyola
Francis Xavier
Dissolution of the Monasteries
Council of Trent
Pope Pius V
Tridentine Mass
Teresa of Ávila
John of the Cross
Philip Neri
Robert Bellarmine









Baroque Period to the
French Revolution




Pope Innocent XI
Pope Benedict XIV
Suppression of the Society of Jesus
Anti-clericalism
Pope Pius VI
Shimabara Rebellion
Edict of Nantes
Dechristianisation of France during the French Revolution








19th century



Pope Pius VII
Pope Pius IX
Dogma of the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary
Our Lady of La Salette
Our Lady of Lourdes
First Vatican Council
Papal infallibility
Pope Leo XIII
Mary of the Divine Heart
Prayer of Consecration to the Sacred Heart
Rerum novarum








20th century



Pope Pius X
Our Lady of Fátima
Persecutions of the Catholic Church and Pius XII
Pope Pius XII
Pope Pius XII Consecration to the Immaculate Heart of Mary
Dogma of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary
Lateran Treaty
Pope John XXIII
Second Vatican Council
Pope Paul VI
Pope John Paul I
Pope John Paul II
World Youth Day

1995
2000










21st century



Catholic Church sexual abuse cases
Pope Benedict XVI
World Youth Day

2002
2005
2008
2011
2013


Pope Francis








By country or region



Belize
Brazil
Canada
Cuba
France
Germany
Great Britain
Haiti
Hispano-America
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Mexico
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Spain
United States
Vatican City
Venezuela
Vietnam











Catholicism Portal
Pope Portal
















v
t
e


History of Catholic theology









Theologians
Teachings
Heresies








General history



History of the Catholic Church
Early Christianity
History of the Papacy
Ecumenical Councils
Timeline of the Catholic Church
History of Christianity
History of Christian theology











Church beginnings



Paul
Clement of Rome
First Epistle of Clement
Didache
Ignatius of Antioch
Polycarp
Epistle of Barnabas
Shepherd of Hermas
Justin Martyr
Epistle to Diognetus
Irenaeus
Montanism
Tertullian
Origen
Antipope Novatian
Cyprian









Constantine to
Pope Gregory I




Eusebius
Athanasius of Alexandria
Arianism
Pelagianism
Nestorianism
Monophysitism
Ephrem the Syrian
Hilary of Poitiers
Cyril of Jerusalem
Basil of Caesarea
Gregory Nazianzus
Gregory of Nyssa
Ambrose
John Chrysostom
Jerome
Augustine of Hippo
John Cassian
Cyril of Alexandria
Peter Chrysologus
Pope Leo I
Boethius
Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite
Pope Gregory I








Early Middle Ages



Isidore of Seville
Maximus the Confessor
Monothelitism
Ecthesis
Bede
John of Damascus
Iconoclasm
Transubstantiation dispute
Predestination disputes
Paulinus II of Aquileia
Alcuin
Rabanus Maurus
Paschasius Radbertus
John Scotus Eriugena








High Middle Ages



Roscellinus
Gregory of Narek
Berengar of Tours
Peter Damian
Anselm of Canterbury
Joachim of Fiore
Peter Abelard
Decretum Gratiani
Bernard of Clairvaux
Peter Lombard
Anselm of Laon
Hildegard of Bingen
Hugh of Saint Victor
Dominic de Guzmán
Robert Grosseteste
Francis of Assisi
Anthony of Padua
Bonaventure
Albertus Magnus
Thomas Aquinas
Thomism
Roger Bacon








Mysticism and reforms



Ramon Llull
Duns Scotus
Dante Alighieri
William of Ockham
Richard Rolle
Catherine of Siena
Brigit of Sweden
Meister Eckhart
Johannes Tauler
Walter Hilton
The Cloud of Unknowing
Heinrich Seuse
Geert Groote
Devotio Moderna
Julian of Norwich
Thomas à Kempis
Nicholas of Kues
Marsilio Ficino
Girolamo Savonarola
Giovanni Pico della Mirandola









Protestant Reformation
Counter-Reformation




Desiderius Erasmus
Thomas Cajetan
Thomas More
John Fisher
Johann Eck
Francisco de Vitoria
Ignatius of Loyola
Francisco de Osuna
John of Avila
Francis Xavier
Teresa of Ávila
Luis de León
John of the Cross
Petrus Canisius
Luis de Molina
Molinism
Robert Bellarmine
Francisco Suárez
Lawrence of Brindisi
Francis de Sales









Baroque Period to
French Revolution




Tommaso Campanella
Pierre de Bérulle
Mary of Jesus of Ágreda
Jean-Jacques Olier
Louis Thomassin
Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet
François Fénelon
Cornelius Jansen
Jansenism
Blaise Pascal
Nicolas Malebranche
Giambattista Vico
Alphonsus Liguori
Louis de Montfort
Maria Gaetana Agnesi
Alfonso Muzzarelli
Johann Michael Sailer
Clemens Maria Hofbauer








19th century



Joseph Görres
Ignaz von Döllinger
John Henry Newman
Jaime Balmes
Gaetano Sanseverino
Giovanni Maria Cornoldi
Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler
Giuseppe Pecci
Joseph Hergenröther
Tommaso Maria Zigliara
Modernism
Léon Bloy
Friedrich von Hügel
George Tyrrell
Maurice Blondel
Thérèse of Lisieux








20th–21st century



G. K. Chesterton
Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange
Joseph Maréchal
Pierre Teilhard de Chardin
Jacques Maritain
Étienne Gilson
Gabriel Marcel
Marie-Dominique Chenu
Romano Guardini
Edith Stein
Henri de Lubac
Gabriel Roschini
Josemaría Escrivá
Adrienne von Speyr
Karl Rahner
Yves Congar
Bernard Lonergan
Emmanuel Mounier
Jean Daniélou
Hans Urs von Balthasar
Edward Schillebeeckx
Thomas Merton
Raimondo Spiazzi
René Girard
Pope Benedict XVI
Johann Baptist Metz
Henri Nouwen
Walter Kasper
Jean-Luc Marion
Tomáš Halík











Catholicism portal
Pope portal
















v
t
e


Medieval philosophers






Islamic




Early



Al-Jahiz
Alkindus
Ibn al-Rawandi
Al-Razi (Rhazes)
Al-Farabi (Alpharabius)
Ibn Masarra
Al Amiri
Ebn Meskavayh
Ibn al-Haytham (Alhazen)
Abu Rayhan Biruni
"Brethren of Purity"








High



Avicenna
Ibn Hazm
Al-Ghazali (Algazel)
Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī
Ibn Bajjah (Avempace)
Ayn al-Quzat Hamadani
Ibn Tufail
Averroes








Late



Ibn Sab'in
Shahab al-Din Suhrawardi
Fakhr ad-Din ar-Razi
Rashid al-Din
Ibn Arabi
Zachariah Kazwin
Abd-el-latif
Athīr al-Dīn al-Abharī
Nasir al-Din al-Tusi
Ibn al-Nafis
Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi
Ibn Taymiyyah
Ibn Khaldun











Jewish




Medieval



Saadia Gaon
Solomon ibn Gabirol
Judah Halevi
Abraham ibn Daud
Maimonides
Nahmanides
Gersonides
Hasdai Crescas
Joseph Albo











Christian




Early



"Church Fathers"
Augustine of Hippo
Boethius
Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite
Isidore of Seville
Johannes Scotus Eriugena
Alcuin








11–12th
century



"Scholasticism"
Anselm of Canterbury
Peter Abelard
Anselm of Laon
Hugh of Saint Victor
Richard of Saint Victor
Roscelin
Peter Lombard
Alexander of Hales
Bernard of Chartres
Dominicus Gundissalinus
Gilbert de la Porrée
Alain de Lille








13–14th
century



Robert Grosseteste
Albertus Magnus
Bonaventure
Thomas Aquinas
Boetius of Dacia
Henry of Ghent
Roger Bacon
John Peckham
Ramon Llull
Petrus Aureolus
Petrus Peregrinus de Maricourt
Durandus
Giles of Rome
Godfrey of Fontaines
Duns Scotus
William of Ockham








Late



Jean Buridan
Nicole Oresme
Albert of Saxony
Francesc Eiximenis
Vincent Ferrer
Paul of Venice
Lambertus de Monte
John Hennon












See also Renaissance philosophy














v
t
e


Metaphysics






Metaphysicians



Parmenides
Plato
Aristotle
Plotinus
Duns Scotus
Thomas Aquinas
Francisco Suárez
Nicolas Malebranche
René Descartes
John Locke
David Hume
Thomas Reid
Immanuel Kant
Isaac Newton
Arthur Schopenhauer
Baruch Spinoza
Georg W. F. Hegel
George Berkeley
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz
Henri Bergson
Friedrich Nietzsche
Charles Sanders Peirce
Joseph Maréchal
Ludwig Wittgenstein
Martin Heidegger
Alfred N. Whitehead
Bertrand Russell
Dorothy Emmet
G. E. Moore
Jean-Paul Sartre
Gilbert Ryle
Hilary Putnam
P. F. Strawson
R. G. Collingwood
Adolph Stöhr
Rudolf Carnap
Saul Kripke
Willard V. O. Quine
G. E. M. Anscombe
Donald Davidson
Michael Dummett
David Malet Armstrong
David Lewis
Alvin Plantinga
Peter van Inwagen
Derek Parfit
more ...








Theories



Abstract object theory
Action theory
Anti-realism
Determinism
Dualism
Enactivism
Essentialism
Existentialism
Free will
Idealism
Libertarianism
Liberty
Materialism
Meaning of life
Monism
Naturalism
Nihilism
Phenomenalism
Realism
Physicalism
Pirsig's metaphysics of Quality
Platonic idealism
Relativism
Scientific realism
Solipsism
Subjectivism
Substance theory
Type theory








Concepts



Abstract object
Anima mundi
Being
Category of being
Causality
Choice
Cogito ergo sum
Concept
Embodied cognition
Entity
Essence
Existence
Experience
Hypostatic abstraction
Idea
Identity
Identity and change
Information
Insight
Intelligence
Intention
Linguistic modality
Matter
Meaning
Memetics
Mental representation
Mind
Motion
Necessity
Notion
Object
Pattern
Perception
Physical body
Principle
Property
Qualia
Quality
Reality
Soul
Subject
Substantial form
Thought
Time
Truth
Type–token distinction
Universal
Unobservable
Value
more ...








Related topics



Axiology
Cosmology
Epistemology
Interpretations of quantum mechanics
Meta-
Ontology
Philosophy of mind
Philosophy of psychology
Philosophy of self
Philosophy of space and time
Teleology
Theoretical physics











 Category
 Portal
 WikiProject
















v
t
e


Notable logicians









Anderson
Aristotle
Averroes
Avicenna
Bain
Barwise
Bernays
Boole
Boolos
Cantor
Carnap
Church
Chrysippus
Cohen
Curry
De Morgan
Dummett
Frege
Geach
Gentzen
Gödel
Hintikka
Hilbert
Kleene
Kripke
Leibniz
Lewis
Löwenheim
Łukasiewicz
Barcan Marcus
Peano
Peirce
Prior
Putnam
Quine
Russell
Schröder
Scott
Scotus
Skolem
Smullyan
Tarski
Turing
Whitehead
William of Ockham
Wittgenstein
Zermelo













Authority control



WorldCat
VIAF: 120697851
LCCN: n50066853
ISNI: 0000 0001 2149 1484
GND: 118528165
SELIBR: 183035
SUDOC: 026654989
BNF: cb11886212b (data)
NLA: 35267407
NKC: jn19992000351
ICCU: IT\ICCU\CFIV\070281















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Duns_Scotus&amp;oldid=691732710"					
				Categories: 1260s births1308 deathsPeople from DunsScottish Friars Minor13th-century Roman Catholic priests14th-century Roman Catholic priestsScottish Roman Catholic priestsAlumni of the University of OxfordAlumni of Merton College, Oxford13th-century Latin writers13th-century philosophers14th-century Latin writers14th-century philosophersLatin commentators on AristotleLogiciansPhilosophers of languageRoman Catholic philosophersScholastic philosophersScottish philosophersScottish scholars and academicsRoman Catholic theologiansUniversity of Paris facultyFranciscan theologians13th-century theologiansPremature burialsBeatifications by Pope John Paul II13th-century venerated Christians14th-century venerated ChristiansScottish beatified peopleFranciscan beatified peopleHidden categories: Articles with Spanish-language external linksUse dmy dates from April 2014Use British English from April 2014Articles with hCardsArticles needing expert attention with no reason or talk parameterArticles needing expert attention from August 2012All articles needing expert attentionAll articles that may contain original researchArticles that may contain original research from January 2013Articles needing expert attention from January 2013Pages containing cite templates with deprecated parametersWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiersWikipedia articles with SBN identifiers				
							
		
		
			