


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Event (philosophy)
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				In philosophy, events are objects in time or instantiations of properties in objects. However, a universal definition has not been reached, as multiple theories exist concerning events.



Contents


1 Kim’s property-exemplification
2 Davidson
3 Lewis
4 Badiou
5 Deleuze
6 See also
7 References
8 External links



Kim’s property-exemplification[edit]
Jaegwon Kim theorized that events are structured.
They are composed of three things:

Object(s) [x],
a property [P] and
time or a temporal interval [t].

Events are defined using the operation [x, P, t].
A unique event is defined by two principles:

a) the existence condition and
b) the identity condition.

The existence condition states “[x, P, t] exists if and only if object x exemplifies the n-adic P at time t”. This means a unique event exists if the above is met. The identity condition states “[x, P, t] is [y, Q, t`] if and only if x=y, P=Q and t=t`].
Kim uses these to define events under five conditions:

One, they are unrepeatable, unchangeable particulars that include changes and the states and conditions of that event.
Two, they have a semi-temporal location.
Three, only their constructive property creates distinct events.
Four, holding a constructive property as a generic event creates a type-token relationship between events, and events are not limited to their three requirements (i.e. [x, P, t]). Critics of this theory such as Myles Brand have suggested that the theory be modified so that an event had a spatiotemporal region; consider the event of a flash of lightning. The idea is that an event must include both the span of time of the flash of lightning and the area in which it occurred.


Other problems exist within Kim’s theory, as he never specified what properties were (e.g. universals, tropes, natural classes, etc.). In addition, it is not specified if properties are few or abundant. The following is Kim’s response to the above.

. . . [T]he basic generic events may be best picked out relative to a scientific theory, whether the theory is a common-sense theory of the behavior of middle-sized objects or a highly sophisticated physical theory. They are among the important properties, relative to the theory, in terms of which lawful regularities can be discovered, described, and explained. The basic parameters in terms of which the laws of the theory are formulated would, on this view, give us our basic generic events, and the usual logical, mathematical, and perhaps other types of operations on them would yield complex, defined generic events. We commonly recognize such properties as motion, colors, temperatures, weights, pushing, and breaking, as generic events and states, but we must view this against the background of our common-sense explanatory and predictive scheme of the world around us. I think it highly likely that we cannot pick out generic events completely a priori.[1]

There is also a major debate about the essentiality of a constitutive object. There are two major questions involved in this: If one event occurs, could it have occurred in the same manner if it were another person, and could it occur in the same manner if it would have occurred at a different time? Kim holds that neither are true and that different conditions (i.e. a different person or time) would lead to a separate event. However, some consider it natural to assume the opposite.
Davidson[edit]





This section does not cite any references (sources). Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2015)


Donald Davidson and John Lemmon proposed a theory of events that had two major conditions, respectively: a causal criterion and a spatiotemporal criterion.
The causal criterion defines an event as two events being the same if and only if they have the same cause and effect.
The spatiotemporal criterion defines an event as two events being the same if and only if they occur in the same space at the same time. Davidson however provided this scenario; if a metal ball becomes warmer during a certain minute, and during the same minute rotates through 35 degrees, must we say that these are the same event? However, one can argue that the warming of the ball and the rotation are possibly temporally separated and are therefore separate events.
Lewis[edit]





This section does not cite any references (sources). Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2015)


David Lewis theorized that events are merely spatiotemporal regions and properties (i.e. membership of a class). It defines an event as “e is an event only if it is a class of spatiotemporal regions, both thisworldly (assuming it occurs in the actual world) and otherworldly.” The only problem with this definition is it only tells us what an event could be, but does not define a unique event. This theory entails modal realism, which assumes possible worlds exist; worlds are defined as sets containing all objects that exist as a part of that set. However, this theory is controversial. Some philosophers have attempted to remove possible worlds, and reduce them to other entities. They hold that the world we exist in is the only world that actually exists, and that possible worlds are only possibilities.
Lewis’ theory is composed of four key points. Firstly, the non-duplication principle; it states that x and y are separate events if and only if there is one member of x that is not a member of y (or vice versa). Secondly, there exist regions that are subsets of possible worlds and thirdly, events are not structured by an essential time.
Badiou[edit]
In Being and Event, Alain Badiou writes that the event is a multiple which basically does not make sense according to the rules of the "situation," in other words existence. Hence, the event "is not," and therefore, in order for there to be an event, there must be an "intervention" which changes the rules of the situation in order to allow that particular event to be ("to be" meaning to be a multiple which belongs to the multiple of the situation&#160;— these terms are drawn from or defined in reference to set theory). In his view, there is no "one," and everything that is is a "multiple." "One" happens when the situation "counts," or accounts for, acknowledges, or defines something: it "counts it as one." For the event to be counted as one by the situation, or counted in the one of the situation, an intervention needs to decide its belonging to the situation. This is because his definition of the event violates the prohibition against self-belonging (in other words, it is a set-theoretical definition which violates set theory's rules of consistency), thus does not count as extant on its own.[2]
Deleuze[edit]
Gilles Deleuze lectured on the concept of event on March 10, 1987. A sense of the lecture is described by James Williams.[3] Williams also wrote, "From the point of view of the difference between two possible worlds, the event is all important".[4] He also stated, "Every event is revolutionary due to an integration of signs, acts and structures through the whole event. Events are distinguished by the intensity of this revolution, rather than the types of freedom or chance."[5] In 1988 Deleuze published a magazine article "Signes et événements"[6]
In his book Nietszche and Philosophy, he addresses the question "Which one is beautiful?" In the preface to the English translation he wrote:

The one that ... does not refer to an individual, to a person,but rather to an event, that is, to the forces in their various relationships to a proposition or phenomenon, and the genetic relationship that determines these forces (power).[7]

See also[edit]

Event (disambiguation)
Random event

References[edit]


^ Jaegwon Kim (1993) Supervenience and Mind, page 37, Cambridge University Press
^ Alain Badiou (1988) L'Être et l'Événement
^ Charles J. Stivale (editor) (2011) Gilles Deleuze: Key Concepts, 2nd edition, chapter 6: Event, pp 80–90
^ James Williams (2003) Gilles Deleuze’s Difference and Repetition: A Critical Introduction and Guide, page 78, Edinburgh University Press
^ Williams 2003 p xi
^ Gilles Deleuze (1988) "Signes et événements", Magazine Littéraire, #257, pages 16 to 25
^ Michael Hart (1993) Gilles Deleuze: An apprenticeship in philosophy, page 31, University of Minnesota Press ISBN 0-8166-2160-8


External links[edit]

Roberto Casati &amp; Achille Varzi, Events, from Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Susan Schneider, Events, from The Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Byron Kaldis, Events, from Encyclopedia of Philosophy and the Social Sciences.









v
t
e


Time






Key concepts



Past

history
deep time


Present
Future

futurology
Far future

Far future in religion
Far future in science fiction and popular culture
Timeline of the far future




Eternity

arguments for
Eternal return


Immortality











Measurement and
standards




Chronometry



UTC
UT
TAI
Unit of time
Planck time
Second
Minute
Hour
Day
Week
Month
Year
Decade
Century
Millennium
Tropical year
Solar year
Sidereal year








Measurement
systems



Time zone
12-hour clock
24-hour clock
Daylight saving time
New Earth Time
Solar time
Sidereal time
Metric time
Decimal time
Hexadecimal time








Calendars



Gregorian
Julian
Hebrew
Islamic
Lunar
Solar Hijri
Mayan
Intercalation
Leap second
Leap year











Clocks



Horology
History of timekeeping devices
Main types

astrarium
atomic

quantum


marine
sundial
sundial markup schema
watch
water-based













Chronology
History






Astronomical chronology
Big History
Calendar era
Chronicle
Deep time
Periodization
Regnal year
Timeline











Religion
Mythology






Dreamtime
Kāla
Kalachakra
Prophecy
Time and fate deities
Wheel of time








Philosophy of time



A-series and B-series
B-theory of time
Causality
Duration
Endurantism
Eternal return
Eternalism
Event
Perdurantism
Presentism
Temporal finitism
Temporal parts
The Unreality of Time








Human experience
and use of time



Accounting period
Chronemics
Fiscal year
Mental chronometry
Procrastination
Punctuality
Temporal database
Term
Time discipline
Time management
Time perception

Specious present


Time-tracking software
Time-use research
Time-based currency (time banking)
Time value of money
Time clock
Timesheet
Yesterday








Time in




Geology



Geological time

age
chron
eon
epoch
era
period


Geochronology
Geological history of Earth








Physics



Absolute time and space
Arrow of time
Chronon
Coordinate time
Imaginary time
Planck epoch
Planck time
Proper time
Rate
Spacetime
Theory of relativity
Time dilation

gravitational


Time domain
T-symmetry








other subject
areas



Chronobiology
Circadian rhythms
Dating methodologies in archaeology
Time geography











Related topics



Carpe diem
Clock position
Space
System time
Tempus fugit
Time capsule
Time complexity
Time signature
Time travel









 Time portal














v
t
e


Philosophy of time






Concepts
in time



Time
Duration
A priori and a posteriori
Eternity
Event
Action
Deterministic system
Free will
Eternal return
A-series and B-series
Temporal parts
Growing block universe
Multiple time dimensions





Time Portal






Theories
of time



Determinism
Temporal finitism
Fatalism
Indeterminism
Compatibilism and incompatibilism
Presentism
Eternalism
Four dimensionalism
Endurantism
Perdurantism
B-Theory of time








Related
articles



Metaphysics
Etiology
Teleology
Post hoc ergo propter hoc
The Unreality of Time













Authority control



GND: 4152718-5















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Event_(philosophy)&amp;oldid=683393786"					
				Categories: Philosophy of timeEventsHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from February 2015All articles needing additional referencesWikipedia articles with GND identifiers				
							
		
		
			