


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Existence of God
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				

Part of a series on


God




General conceptions


Agnosticism
Apatheism
Atheism
Deism
Henotheism
Ignosticism
Monotheism
Monism
Dualism
Monolatrism
Kathenotheism
Omnism
Panpsychism
Panentheism
Pantheism
Polytheism
Theism
Transtheism








Specific conceptions


Creator
Demiurge
Deus
Father
Great Architect
Monad
Mother
Supreme Being
Sustainer
The All
The Lord
Trinity
Tawhid
Ditheism
Monism
Personal
Unitarianism








In particular religions



Abrahamic




Judaism
Christianity
Islam
Bahá'í
Mormonism




Indo-Iranian




Hinduism
Buddhism
Jainism
Sikhism
Zoroastrianism











Attributes


Eternalness
Existence
Gender
Names&#160;("God")
Omnibenevolence
Omnipotence
Omnipresence
Omniscience











Experiences
Practices





Belief
Esotericism
Faith
Fideism
Gnosis
Hermeticism
Metaphysics
Mysticism
Prayer
Revelation
Worship








Related topics


Euthyphro dilemma
God complex
God gene
Theology
Ontology
Problem of evil&#160;(theodicy)
Religion

philosophy
texts


Portrayals of God in popular media









v
t
e







Part of a series on


Irreligion







Irreligion



Secular humanism
Freethought

Post-theism
Nontheism
Anti-clericalism
Antireligion
Criticism of religion
Parody religion









Atheism






History
Demographics
Discrimination
Criticism
Lists of atheists





Forms and variations





Implicit and explicit
Negative and positive
New
State
Christian
Hindu
Jewish





Aspects





Anti-clericalism
Antireligion
Antitheism



Relationship between atheism and religion
Existence of God











Agnosticism



Strong
Weak
Atheistic
Theistic
Apatheism
Secular Buddhism



List of agnostics








Nontheism



Criticism of religion
Secular humanism
Freethought
Flying Spaghetti Monster
Ignosticism
Inconsistent revelations
Invisible Pink Unicorn
Nontheistic religions
Parody religion
Post-theism

Russell's teapot
Theological noncognitivism
Transtheism









Naturalism



Humanistic
Metaphysical

Methodological
Religious









People



Lists of&#160; agnostics
atheists
deists
humanists
pantheists









Books



Ethics
The End of Faith



The God Delusion
God Is Not Great
The System of Nature
Letter to a Christian Nation
Why I Am Not a Christian
Why I Am Not a Muslim








Secularist organizations


Atheist Alliance International
Freedom From Religion Foundation



Reason Rally
World Pantheist Movement









Related topics



Secularism
Laïcité



Parody or mock religions








Irreligion by country







v
t
e







Part of a series on the


Philosophy of religion




Religious concepts


Afterlife
Apophatism
Eschatology
Intelligent design
Miracle
Religious belief
Religious faith
Scripture (religious text)
Soul
Spirit
Theological veto








Challenges





Ethical egoism
Euthyphro dilemma
Logical positivism
Religious language
Verificationism&#160;(eschatological)




Problem of evil




Theodicy&#160;(Augustinian
Irenaean)
Best of all possible worlds
Inconsistent triad
Natural evil











God



Conceptions




Aristotelian
Brahman
Demiurge
Divinely simple
Holy Spirit
Maltheist
Pandeist
Personal
Process-theological
Supreme being
Unmoved mover




Existence





Arguments for




Beauty
Christological
Consciousness
Cosmological&#160;(kalām
contingency)
Degree
Desire
Experience
Fine-tuned universe
Love
Miracles
Morality
Ontological
Pascal's Wager
Proper basis
Reason
Teleological&#160;(natural law
watchmaker)
Transcendental




Arguments against




747 gambit
Atheist's Wager
Evil
Free will
Hell
Inconsistent revelations
Nonbelief
Noncognitivism
Occam's razor
Omnipotence paradox
Poor design
Russell's teapot







By religion




Abrahamic&#160;(Bahá'í
Christianity
Islam
Judaism
Mormonism)
Buddhism
Hinduism
Jainism
Sikhism
Wicca











Theories of religion


Acosmism
Agnosticism
Animism
Antireligion
Atheism
Dharmism
Deism
Divine command theory
Dualism
Esotericism
Exclusivism
Existentialism&#160;(agnostic
atheist
Christian)
Feminist
Fundamentalism
Gnosticism
Henotheism
Humanism&#160;(Christian
religious
secular)
Inclusivism
Monism
Monotheism
Mysticism
Naturalism&#160;(humanistic
metaphysical
religious)
New Age
Nondualism
Nontheism
Pandeism
Panentheism
Pantheism
Perennialism
Polytheism
Process
Spiritualism
Shamanism
Taoic
Theism
Transcendentalism








Philosophers of religion



Atheist&#160;/ agnostic




Critchley
Dennett
Drange
Draper
Kenny
Hecht
Martin




Buddhist




Nakamura
Nishitani
Smith




Christian




Adams
Alston
Bell
Brümmer
Burns
Caird
Christoyannopoulos
Copan
Craig
Dalferth
Davies
Eliade
Evans
Gamwell
Geisler
Habermas
Hare
Hick
A.&#160;von Hildebrand
D.&#160;von Hildebrand
van Inwagen
Kierkegaard
Kretzmann
Leftow
McCabe
McIntyre
McLean
Macquarrie
Merricks
Miceli
Moser
Otto
Paley
Pandikattu
Paulsen
Pearcey
Plantinga
Rookmaaker
Schaeffer
de Silva
Smith
Stewart
Swinburne
Taliaferro
Tamer
Thiselton
Ward
White
Wiebe
Wollaston
Yandell




Islamic




al-Amiri
Averroes
Avicenna
Badawi
Brethren of Purity
Damad
al-Farabi
al-Ghazali
Ibn Arabi
Ibn Bajjah
Ibn Masarra
Ibn Miskawayh
A. Iqbal
M. Iqbal
al-Kindi
Nasr
Ramadan
al-Razi
Sadra
al-Shahrastani
Shariati
Suhrawardi
al-Tusi
Waliullah




Jewish




Buber
Heschel
Maimonides
Mendelssohn
Schwarzschild
Soloveitchik
Spinoza




others




Almaas
Anderson
Davis
Emmet
Esaulov
Ferré
Forman
Glogau
Hartshorne
Hatano
Hatcher
Klostermaier
Kvanvig
Martinich
Meltzer
Runzo
Smart
Vallicella
Zank
Zimmerman











Related topics


Criticism of religion
Ethics in religion
Exegesis
Faith and rationality
History of religions
Political science of religion
Religion and science
Religious philosophy
Theology






Philosophy of religion article index





v
t
e





Arguments for and against the existence of God have been proposed by philosophers, theologians, scientists, and others for thousands of years. In philosophical terms, such arguments involve primarily the disciplines of epistemology (the nature and scope of knowledge) and ontology (study of the nature of being, existence, or reality) and also the theory of value, since concepts of perfection are connected to notions of God. A wide variety of arguments exist which can be categorized as metaphysical, logical, empirical, or subjective. The existence of God is subject to lively debate in philosophy,[1] the philosophy of religion, and popular culture.
The Western tradition of philosophical discussion of the existence of God began with Plato and Aristotle, who made arguments that would now be categorized as cosmological. Other arguments for the existence of God have been proposed by St. Anselm, who formulated the first ontological argument; Ibn Rushd (Averroes) and Aquinas, who presented their own versions of the cosmological argument (the kalam argument and the first way, respectively); Descartes, who said that the existence of a benevolent God was logically necessary for the evidence of the senses to be meaningful; and Immanuel Kant, who argued that the existence of God can be deduced from the existence of good. Thinkers who have provided arguments against the existence of God include David Hume, Kant, Nietzsche, and Bertrand Russell. In modern culture, the question of God's existence has been discussed by scientists such as Stephen Hawking, Francis Collins, Richard Dawkins, and John Lennox, as well as philosophers including Richard Swinburne, Alvin Plantinga, William Lane Craig, Daniel Dennett, Edward Feser, David Bentley Hart and Sam Harris.
Atheism views arguments for the existence of God as insufficient, mistaken or weighing less in comparison to arguments against. Fideists acknowledge that belief in the existence of God may not be amenable to demonstration or refutation, but rests on faith alone. The Catholic Church maintains that knowledge of the existence of God is the "natural light of human reason".[2] Other religions, such as Buddhism do not concern themselves with the existence of gods at all, while religions such as Jainism reject the possibility of a creator deity.



Contents


1 Philosophical issues

1.1 Definition of God

1.1.1 Ignosticism


1.2 Epistemology

1.2.1 The problem of the supernatural
1.2.2 Nature of relevant proofs and arguments


1.3 Outside of Western thought


2 Arguments for the existence of God

2.1 Empirical arguments

2.1.1 Aquinas' Five Ways
2.1.2 Rational warrant


2.2 Deductive arguments

2.2.1 Ontological argument
2.2.2 Other arguments


2.3 Inductive arguments

2.3.1 Other arguments


2.4 Subjective arguments

2.4.1 Arguments from historical events or personages
2.4.2 Arguments from testimony

2.4.2.1 Arguments grounded in personal experiences




2.5 Hindu arguments


3 Arguments against the existence of God

3.1 Empirical arguments
3.2 Deductive arguments
3.3 Inductive arguments
3.4 Subjective arguments
3.5 Hindu arguments


4 Conclusions

4.1 Theism
4.2 Atheism

4.2.1 Positive atheism
4.2.2 Negative atheism


4.3 Agnosticism

4.3.1 Strong agnosticism
4.3.2 Weak agnosticism
4.3.3 Agnostic theism
4.3.4 Agnostic atheism


4.4 Apatheism
4.5 Ignosticism


5 Psychological aspects
6 See also
7 References
8 Further reading
9 External links



Philosophical issues[edit]
Definition of God[edit]
Main articles: God and Deity
According to Hindu Religion, God is told of being Paramatma (Param-Aatma). In Sanskrit, Param means Great in all beings and Aatma is Soul. That means Greatest Soul. As every being is said to have Soul, God is the Greatest Soul of all. Vedas give an appropriate Meaning of God. He is Almighty. In Classical theism, God is characterized as the metaphysically ultimate being (the first, timeless, absolutely simple, and sovereign being, who is devoid of any anthropomorphic qualities), in distinction to other conceptions such as Theistic Personalism, Open Theism, and Process Theism. Despite extensive writing on the nature of God, these classical theists did not believe that God could be defined. They believed that it would contradict the transcendent nature of God for mere humans to define him. Robert Barron explains by analogy that it seems impossible for a two-dimensional object to conceive of three-dimensional humans.[3]
By contrast, much of Eastern religious thought (chiefly pantheism) posits God as a force contained in every imaginable phenomenon. For example, Baruch Spinoza and his followers use the term God in a particular philosophical sense to mean the essential substance/principles of nature.
In modern Western societies, the concept of God typically entails a monotheistic, supreme, ultimate, and personal being, as found in the Islamic, Christian and Hebrew traditions. In monotheisms outside the Abrahamic traditions, the existence of God is discussed in similar terms.
In the Advaita Vedanta school of Hinduism, reality is ultimately seen as a single, qualityless, changeless nirguna Brahman. Advaitin philosophy introduces the concept of saguna Brahman or Ishvara as a way of talking about Brahman to people. Ishvara, in turn, is ascribed such qualities as omniscience, omnipotence, and benevolence.[4]
Ignosticism[edit]
Ignosticism or "igtheism" is the theological position that every other theological position (including agnosticism and atheism) assumes too much about the concept of God and many other theological concepts.
It can be defined as encompassing two related views about the existence of God. The view that a coherent definition of God must be presented before the question of the existence of God can be meaningfully discussed. Furthermore, if that definition is unfalsifiable, the ignostic takes the theological noncognitivist position that the question of the existence of God (per that definition) is meaningless. In this case, the concept of God is not considered meaningless; the term "God" is considered meaningless. The second view is synonymous with theological noncognitivism, and skips the step of first asking "What is meant by 'God'?" before proclaiming the original question "Does God exist?" as meaningless.
Some philosophers have seen ignosticism as a variation of agnosticism or atheism,[5] while others have considered it to be distinct. An ignostic maintains that he cannot even say whether he is a theist or an atheist until a sufficient definition of theism is put forth.
The term "ignosticism" was coined in the 1960s by Sherwin Wine, a rabbi and a founding figure of Humanistic Judaism. The term "igtheism" was coined by the secular humanist Paul Kurtz in his 1992 book The New Skepticism.[6]
Epistemology[edit]
Main articles: Epistemology and Sociology of knowledge
Epistemology is the branch of philosophy which studies the nature, origin, and scope of knowledge. Knowledge is, from an epistemological standpoint, distinguished from mere belief by justification, warrant, or other such property the having of which is conducive to getting at the truth.
Knowledge in the sense of "understanding of a fact or truth" can be divided into a posteriori knowledge, based on experience or deduction (see methodology), and a priori knowledge from introspection, axioms, or self-evidence. Knowledge can also be described as a psychological state, since in a strict sense there can never be a posteriori knowledge proper (see relativism). Much of the disagreement about "proofs" of God's existence is due to different conceptions not only of the term "God" but also the terms "proof", "truth", and "knowledge". Religious belief from revelation or enlightenment (satori) can fall into either the first category, a posteriori knowledge, if rooted in deduction or personal revelation, or the second, a priori class of knowledge, if based on introspection.
Different conclusions as to the existence of God often rest on different criteria for deciding what methods are appropriate for deciding if something is true or not, including

whether logic counts as evidence concerning the quality of existence
whether subjective experience counts as evidence for objective reality
whether either logic or evidence can rule in or out the supernatural
whether an object of the mind is accepted for existence
whether a truthbearer can justify.

The problem of the supernatural[edit]
One problem posed by the question of the existence of God is that traditional beliefs usually ascribe to God various supernatural powers. Supernatural beings may be able to conceal and reveal themselves for their own purposes, as for example in the tale of Baucis and Philemon. In addition, according to concepts of God, God is not part of the natural order, but the ultimate creator of nature and of the scientific laws. Thus, in Aristotelian philosophy, God is viewed as part of the explanatory structure needed to support scientific conclusions, and any powers God possesses are, strictly speaking, of the natural order—that is, derived from God's place as originator of nature. (See also Monadology)
Some[who?] religious apologists offer the supernatural nature of God as the explanation for the inability of empirical methods to decide the question of God's existence. In Karl Popper's philosophy of science, belief in a supernatural God is outside the natural domain of scientific investigation because all scientific hypotheses must be falsifiable in the natural world. The Non-overlapping Magisteria view proposed by Stephen Jay Gould also holds that the existence (or otherwise) of God is irrelevant to and beyond the domain of science.
Logical positivists, such as Rudolf Carnap and A. J. Ayer viewed any talk of gods as literal nonsense. For the logical positivists and adherents of similar schools of thought, statements about religious or other transcendent experiences could not have a truth value, and were deemed to be without meaning, because metaphysical naturalism, the philosophical basis for logical positivism, automatically excludes the possibility of the supernatural a priori without proof. As the Christian biologist Scott C. Todd put it "Even if all the data pointed to an intelligent designer, such a hypothesis is excluded from science because it is not naturalistic."[7] This argument limits the domain of science to the empirically observable and limits the domain of God to the unprovable.
Nature of relevant proofs and arguments[edit]
John Polkinghorne suggests that the nearest analogy to the existence of God in physics are the ideas of quantum mechanics which are seemingly paradoxical but make sense of a great deal of disparate data.[8]
Alvin Plantinga compares the question of the existence of God to the question of the existence of other minds, claiming both are notoriously impossible to "prove" against a determined skeptic.[9]
One approach, suggested by writers such as Stephen D. Unwin, is to treat (particular versions of) theism and naturalism as though they were two hypotheses in the Bayesian sense, to list certain data (or alleged data), about the world, and to suggest that the likelihoods of these data are significantly higher under one hypothesis than the other.[10] Most of the arguments for, or against, the existence of God can be seen as pointing to particular aspects of the universe in this way. In almost all cases it is not seriously suggested by proponents of the arguments that they are irrefutable, merely that they make one worldview seem significantly more likely than the other. However, since an assessment of the weight of evidence depends on the prior probability that is assigned to each worldview, arguments that a theist finds convincing may seem thin to an atheist and vice versa.[11]
Philosophers, such as Wittgenstein, take a view that is considered anti-realist and oppose philosophical arguments related to God's existence. For instance, Charles Taylor contends that the real is whatever will not go away. If we cannot reduce talk about God to anything else, or replace it, or prove it false, then perhaps God is as real as anything else.[12]
In George Berkeley's A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge of 1710, he argued that a "naked thought" cannot exist, and that a perception was a thought; therefore only minds could be proven to exist, since all else was merely an idea conveyed by a perception. This viewpoint has been used in popular fiction, including The Matrix movie series. From this Berkeley argued that the universe is based upon observation and is non-objective. However, he noted that the universe includes "ideas" not perceptible to mankind (or not always perceptible), and that there must therefore exist an omniscient superobserver, which perceives such things. Berkeley considered this proof of the existence of the Christian god.
C.S. Lewis, in Mere Christianity and elsewhere, raised the argument from desire. He posed that all natural desires have a natural object. One thirsts, and there exists water to quench this thirst; One hungers, and there exists food to satisfy this hunger. He then argued that the human desire for perfect justice, perfect peace, perfect happiness, and other intangibles strongly implies the existence of such things, though they seem unobtainable on earth. He further posed that the unquenchable desires of this life strongly imply that we are intended for a different life, necessarily governed by a God who can provide the desired intangibles.[13]
Outside of Western thought[edit]
Existence in absolute truth is central to Vedanta epistemology. Traditional sense perception based approaches were put into question as possibly misleading due to preconceived or superimposed ideas. But though all object-cognition can be doubted, the existence of the doubter remains a fact even in nastika traditions of mayavada schools following Adi Shankara.[14] The five eternal principles to be discussed under ontology, beginning with God or Isvara, the Ultimate Reality cannot be established by the means of logic alone, and often require superior proof.[15] In Vaisnavism Vishnu, or his intimate ontological form of Krishna, is equated to personal absolute God of the Western traditions. Aspects of Krishna as svayam bhagavan in original Absolute Truth, sat chit ananda, are understood originating from three essential attributes of Krishna's form, i.e., "eternal existence" or sat, related to the brahman aspect; "knowledge" or chit, to the paramatman; and "bliss" or ananda in Sanskrit, to bhagavan.[16]
Arguments for the existence of God[edit]
Empirical arguments[edit]
Aquinas' Five Ways[edit]
Main article: Quinque viae
For in depth analysis of the individual arguments, see unmoved mover, first cause, argument from contingency, argument from degree, or teleological argument.
In the first part of his Summa Theologica, Thomas Aquinas developed his five arguments for God's existence. These arguments are grounded in an Aristotelian ontology and make use of the infinite regression argument.[17][18] Aquinas did not intend to fully prove the existence of God as he is orthodoxly conceived (with all of his traditional attributes), but proposed his Five Ways as a first stage, which he built upon later in his work.[19] Aquinas' Five Ways argued from the unmoved mover, first cause, necessary being, argument from degree, and the teleological argument.

The unmoved mover argument asserts that, from our experience of motion in the universe (motion being the transition from potentiality to actuality) we can see that there must have been an initial mover. Aquinas argued that whatever is in motion must be put in motion by another thing, so there must be an unmoved mover.[17]
Aquinas' argument from first cause started with the premise that it is impossible for a being to cause itself (because it would have to exist before it caused itself) and that it is impossible for there to be an infinite chain of causes, which would result in infinite regress. Therefore, there must be a first cause, itself uncaused.[17]
The argument from necessary being asserts that all beings are contingent, meaning that it is possible for them not to exist. Aquinas argued that if everything can possibly not exist, there must have been a time when nothing existed; as things exist now, there must exist a being with necessary existence, regarded as God.[17]
Aquinas argued from degree, considering the occurrence of degrees of goodness. He believed that things which are called good, must be called good in relation to a standard of good—a maximum. There must be a maximum goodness that which causes all goodness.[17]
The teleological argument asserts the view that things without intelligence are ordered towards a purpose. Aquinas argued that unintelligent objects cannot be ordered unless they are done so by an intelligent being, which means that there must be an intelligent being to move objects to their ends: God.[17]

Rational warrant[edit]
Philosopher Stephen Toulmin, notable for his work in the history of ideas[20] that features the (rational) warrant: a statement that connects the premises to a conclusion.
Joseph Hinman applied Toulmin's approach in his argument for the existence of God, particularly in his book The Trace of God: A Rational Warrant for Belief.[21] Instead of attempting to prove the existence of God, Hinman argues you can "demonstrate the rationally warranted nature of belief".[22]
Hinman uses a wide range of studies, including ones by Robert Wuthnow, Andrew Greeley, Mathes and Kathleen Nobel to establish that mystical experiences are life-transformative in a way that is significant, positive and lasting.[23] He draws on additional work to add several additional major points to his argument. First, the people who have these experiences not only do not exhibit traditional signs of mental illness but, often, are in better mental and physical health than the general population due to the experience.[24] Second, the experiences work. In other words, they provide a framework for navigating life that is useful and effective.[25] All of the evidence of the positive effect's of the experience upon people's lives he, adapting a term from Derida, terms "the trace of God": the footprints left behind that point to the impact.
Finally, he discusses how both religious experience and belief in God is, and has always been, normative among humans:[26] people do not need to prove the existence of God. If there is no need to prove, Hinman argues, and the Trace of God (for instance, the impact of mystical experiences on them), belief in God is rationally warranted.
Deductive arguments[edit]
Ontological argument[edit]
Main article: Ontological argument
The ontological argument has been formulated by philosophers including St. Anselm and René Descartes. The argument proposes that God's existence is self-evident. The logic, depending on the formulation, reads roughly as follows:[27]

God is the greatest conceivable being.
It is greater to exist than not to exist.
Therefore, God exists.[27]

Thomas Aquinas criticized the argument for proposing a definition of God which, if God is transcendent, should be impossible for humans.[28] Immanuel Kant criticized the proof from a logical standpoint: he stated that the term "God" really signifies two different terms: both idea of God, and God. Kant concluded that the proof is equivocation, based on the ambiguity of the word God.[29] Kant also challenged the argument's assumption that existence is a predicate (of perfection) because it does not add anything to the essence of a being. If existence is not a predicate, then it is not necessarily true that the greatest possible being exists.[30] A common rebuttal to Kant's critique is that, although "existence" does add something to both the concept and the reality of God, the concept would be vastly different if its referent was an unreal Being.[citation needed] Another response to Kant is attributed to Alvin Plantinga who explains that even if one were to grant Kant that "existence" is not a real predicate, "Necessary Existence", which is the correct formulation of an understanding of God, is a real predicate, thus according to Plantinga Kant's argument is refuted.[31]
Other arguments[edit]
These two arguments follow from possible deductions, i.e., they can be set up as deductions and therefore are placed here.

Argument from Meaning.
Argument from Ethics, being one type of view by ontologically considered intelligence.

Inductive arguments[edit]
Inductive arguments argue their conclusions through inductive reasoning.

Another class of philosophers asserts that the proofs for the existence of God present a fairly large probability though not absolute certainty. A number of obscure points, they say, always remain; an act of faith is required to dismiss these difficulties. This view is maintained, among others, by the Scottish statesman Arthur Balfour in his book The Foundations of Belief (1895). The opinions set forth in this work were adopted in France by Ferdinand Brunetière, the editor of the Revue des deux Mondes. Many orthodox Protestants express themselves in the same manner, as, for instance, Dr. E. Dennert, President of the Kepler Society, in his work Ist Gott tot?[32]

Other arguments[edit]

The hypothesis of Intelligent design proposes that certain features of the universe and of living things are the product of an intelligent cause.[33] Its proponents are mainly Christians.[34]
Argument from belief in God being properly basic as presented by Alvin Plantinga.[35]
Argument from the confluence of proper function and reliability and the evolutionary argument against naturalism, which demonstrate how naturalism is incapable of providing humans with the cognitive apparatus necessary for their knowledge to have positive epistemic status.[36]
Argument from Personal Identity.[37]
Argument from the "divine attributes of scientific law".[38]

Subjective arguments[edit]
Arguments from historical events or personages[edit]

Christianity and Judaism assert that God intervened in key specific moments in history, especially at the Exodus and the giving of the Ten Commandments in front of all the tribes of Israel, positing an argument from empirical evidence stemming from sheer number of witnesses, thus demonstrating his existence.
The argument from the Resurrection of Jesus. This asserts that there is sufficient historical evidence for Jesus's resurrection to support his claim to be the son of God and indicates, a fortiori, God's existence.[39] This is one of several arguments known as the Christological argument.
Islam asserts that the revelation of its holy book, the Qur'an, vindicates its divine authorship, and thus the existence of God.
The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, also known as Mormonism, similarly asserts that the miraculous appearance of God, Jesus Christ, and angels to Joseph Smith and others and subsequent finding and translation of the Book of Mormon establishes the existence of God. The whole Latter Day Saint movement makes the same claim for example Community of Christ, Church of Christ (Temple Lot), Church of Jesus Christ (Bickertonite), Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints (Strangite), Church of Jesus Christ (Cutlerite), etc.

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints (Strangite), similarly asserts that the finding and translation of the Plates of Laban, also known as the Brass Plates, into the Book of the Law of the Lord and Voree plates by James Strang, One Mighty and Strong, establishes the existence of God.
Various sects that have broken from the Church of Christ (Temple Lot) (such as Church of Christ "With the Elijah Message" and Church of Christ (Assured Way)) claim that the message brought by John the Baptist, One Mighty and Strong, to Otto Fetting and W. A. Draves in The Word of the Lord Brought to Mankind by an Angel establishes the existence of God.



Arguments from testimony[edit]
Arguments from testimony rely on the testimony or experience of witnesses, possibly embodying the propositions of a specific revealed religion. Swinburne argues that it is a principle of rationality that one should accept testimony unless there are strong reasons for not doing so.[40]

The witness argument gives credibility to personal witnesses, contemporary and throughout the ages. A variation of this is the argument from miracles (also referred to as "the priest stories") which relies on testimony of supernatural events to establish the existence of God.
The majority argument argues that the theism of people throughout most of recorded history and in many different places provides prima facie demonstration of God's existence.

Arguments grounded in personal experiences[edit]
See also: Anecdotal evidence

An argument for God is often made from an unlikely complete reversal in lifestyle by an individual towards God. Paul of Tarsus, a persecutor of the early Church, became a pillar of the Church after his conversion on the road to Damascus. Modern day examples in Evangelical Protestantism are sometimes called "Born-Again Christians".
The Scottish School of Common Sense led by Thomas Reid taught that the fact of the existence of God is accepted by people without knowledge of reasons but simply by a natural impulse. That God exists, this school said, is one of the chief metaphysical principles that people accept not because they are evident in themselves or because they can be proved, but because common sense obliges people to accept them.
The Argument from a Proper Basis argues that belief in God is "properly basic"; that it is similar to statements like "I see a chair" or "I feel pain". Such beliefs are non-falsifiable and, thus, neither provable nor disprovable; they concern perceptual beliefs or indisputable mental states.
In Germany, the School of Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi taught that human reason is able to perceive the suprasensible. Jacobi distinguished three faculties: sense, reason, and understanding. Just as sense has immediate perception of the material so has reason immediate perception of the immaterial, while the understanding brings these perceptions to a person's consciousness and unites them to one another.[41] God's existence, then, cannot be proven (Jacobi, like Immanuel Kant, rejected the absolute value of the principle of causality), it must be felt by the mind.
In Emile, Jean-Jacques Rousseau asserted that when a person's understanding ponders over the existence of God it encounters nothing but contradictions; the impulses of people's hearts, however, are of more value than the understanding, and these proclaim clearly the truths of natural religion, namely, the existence of God and the immortality of the soul.
The same theory was advocated in Germany by Friedrich Schleiermacher, who assumed an inner religious sense by means of which people feel religious truths. According to Schleiermacher, religion consists solely in this inner perception, and dogmatic doctrines are inessential.[42]
Many modern Protestant theologians follow in Schleiermacher's footsteps, and teach that the existence of God cannot be demonstrated; certainty as to this truth is only furnished to people by inner experience, feeling, and perception.
Modernist Christianity also denies the demonstrability of the existence of God. According to them, one can only know something of God by means of the vital immanence, that is, under favorable circumstances the need of the divine dormant in one's subconsciousness becomes conscious and arouses that religious feeling or experience in which God reveals himself. In condemnation of this view the Oath Against Modernism formulated by Pius X, a Pope of the Catholic Church, says: "Deum ... naturali rationis lumine per ea quae facta sunt, hoc est per visibilia creationis opera, tanquam causam per effectus certo cognosci adeoque demostrari etiam posse, profiteor." ("I declare that by the natural light of reason, God can be certainly known and therefore his existence demonstrated through the things that are made, i.e., through the visible works of creation, as the cause is known through its effects.")
Brahma Kumaris religion was established in 1936, when God was said to enter the body of diamond merchant Lekhraj Kripalani (1876–1969) in Hyderabad, Sindh and started to speak through him.[43][44]

Hindu arguments[edit]
Most schools of Hindu philosophy accept the existence of a creator god (Brahma), while some do not. The school of Vedanta argues that one of the proofs of the existence of God is the law of karma. In a commentary to Brahma Sutras (III, 2, 38, and 41), a Vedantic text, Adi Sankara, an Indian philosopher who consolidated the doctrine of Advaita Vedanta, a sub-school of Vedanta, argues that the original karmic actions themselves cannot bring about the proper results at some future time; neither can super sensuous, non-intelligent qualities like adrsta—an unseen force being the metaphysical link between work and its result—by themselves mediate the appropriate, justly deserved pleasure and pain. The fruits, according to him, then, must be administered through the action of a conscious agent, namely, a supreme being (Ishvara).[45]
A human's karmic acts result in merits and demerits. Since unconscious things generally do not move except when caused by an agent (for example, the axe moves only when swung by an agent), and since the law of karma is an unintelligent and unconscious law, Sankara argues there must be a conscious supreme Being who knows the merits and demerits which persons have earned by their actions, and who functions as an instrumental cause in helping individuals reap their appropriate fruits.[46] Thus, God affects the person's environment, even to its atoms, and for those souls who reincarnate, produces the appropriate rebirth body, all in order that the person might have the karmically appropriate experiences.[47] Thus, there must be a theistic administrator or supervisor for karma, i.e., God.
The Nyaya school, one of six orthodox schools of Hindu philosophy, states that one of the proofs of the existence of God is karma;[48] it is seen that some people in this world are happy, some are in misery. Some are rich and some are poor. The Naiyanikas explain this by the concept of karma and reincarnation. The fruit of an individual's actions does not always lie within the reach of the individual who is the agent; there ought to be, therefore, a dispenser of the fruits of actions, and this supreme dispenser is God.[48] This belief of Nyaya, accordingly, is the same as that of Vedanta.[48]
Arguments against the existence of God[edit]


Part of a series on


Atheism










Concepts
History





Antitheism

Atheism and religion
(Criticism of atheism&#160;/ of religion)

History of atheism
New Atheism








Types


Implicit and explicit
Negative and positive



Christian
Hindu
Jewish



Feminist
State atheism








Arguments for atheism
Against God's existence


Atheist's Wager
Evil God Challenge
Fate of the unlearned
Free will
God of the gaps
Hitchens's razor
Incompatible properties
Inconsistent revelation
Nonbelief
Omnipotence paradox
Poor design
Problem of evil
Problem of Hell
Russell's teapot



Theological noncognitivism
Ultimate Boeing 747 gambit








People


Demographics of atheism

Discrimination against&#160;/ persecution of
atheists

Lists of atheists








Related stances



Agnosticism




Weak
Strong
Agnostic theism
Agnostic atheism
Ignosticism
Apatheism




Irreligion




Anti-clericalism
Antireligion
Freethought
Parody religion
Post-theism




Naturalism




Humanistic
Metaphysical
Methodological
Religious




Secularism




Secularity
Secular Buddhism
Secular humanism











 Atheism portal
WikiProject







v
t
e





Each of the arguments below aims to show that a particular set of gods does not exist—by demonstrating them to be inherently meaningless, contradictory, or at odds with known scientific or historical facts)—or that there is insufficient proof to say that they do exist.
Empirical arguments[edit]
Empirical arguments depend on knowledge acquired by means of observation or experimentation to prove their conclusions.

The argument from inconsistent revelations contests the existence of the deity called God as described in scriptures—such as the Hindu Vedas, the Jewish Tanakh, the Christian Bible, the Muslim Qur'an, the Book of Mormon or the Baha'i Aqdas—by identifying apparent contradictions between different scriptures, within a single scripture, or between scripture and known facts. To be effective this argument requires the other side to hold that its scriptural record is inerrant, or at least to assert that a proper understanding of scripture gives rise to knowledge of God's existence.
The problem of evil contests the existence of a god who is both omnipotent and omnibenevolent by arguing that such a god should not permit the existence of evil or suffering. The theist responses are called theodicies.
The destiny of the unevangelized, by which persons who have never even heard of a particular revelation might be harshly punished for not following its dictates.
The argument from poor design contests the idea that God created life on the basis that lifeforms, including humans, seem to exhibit poor design.
The argument from nonbelief contests the existence of an omnipotent God who wants humans to believe in him by arguing that such a god would do a better job of gathering believers.
The argument from parsimony (using Occam's razor) contends that since natural (non-supernatural) theories adequately explain the development of religion and belief in gods,[49] the actual existence of such supernatural agents is superfluous and may be dismissed unless otherwise proven to be required to explain the phenomenon.
The analogy of Russell's teapot argues that the burden of proof for the existence of God lies with the theist rather than the atheist. The Russell's teapot analogy can be considered an extension of Occam's Razor.
Stephen Hawking and co-author Leonard Mlodinow state in their book The Grand Design that it is reasonable to ask who or what created the universe, but if the answer is God, then the question has merely been deflected to that of who created God. In this view, it is accepted that some entity exists that needs no creator, and that entity is called God. This is known as the first-cause argument for the existence of God. Both authors claim however, that it is possible to answer these questions purely within the realm of science, and without invoking any divine beings.[50] Some Christian philosophers disagree.[51]

Deductive arguments[edit]
Deductive arguments attempt to prove their conclusions by deductive reasoning from true premises.

The Ultimate Boeing 747 gambit is a counter-argument to the argument from design. The argument from design claims that a complex or ordered structure must be designed. However, a god that is responsible for the creation of a universe would be at least as complicated as the universe that it creates. Therefore, it too must require a designer. And its designer would require a designer also, ad infinitum. The argument for the existence of God is then a logical fallacy with or without the use of special pleading. The Ultimate 747 gambit states that God does not provide an origin of complexity, it simply assumes that complexity always existed. It also states that design fails to account for complexity, which natural selection can explain.
The omnipotence paradox suggests that the concept of an omnipotent entity is logically contradictory, from considering a question like: "Can God create a rock so big that He cannot move it?" or "If God is all powerful, could God create a being more powerful than Himself?" This, however, is merely an improper question, that is, a question which assumes as its premises two contradictory "facts." A rock that God cannot move is necessarily a contradiction to an omnipotent God, and a more powerful being is necessarily a contradiction of an ultimately powerful God, thus the question contradicts itself and is incoherent.
The omniscience paradox shows a different angle of the omnipotence paradox. "If God is omnipotent, then he should be able to change the future to an 'alternate future' that is unknown to him, conflicting with his omniscience." Similarly, an omniscient god would know the position of all atoms in the universe over its ~14 billion-year history as well as its infinite future. To know that, god's memory needs to be bigger than the infinite set of possible states in the current universe. Also, a twist on the omnipotence paradox is that God's omniscience is logically contradictory, since He could not think up a puzzle or code that he could not solve.
The problem of hell is the idea that eternal damnation for actions committed in a finite existence contradicts God's omnibenevolence or omnipresence.
The argument from free will contests the existence of an omniscient god who has free will—or has allotted the same freedom to his creations—by arguing that the two properties are contradictory. According to the argument, if God already knows the future, then humanity is destined to corroborate with his knowledge of the future and not have true free will to deviate from it. Therefore, our free will contradicts an omniscient god. Another argument attacks the existence of an omniscient god who has free will directly in arguing that the will of God himself would be bound to follow whatever God foreknows himself doing throughout eternity. An unstated assumption here is that God is contained within the dimension of time, and since this is directly contradictory to the stated nature of God as given by believers, forms a straw man fallacy.
A counter-argument against the Cosmological argument ("chicken or the egg") takes its assumption that things cannot exist without creators and applies it to God, setting up an infinite regress. This attacks the premise that the universe is the second cause (after God, who is claimed to be the first cause).
Theological noncognitivism, as used in literature, usually seeks to disprove the god-concept by showing that it is unverifiable by scientific tests.
The anthropic argument states that if God is omniscient, omnipotent, and morally perfect, He would have created other morally perfect beings instead of imperfect humans.

Inductive arguments[edit]
Inductive arguments argue their conclusions through inductive reasoning.

The atheist-existential argument for the non-existence of a perfect sentient being states that if existence precedes essence, it follows from the meaning of the term sentient that a sentient being cannot be complete or perfect. It is touched upon by Jean-Paul Sartre in Being and Nothingness. Sartre's phrasing is that God would be a pour-soi [a being-for-itself; a consciousness] who is also an en-soi [a being-in-itself; a thing]: which is a contradiction in terms. The argument is echoed thus in Salman Rushdie's novel Grimus: "That which is complete is also dead."
The "no reason" argument tries to show that an omnipotent and omniscient being would not have any reason to act in any way, specifically by creating the universe, because it would have no needs, wants, or desires since these very concepts are subjectively human. Since the universe exists, there is a contradiction, and therefore, an omnipotent god cannot exist. This argument is expounded upon by Scott Adams in the book God's Debris, which puts forward a form of Pandeism as its fundamental theological model. A similar argument is put forward in Ludwig von Mises's "Human Action". He referred to it as the "praxeological argument" and claimed that a perfect being would have long ago satisfied all its wants and desires and would no longer be able to take action in the present without proving that it had been unable to achieve its wants faster—showing it imperfect.
The "historical induction" argument concludes that since most theistic religions throughout history (e.g. ancient Egyptian religion, ancient Greek religion) and their gods ultimately come to be regarded as untrue or incorrect, all theistic religions, including contemporary ones, are therefore most likely untrue/incorrect by induction. It is implied as part of Stephen F. Roberts' popular quotation:

I contend that we are both atheists. I just believe in one fewer god than you do. When you understand why you dismiss all the other possible gods, you will understand why I dismiss yours.



Subjective arguments[edit]
See also: Anecdotal evidence
Similar to the subjective arguments for the existence of God, subjective arguments against the supernatural mainly rely on the testimony or experience of witnesses, or the propositions of a revealed religion in general.

The witness argument gives credibility to personal witnesses, contemporary and from the past, who disbelieve or strongly doubt the existence of God.
The conflicted religions argument notes that many religions give differing accounts as to what God is and what God wants; since all the contradictory accounts cannot be correct, many if not all religions must be incorrect.
The disappointment argument claims that if, when asked for, there is no visible help from God, there is no reason to believe that there is a God.

Hindu arguments[edit]
Atheistic Hindu doctrines cite various arguments for rejecting a creator-God or Ishvara. The Sāṁkhyapravacana Sūtra of the Samkhya school states that there is no philosophical place for a creationist God in this system. It is also argued in this text that the existence of Ishvara (God) cannot be proved and hence cannot be admitted to exist.[52] Classical Samkhya argues against the existence of God on metaphysical grounds. For instance, Samkhya argue that an unchanging God cannot be the source of an ever changing world. It says God was a necessary metaphysical assumption demanded by circumstances.[53] The Sutras of Samkhya endeavour to prove that the idea of God is inconceivable and self-contradictory, and some[which?] commentaries speak plainly on this subject. The Sankhya- tattva-kaumudi, commenting on Karika 57, argues that a perfect God can have no need to create a world, and if God's motive is kindness, Samkhya questions whether it is reasonable to call into existence beings who while non-existent had no suffering. Samkhya postulates that a benevolent deity ought to create only happy creatures, not an imperfect world like the real world.[54]
Proponents of the school of Mimamsa, which is based on rituals and orthopraxy, decided that the evidence allegedly proving the existence of God was insufficient. They argue that there was no need to postulate a maker for the world, just as there was no need for an author to compose the Vedas or a god to validate the rituals.[55] Mimamsa argues that the gods named in the Vedas have no existence apart from the mantras that speak their names. In that regard, the power of the mantras is what is seen as the power of gods.[56]
Conclusions[edit]




Europeans polled who "believe in a god", according to Eurobarometer in 2005.






North Americans polled about religious identity.


Conclusions on the existence of God can be divided along numerous axes, producing a variety of orthogonal classifications. Theism and atheism are positions of belief (or lack of it), while gnosticism and agnosticism are positions of knowledge (or the lack of it). Ignosticism concerns belief regarding God's conceptual coherence. Apatheism concerns belief regarding the practical importance of whether God exists.
Theism[edit]
The theistic conclusion is that there is sufficient reason to believe that god or gods exists, or that arguments do not matter as much as the "personal witness of the Holy Spirit", as argued by preeminent apologist William Lane Craig.[citation needed] The Catholic Church, following the teachings of Saint Paul the Apostle, Saint Thomas Aquinas, and the First Vatican Council, affirms that God's existence "can be known with certainty from the created world by the natural light of human reason".[57] In Christian faith, theologians and philosophers make a distinction between: (a) preambles of faith and (b) articles of faith. The preambles include alleged truths contained in revelation which are nevertheless demonstrable by reason, e.g., the immortality of the soul, the existence of God. The articles of faith, on the other hand, contain truths that cannot be proven or reached by reason alone and presuppose the truths of the preambles, e.g., the Holy Trinity, is not demonstrable and presupposes the existence of God.
The argument that the existence of God can be known to all, even prior to exposure to any divine revelation, predates Christianity. St. Paul made this argument when he said that pagans were without excuse because "since the creation of the world [God's] invisible nature, namely, his eternal power and deity, has been clearly perceived in the things that have been made".[58] In this Paul alludes to the proofs for a creator, later enunciated by St. Thomas[59] and others, but that had also been explored by the Greek philosophers.
Another apologetical school of thought, including Dutch and American Reformed thinkers (such as Abraham Kuyper, Benjamin Warfield, Herman Dooyeweerd), emerged in the late 1920s. This school was instituted by Cornelius Van Til, and came to be popularly called Presuppositional apologetics (though Van Til himself felt "transcendental" would be a more accurate title). The main distinction between this approach and the more classical evidentialist approach is that the presuppositionalist denies any common ground between the believer and the non-believer, except that which the non-believer denies, namely, the assumption of the truth of the theistic worldview. In other words, presuppositionalists do not believe that the existence of God can be proven by appeal to raw, uninterpreted, or "brute" facts, which have the same (theoretical) meaning to people with fundamentally different worldviews, because they deny that such a condition is even possible. They claim that the only possible proof for the existence of God is that the very same belief is the necessary condition to the intelligibility of all other human experience and action. They attempt to prove the existence of God by means of appeal to the transcendental necessity of the belief—indirectly (by appeal to the unavowed presuppositions of the non-believer's worldview) rather than directly (by appeal to some form of common factuality). In practice this school utilizes what have come to be known as transcendental arguments. In these arguments they claim to demonstrate that all human experience and action (even the condition of unbelief, itself) is a proof for the existence of God, because God's existence is the necessary condition of their intelligibility.
Alvin Plantinga presents an argument for the existence of God using modal logic.[60] Others have said that the logical and philosophical arguments for and against the existence of God miss the point. The word God has a meaning in human culture and history that does not correspond to the beings whose existence is supported by such arguments, assuming they are valid. The real question is not whether a "most perfect being" or an "uncaused first cause" exist. The real question is whether Jehovah, Zeus, Ra, Krishna, or any gods of any religion exist, and if so, which gods? On the other hand, many theists equate all monotheistic or henotheistic "most perfect Beings", no matter what name is assigned to them/him, as the one monotheistic God (one example would be understanding the Muslim Allah, Christian Yhwh, and Chinese Shangdi as different names for the same Being). Most of these arguments do not resolve the issue of which of these figures is more likely to exist. These arguments fail to make the distinction between immanent gods and a Transcendent God.
Some[who?] Christians note that the Christian faith teaches "salvation is by faith",[61] and that faith is reliance upon the faithfulness of God. The most extreme example of this position is called fideism, which holds that faith is simply the will to believe, and argues that if God's existence were rationally demonstrable, faith in its existence would become superfluous. Søren Kierkegaard argued that objective knowledge, such as 1+1=2, is unimportant to existence. If God could rationally be proven, his existence would be unimportant to humans.[citation needed] It is because God cannot rationally be proven that his existence is important to us. In The Justification of Knowledge, the Calvinist theologian Robert L. Reymond argues that believers should not attempt to prove the existence of God. Since he believes all such proofs are fundamentally unsound, believers should not place their confidence in them, much less resort to them in discussions with non-believers; rather, they should accept the content of revelation by faith. Reymond's position is similar to that of his mentor Gordon Clark, which holds that all worldviews are based on certain unprovable first premises (or, axioms), and therefore are ultimately unprovable. The Christian theist therefore must simply choose to start with Christianity rather than anything else, by a "leap of faith". This position is also sometimes called presuppositional apologetics, but should not be confused with the Van Tillian variety.
Atheism[edit]
Main article: Atheism
The atheistic conclusion is that the arguments and evidence both indicate there is insufficient reason to believe that any gods exist, and that personal subjective religious experiences say something about the human experience rather than the nature of reality itself; therefore, one has no reason to believe that a god exists.
Positive atheism[edit]
Main article: Negative and positive atheism
Positive atheism (also called "strong atheism" and "hard atheism") is a form of atheism that asserts that no deities exist.[62][63][64] The strong atheist explicitly asserts the non-existence of gods. Some[who?] strong atheists further assert that the existence of gods is logically impossible, stating that the combination of attributes which God may be asserted to have (omnipotence, omniscience, omnipresence, transcendence, omnibenevolence) are logically contradictory, incomprehensible, or absurd, and therefore the existence of such a god is a priori false. Metaphysical naturalism is a common worldview associated with strong atheism.
In Science Refutes Religion, Isaacson argues an empirical form of strong atheism. If God is in the world (as opposed to being an abstract being), then science effectively proves there is no god. Because "the absence of evidence is overwhelming. There is no more reason to believe that a god-of-this-world exists than there is to believe that Zeus exists, or that Santa Claus or the Tooth Fairy exist, or the Loch Ness Monster or Bigfoot."[65] If, on the other hand, God is an "abstract being", then it means (by definition) that god doesn't interfere in the lives of us mortals. "He doesn't answer prayers. There was no burning bush." etc.[66]
Negative atheism[edit]
Negative atheism (also called "weak atheism" and "soft atheism") is any type of atheism other than positive, wherein a person does not believe in the existence of any deities, but does not explicitly assert there to be none.[62][63][64]
Agnosticism[edit]
Agnosticism is the view that the truth value of certain claims—especially claims about the existence of any deity, but also other religious and metaphysical claims—is unknown or unknowable.[67] Agnosticism as a broad umbrella term does not define one's belief or disbelief in gods; agnostics may still identify themselves as theists or atheists.[68]
Strong agnosticism[edit]
Strong agnosticism is the belief that it is impossible for humans to know whether or not any deities exist.
Weak agnosticism[edit]
Weak agnosticism is the belief that the existence or nonexistence of deities is unknown but not necessarily unknowable.
Agnostic theism[edit]
Agnostic theism is the philosophical view that encompasses both theism and agnosticism. For theism, an agnostic theist believes that the proposition at least one deity exists is true, but, per agnosticism, believes that the existence of gods is unknown or inherently unknowable. The agnostic theist may also or alternatively be agnostic regarding the properties of the god(s) they believe in.[69]
Agnostic atheism[edit]
Agnostic atheism is the view of those who do not claim to know the existence of any deity but do not believe in any.[68]
The theologian Robert Flint explains: "If a man have failed to find any good reason for believing that there is a God, it is perfectly natural and rational that he should not believe that there is a God; and if so, he is an atheist, although he assume no superhuman knowledge, but merely the ordinary human power of judging of evidence. If he go farther, and, after an investigation into the nature and reach of human knowledge, ending in the conclusion that the existence of God is incapable of proof, cease to believe in it on the ground that he cannot know it to be true, he is an agnostic and also an atheist, an agnostic-atheist—an atheist because an agnostic."[70]
Apatheism[edit]
The apatheist concludes the question of God's existence or nonexistence to be of little or no practical importance.[citation needed]
Ignosticism[edit]
The ignostic (or igtheist) usually concludes that the question of God's existence or nonexistence, like many similar questions, is usually not worth discussing because concepts like "God" are usually not sufficiently clearly defined.
Some philosophers have seen ignosticism as a variation of agnosticism or atheism,[5] while others have considered it to be distinct.
Psychological aspects[edit]
See also: Evolutionary psychology of religion
Several authors have offered psychological or sociological explanations for belief in the existence of God.
Psychologists observe that the majority of humans often ask existential questions such as "why we are here" and whether life has purpose. Some[who?] psychologists have posited that religious beliefs may recruit cognitive mechanisms in order to satisfy these questions. William James emphasized the inner religious struggle between melancholy and happiness, and pointed to trance as a cognitive mechanism. Sigmund Freud stressed fear and pain, the need for a powerful parental figure, the obsessional nature of ritual, and the hypnotic state a community can induce as contributing factors to the psychology of religion.
Pascal Boyer's Religion Explained (2002), based in part on his anthropological field work, treats belief in God as the result of the brain's tendency towards agency detection. Boyer suggests that, because of evolutionary pressures, humans err on the side of attributing agency where there isn't any. In Boyer's view, belief in supernatural entities spreads and becomes culturally fixed because of their memorability. The concept of "minimally counterintuitive" beings that differ from the ordinary in a small number of ways (such as being invisible, able to fly, or having access to strategic and otherwise secret information) leave a lasting impression that spreads through word-of-mouth.
Scott Atran's In Gods We Trust: The Evolutionary Landscape of Religion (2002) makes a similar argument and adds examination of the socially coordinating aspects of shared belief. In Minds and Gods: The Cognitive Foundations of Religion, Todd Tremlin follows Boyer in arguing that universal human cognitive process naturally produces the concept of the supernatural. Tremlin contends that an agency detection device (ADD) and a theory of mind module (ToMM) lead humans to suspect an agent behind every event. Natural events for which there is no obvious agent may be attributed to God (c.f. Act of God).
See also[edit]


Absurdism
Apologetics
Christian existential apologetics
Efficacy of prayer
Existence of Jesus
Gödel's ontological proof
Metaphysics
Pascal's Wager
Rationalism
Spectrum of theistic probability
Relationship between religion and science


References[edit]


^ See e.g. The Rationality of Theism quoting Quentin Smith "God is not 'dead' in academia; it returned to life in the late 1960s". They cite "the shift from hostility towards theism in Paul Edwards's Encyclopedia of Philosophy (1967) to sympathy towards theism in the more recent Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy
^ Catechism of the Catholic Church, Paragraph 47; cf. Canons of the First Vatican Council, 2:2
^ Barron, Robert (2011). Catholicism: A Journey to the Heart of the Faith. The Doubleday Religious Publishing Group. ISBN&#160;9780307720511.&#160;
^ Hebbar, Neria Harish. "The Principal Upanishads". Retrieved 2007-01-12.&#160;
^ a b "The Argument From Non-Cognitivism". Retrieved 2008-02-11.&#160;
^ "isms of the week: Agnosticism and Ignosticism". The Economist. 2010-07-28. Retrieved December 19, 2011.&#160;
^ Scott C. Todd, "A View from Kansas on that Evolution Debate," Nature Vol. 401, Sep. 30, 1999, p. 423
^ Polkinghorne, John (1998). Belief in God in an Age of Science. Yale University Press. ISBN&#160;0-300-07294-5.&#160;
^ see his God and Other Minds: A Study of the Rational Justification of Belief in God Cornell (1990) ISBN 0-8014-9735-3 and Warranted Christian Belief OUP (2000) ISBN 0-19-513193-2
^ See e.g. the Beale/Howson debate published Prospect May, 1998
^ See e.g. The Probability of God by Stephen D. Unwin its criticism in The God Delusion, and the critical comment in that article.
^ "iep.utm.edu". iep.utm.edu. 2004-08-30. Retrieved 2013-05-14.&#160;
^ Lewis, C.S. "10". Mere Christianity, Bk. III.&#160;
^ Klostermaier, Klaus K. (2007). A survey of Hinduism. Albany: State University of New York Press. p.&#160;357. ISBN&#160;0-7914-7081-4.&#160;
^ Sudesh Narang (1984)The Vaisnava Philosophy According to Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa, p. 30
^ Maria Ekstrand; Bryant, Edwin H. (2004). The Hare Krishna movement: the postcharismatic fate of a religious transplant. New York: Columbia University Press. p.&#160;7. ISBN&#160;0-231-12256-X.&#160;
^ a b c d e f Aquinas, Thomas (1274). Summa Theologica. Part 1, Question 2, Article 3.&#160;
^ Aquinas, Thomas; Kreeft, Peter (1990). Summa of the Summa. Ignatius Press. pp.&#160;65–69. ISBN&#160;9780898703009.&#160;
^ Davies, Brian (1992). The Thought of Thomas Aquinas. Oxford University Press. p.&#160;26. ISBN&#160;9780191520440.&#160;
^ "Stephen Edelston Toulmin". Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved 16 June 2014.&#160;
^ Hinman, Joseph. The Trace of God: A Rational Warrant for Belief (1 ed.). GrandViaduct. ISBN&#160;978-0-9824087-1-1.&#160;
^ Hinman, Joseph. "On Rational Warrant". Metacrock. Retrieved 2014-06-13.&#160;
^ Hinman, Joseph. The Trace of God: A Rational Warrant for Belief (1 ed.). GrandViaduct. pp.&#160;85–92. ISBN&#160;978-0-9824087-1-1.&#160;
^ Hinman, Joseph. The Trace of God: A Rational Warrant for Belief (1 ed.). GrandViaduct. pp.&#160;90–92. ISBN&#160;978-0-9824087-1-1.&#160;
^ Hinman, Joseph. The Trace of God: A Rational Warrant for Belief (1 ed.). GrandViaduct. pp.&#160;100–103. ISBN&#160;978-0-9824087-1-1.&#160;
^ Hinman, Joseph. The Trace of God: A Rational Warrant for Belief (1 ed.). GrandViaduct. pp.&#160;104–105. ISBN&#160;978-0-9824087-1-1.&#160;
^ a b Nolan, Lawrence. "Descartes' Ontological Argument". Stanford.&#160;
^ Aquinas, Thomas (1274). Summa Theologica. Part 1, Question 2.&#160;
^ Kreeft, Peter (2009). Socrates Meets Kant. Ignatius Press. ISBN&#160;9781586173487.&#160;
^ Himma, Kenneth Einar (27 April 2005). "Ontological Argument". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Retrieved October 12, 2011.&#160;
^ "Plantinga 'The Ontological Argument' Text". Mind.ucsd.edu. Retrieved 2013-05-14.&#160;
^ (Stuttgart, 1908)
^ "Intelligent Design". Intelligent Design. Retrieved 2013-05-14.&#160;
^ Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District, 04 cv 2688 (December 20, 2005) (“the writings of leading ID proponents reveal that the designer postulated by their argument is the God of Christianity”). , Ruling p. 26. A selection of writings and quotes of intelligent design supporters demonstrating this identification of the Christian god with the intelligent designer are found in the pdf Horse's MouthArchived June 27, 2008 at the Wayback Machine (PDF) by Brian Poindexter, dated 2003.
^ Alvin Plantinga, Warranted Christian Belief
^ Alvin Plantinga, Warrant and Proper Function
^ Richard Swinburne, The Coherence of Theism
^ This argument is articulated by Vern Poythress in chapter 1 of Redeeming Science (pages 13-31). Available: http://www.frame-poythress.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/08/PoythressVernRedeemingScience.pdf#page=14
^ Polkinghorne, John. Science and Christian Belief. pp.&#160;108–122.&#160;
^ Swinburne, Richard (1997). Is there a God?. Oxford University Press. ISBN&#160;0-19-823545-3.&#160;
^ (A. Stöckl, Geschichte der neueren Philosophie, II, 82 sqq.)
^ (Stöckl, loc. cit., 199 sqq.)
^ "Based on our real life experiences we clearly know that it was God, the Supreme Soul, Shiva, Himself, had entered into his body. It was God who had revealed the truth about the coming destruction, and of the establishment of the heavenly world which would then follow. And it was God Himself who had given the sign that he, Dada, was to be His medium and the engine for creating such a divine world."[dead link]
^ Babb, Lawrence A. (1987). Redemptive Encounters: Three Modern Styles in the Hindu Tradition (Comparative Studies in Religion and Society). Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-7069-2563-7.
^ Reichenbach, Bruce R. (April 1989). "Karma, causation, and divine intervention". Philosophy East and West (Hawaii: University of Hawaii Press) 39 (2): 135–149 [145]. doi:10.2307/1399374. Retrieved 2009-12-29.&#160;
^ see,Theistic Explanations of Karma, pg. 146 of Causation and Divine Intervention by BR Reichenbach at http://ccbs.ntu.edu.tw/FULLTEXT/JR-PHIL/reiche2.htm citing Sankara's commentary on Brahma Sutras,III, 2, 38, and 41.
^ See, Theistic Explanations of Karma, Causation and Divine Intervention by BR Reichenbach at http://ccbs.ntu.edu.tw/FULLTEXT/JR-PHIL/reiche2.htm citing Sankara's commentary on Brahma Sutras,III, 2, 38, and 41.
^ a b c See Theistic Explanations of Karma, pg. 146 of Causation and Divine Intervention by BR Reichenbach, citing Uddyotakara, Nyaayavaarttika, IV, 1, 21, at http://ccbs.ntu.edu.tw/FULLTEXT/JR-PHIL/reiche2.htm
^ Religion Explained: The Evolutionary Origins of Religious Thought, Pascal Boyer, Basic Books (2001)
^ p. 172, The Grand Design, Stephen Hawking, Leonard Mlodinow
^ Professor John Lennox (2010-09-03). "Stephen Hawking is wrong. You can't explain the universe without God | Mail Online". London: Dailymail.co.uk. Retrieved 2013-05-14.&#160;
^ Sāṁkhyapravacana Sūtra I.92.
^ Rajadhyaksha (1959). The six systems of Indian philosophy. p.&#160;95.&#160;
^ Eliot, Charles. Hinduism and Buddhism, Vol II. (of 3). p.&#160;243.&#160;
^ Neville, Robert. Religious truth. p.&#160;51.&#160;
^ Coward, Harold. The perfectibility of human nature in eastern and western thought. p.&#160;114.&#160;
^ Vatican Council I, Dei Filius 2; quoted in Catechism of the Catholic Church, 2nd edition (New York: Doubleday, 1995) n. 36, p. 20.
^ Romans 1:20
^ For the proofs of God's existence by Saint Thomas Aquinas see Quinquae viae.
^ Plantinga, Alvin (1974). The Nature of Necessity. New York: Oxford University Press. p.&#160;63.&#160;
^ 2 Timothy 3:14–15 NIV "But as for you, continue in what you have learned and have become convinced of, because you know those from whom you learned it, and how from infancy you have known the holy Scriptures, which are able to make you wise for salvation through faith in Christ Jesus." The Holy Bible, New International Version. International Bible Society. 1984.
^ a b Flew, Antony (1976). "The Presumption of Atheism". The Presumption of Atheism, and other Philosophical Essays on God, Freedom, and Immortality. New York: Barnes and Noble. pp.&#160;14ff. Retrieved 2011-12-10. In this interpretation an atheist becomes: not someone who positively asserts the non-existence of God; but someone who is simply not a theist. Let us, for future ready reference, introduce the labels 'positive atheist' for the former and 'negative atheist' for the latter.&#160;
^ a b Martin, Michael (2006). The Cambridge Companion to Atheism. Cambridge University Press. ISBN&#160;0-521-84270-0.&#160;
^ a b "Definitions of the term "Atheism"". Ontario Consultants on Religious Tolerance. 2007. Retrieved 2010-06-01.&#160;
^ Science Refutes Religion: An essay concerning How and what it means to prove God does not exist. "Science Refutes Religion: An essay concerning How and what it means to prove God does not exist, revised edition (978-1481099882): Steve Isaacson: Books". Amazon.com. Retrieved 2012-11-29.&#160;, pg. 15
^ Science Refutes Religion, pg. 24
^ Carroll, Robert (2009-02-22). "agnosticism". The Skeptic's Dictionary. skepdic.com. Retrieved 2009-10-17.&#160;
^ a b Cline, Austin. "What is Agnosticism?". About.com. Retrieved 2009-01-08.&#160;
^ "Introduction to Agnosticism: What is Agnostic Theism? Believing in God, but not Knowing God". Atheism.about.com. 2012-04-13. Retrieved 2013-05-14.&#160;
^ Flint, Robert (1903). "Erroneous VIews of Agnosticism". Agnosticism. C. Scribner sons. p.&#160;50. Retrieved 2009-11-15.&#160;


Further reading[edit]

Richard Dawkins, The God Delusion, Black Swan, 2007 (ISBN 978-0-552-77429-1).
Hick, John, ed. (1964). The Existence of God: Readings, in The Problems of Philosophy Series. New York: Macmillan Co.
Plantinga, Alvin. "Two Dozen (or so) Theistic Arguments" (PDF). Calvin College.&#160;
Schneider, Nathan (2013). God in Proof: The Story of a Search from the Ancients to the Internet. University of California Press. ISBN&#160;9780520269071.&#160;
Schneider, Nathan (December 10, 2013). "What Proofs about God Really Prove". Killing the Buddha.&#160;

External links[edit]



Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: God and Religious Toleration/The proof of God





Wikiversity has learning materials about Existence of God



A Philosophical Analysis of Major Epistemological Approaches to the Problem of Divine Existence and Nature
PhilosophyOfReligion.info. Introductory articles on philosophical arguments about the existence of God (for and against).
Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy, articles on philosophical arguments about the nature and existence of God.
A Collection of Arguments for the Existence of God
Arguments for the Existence of God from the Christian Cadre.
Is There a God? by Harley Hahn. A logical discussion considering the existence of a traditional monotheistic God.
Proofs of God's Existence: Islam—Ahmadiyyat
StrongAtheism.net References page
The Existence of God—Catholic Encyclopedia
The Classical Islamic Arguments for the Existence of God by Majid Fakhry
Arguments for God's Existence from a Christian perspective.
A Logical Proof of the existence of God from William S. Hatcher.






&#160;
Links to related articles
















v
t
e


Arguments for and against the existence of God






For



Beauty
Christological
Consciousness
Cosmological
Degree
Design
Desire
Experience
Love
Miracles
Morality
Ontological
Pascal's Wager
Proper basis
Reason
Teleological
Transcendental








Against



747 gambit
Atheist's Wager
Evil
Free will
Hell
Inconsistent revelations
Nonbelief
Noncognitivism
Occam's Razor
Omnipotence
Poor design
Russell's teapot
















v
t
e


Theology







Outline










&#160;



Conceptions of God













Theism





forms





Deism
Dystheism
Henotheism
Hermeticism
Kathenotheism
Nontheism
Monolatrism
Monotheism
Mysticism
Panentheism
Pandeism
Pantheism
Polydeism
Polytheism
Spiritualism
Theopanism
more...









concepts





Deity
Divinity
Gender of God and gods

Male deity
Goddess


Numen











Singular god
theologies





by faith




Abrahamic religions

Judaism
Christianity
Islam


the Bahá'í Faith
Buddhism
Hinduism
Jainism
Sikhism
Zoroastrianism
more...









concepts




Absolute
Brahman
Emanationism
Logos
Supreme Being
more...









God as




the Devil
Sustainer
Time











Trinitarianism



Athanasian Creed
Comma Johanneum
Consubstantiality
Homoousian
Homoiousian
Hypostasis
Perichoresis
Shield of the Trinity
Trinitarian formula
Trinity
Trinity of the Church Fathers
Trinitarian Universalism
more...








Other concepts



Aristotelian view
Attributes of God in Christianity&#160;/ in Islam
Binitarianism
Demiurge
Divine simplicity
Divine presence
Egotheism
Godhead in Christianity

Latter-Day Saints


Great Architect of the Universe
Great Spirit
Apophatic theology
Olelbis
Open theism
Personal god
Phenomenological definition
Philo's view
Sarav viāpak
Taryenyawagon
The All
Tian
Unmoved mover
more...








Names of God in



Christianity
Hinduism
Islam
Jainism
Judaism
more...


















&#160;



Existence of God
Apologetics













Arguments on the
existence of God




For




Arguments from



Beauty
Consciousness
Degree
Desire
Love
Miracles
Morality
Proper basis
Reason
Religious experience








Other arguments



Christological
Cosmological
Ontological
Pascal's wager
Teleological
Trademark
Transcendental
Witness
more...











Against




Arguments from



Free will
Inconsistent revelation
Nonbelief
Poor design








Other arguments



God of the gaps
Incompatible properties
Noncognitivism
Omnipotence paradox
Problem of evil
Problem of Hell
more...














Apologetics




General



List of apologetic works
Polemic
Positive deconstruction
more...








Christian



Apologists
List of works
Ecumenical
Presuppositional
Epistle to Diognetus
Trilemma
Urmonotheismus
more...








Other faiths



Bahá'í
Muslim apologists





















&#160;



Criticism
Opposition
Persecution













Criticism of



Buddhism
Christianity
Hinduism
Islam
Jainism
Judaism








Opposition to



Christianity

Catholicism
Protestantism
Anti-Christian sentiment


Gnosticism
Hinduism
Islam
Judaism
Cults&#160;/ New religious movements
more...








Persecution of



Buddhists
Christians
Muslims
Zoroastrians








Related topics



Disengagement from religion
Secularism
Separation of church and state


















&#160;
Eschatology










By faith



Buddhist
Christian
Hindu
Islamic
Jewish
Norse
Taoist
Zoroastrian








Topics



Afterlife
Apocalypticism
Doomsday films
Ghosts
Ghost Dance movement
Heaven
Personifications of death
more...


















&#160;
Theologies










Christian



History
Outline
Biblical canon
Glossary
Christology
Cosmology
Ecclesiology
Ethics
Hamartiology
Law
Messianism
Movements
Nestorianism
New Testament
Old Testament
Philosophy
Practical
Sophiology
Soteriology
more...








Feminist



Buddhism
Christianity
Hinduism
Islam
Judaism
Mormonism
Goddesses
more...








Hindu



Philosophical concepts
Ayyavazhi theology
Krishnology
more...








Islamic



Oneness of God
Prophets
Holy Scriptures
Angels
Predestination
Last Judgment
more...








Jewish



Abrahamic prophecy
Aggadah
Denominations
Kabbalah
Philosophy








Other



Death of God
Exotheology
Holocaust
Pope Pius XII
Process
More...


















&#160;



Education
People and resources













Seminaries and
theological colleges



Anglican
Buddhist
Eastern Orthodox
Evangelical
Islamic
Jewish
Lutheran
Madrasa
Methodist
Reformed Church
Roman Catholic
more...








Schools by affiliation



Ahmadiyya
Anglican
Assemblies of God
Bahá'í
Buddhist
Baptist
Eastern Orthodox
Hindu
Islamic
Jewish
Latter Day Saints
Lutheran
Mennonite
Methodist
Nondenominational Christian
Presbyterian
Quaker
Roman Catholic
Seventh-Day Adventist








People and resources



Theologians
Teachers
Journals

more...
























v
t
e


Theism









Deity

Divinity
Male
Female
List


God

Existence
Gender


Apatheism
Atheism

Antitheism


Binitarianism
Classical theism
Deism

Pandeism
Polydeism


Dystheism
Misotheism
Henotheism
Hylotheism
Ietsism
Kathenotheism
Monolatrism
Monotheism
Mysticism
Nontheism

Post-theism


Panentheism
Pantheism
Philosophical theism
Polytheism
Spiritualism
Theopanism
Transtheism
Trinitarianism
Unitarianism









Religion portal


















v
t
e


Philosophy of religion






Concepts in religion



Afterlife
Euthyphro dilemma
Faith
Intelligent design
Miracle
Problem of evil
Religious belief
Soul
Spirit
Theodicy
Theological veto








Conceptions of God







Aristotelian view
Brahman
Demiurge
Divine simplicity
Egoism
Holy Spirit
Maltheism
Pandeism
Personal god
Process theology
Supreme Being
Unmoved mover








God in



Abrahamic religions
Buddhism
Christianity
Hinduism
Islam
Jainism
Judaism
Mormonism
Sikhism
Bahá'í Faith
Wicca











Existence of God




For



Beauty
Christological
Consciousness
Cosmological

Kalam
Contingency


Degree
Desire
Experience
Fine-tuning of the Universe
Love
Miracles
Morality
Ontological
Pascal's Wager
Proper basis
Reason
Teleological

Natural law
Watchmaker analogy


Transcendental








Against



747 Gambit
Atheist's Wager
Evil
Free will
Hell
Inconsistent revelations
Nonbelief
Noncognitivism
Occam's razor
Omnipotence
Poor design
Russell's teapot











Theology



Acosmism
Agnosticism
Animism
Antireligion
Atheism
Creationism
Dharmism
Deism
Divine command theory
Dualism
Esotericism
Exclusivism
Existentialism

Christian
Agnostic
Atheistic


Feminist theology

Thealogy
Womanist theology


Fideism
Fundamentalism
Gnosticism
Henotheism
Humanism

Religious
Secular
Christian


Inclusivism
Theories about religions
Monism
Monotheism
Mysticism
Naturalism

Metaphysical
Religious
Humanistic


New Age
Nondualism
Nontheism
Pandeism
Panentheism
Pantheism
Perennialism
Polytheism
Process theology
Religious skepticism
Spiritualism
Shamanism
Taoic
Theism
Transcendentalism
more...








Religious language



Eschatological verification
Language-game
Logical positivism
Apophatic theology
Verificationism








Problem of evil



Augustinian theodicy
Best of all possible worlds
Euthyphro dilemma
Inconsistent triad
Irenaean theodicy
Natural evil
Theodicy









Philosophers
of religion

(by date active)




Ancient
and
Medieval



Heraclitus


Augustine of Hippo
Boethius
Anselm of Canterbury
Gaunilo of Marmoutiers
Averroes
Thomas Aquinas
Maimonides


Pico della Mirandola
Desiderius Erasmus








Enlightenment



René Descartes
Blaise Pascal
Baruch Spinoza
Nicolas Malebranche
Gottfried W Leibniz
William Wollaston
Thomas Chubb


David Hume
Baron d'Holbach
Immanuel Kant
Johann G Herder








1800
1850



Friedrich Schleiermacher
Karl C F Krause
Georg W F Hegel


William Whewell
Ludwig Feuerbach
Søren Kierkegaard
Karl Marx
Albrecht Ritschl








1880
1900



Ernst Haeckel
W K Clifford
Friedrich Nietzsche
Harald Høffding
William James


Vladimir Solovyov
Ernst Troeltsch
Rudolf Otto
Lev Shestov
Sergei Bulgakov
Pavel Florensky
Ernst Cassirer
Joseph Maréchal








1920
postwar



George Santayana
Bertrand Russell
Martin Buber
René Guénon
Paul Tillich
Karl Barth
Emil Brunner
Rudolf Bultmann
Reinhold Niebuhr


Charles Hartshorne
Mircea Eliade
J L Mackie
Walter Kaufmann
Martin Lings
Peter Geach
George I Mavrodes
William Alston
Antony Flew








1970
1990
2010



William L Rowe
Dewi Z Phillips
Alvin Plantinga
Anthony Kenny
Nicholas Wolterstorff
Richard Swinburne
Robert Merrihew Adams


Peter van Inwagen
Daniel Dennett
Loyal Rue
Jean-Luc Marion
William Lane Craig
Ali Akbar Rashad


Alexander Pruss











Related topics



Criticism of religion
Ethics in religion
Exegesis
History of religions
Religion
Religious language
Religious philosophy
Relationship between religion and science
Political science of religion
Faith and rationality
more...











 Portal
 Category
















v
t
e


Philosophy










&#160;
Branches










Traditional



Metaphysics
Epistemology
Logic
Ethics
Aesthetics








Philosophy of



Action
Art

Culture
Design
Music
Film


Being
Business
Dialogue
Education
Environment
Futility
Happiness
Healthcare
History
Human nature
Humor
Language
Literature
Mathematics
Mind

Pain
Psychology


Philosophy
Religion
Science

Physics
Chemistry
Biology
Geography


Sexuality
Social science

Economics
Justice
Law
Politics
Society


Space and time
Sport
Technology

Computer science
Engineering
Information


War


















&#160;
Schools of thought










By era



Ancient
Western

Medieval
Renaissance
Early modern
Modern
Contemporary










Ancient




Chinese



Agriculturalism
Confucianism
Legalism
Logicians
Mohism
Chinese naturalism
Neotaoism
Taoism
Yangism
Zen








Greco-Roman



Aristotelianism
Cynicism
Epicureanism
Hermeneutics
Neoplatonism
Peripatetic
Platonism
Presocratic
Pythagoreanism
Sophism
Stoicism








Indian



Buddhist
Cārvāka
Hindu
Jain








Persian



Mazdakism
Zoroastrianism
Zurvanism











Medieval
9th–16th
century





European



Christian philosophy
Scholasticism
Thomism
Renaissance humanism








East Asian



Korean Confucianism
Edo Neo-Confucianism
Neo-Confucianism








Indian



Navya-Nyāya
Vishishtadvaita
Dvaita








Islamic



Averroism
Avicennism
Persian Illuminationism
Ilm al-Kalam
Sufi








Jewish



Judeo-Islamic











Modern
17th–19th
century





people



Neo-Scholasticism
Cartesianism
Kantianism
Neo-Kantianism
Hegelianism
Marxism








Ideal&#160;/ Material



Idealism
Absolute idealism
Rationalism
Empiricism
Utilitarianism
Pragmatism








Other



Liberalism
Anarchism
Modernism
Phenomenology
Transcendentalism
Existentialism
Kokugaku
New Confucianism











Contemporary
20th–21st
century





Analytic



Analytic feminism
Consequentialism
Experimental philosophy
Internalism and Externalism
Falsificationism
Foundationalism&#160;/ Coherentism
Logical positivism
Legal positivism
Quinean Naturalism
Ordinary language philosophy
Quietism
Rawlsian
Reformed epistemology
Postanalytic philosophy
Contemporary utilitarianism
Neo-Aristotelian
Vienna Circle
Wittgensteinian








Continental



Critical theory
Deconstruction
Existentialism
Feminist
Frankfurt School
Postmodernism
Post-structuralism
Social constructionism
Structuralism








Other



Kyoto School
Objectivism
Russian cosmism
more...





















&#160;
Positions










Aesthetics



Formalism
Institutionalism
Aesthetic response








Ethics



Consequentialism
Deontology
Virtue








Free will



Compatibilism
Determinism
Libertarianism








Metaphysics



Atomism
Dualism
Monism
Naturalism








Epistemology



Constructivism
Empiricism
Idealism
Particularism
Fideism
Rationalism&#160;/ Reasonism
Skepticism
Solipsism








Mind



Behaviorism
Eliminativism
Epiphenomenalism
Functionalism
Objectivism
Subjectivism








Normativity



Absolutism
Particularism
Relativism
Nihilism
Skepticism
Universalism








Ontology



Action
Event
Process








Reality



Anti-realism
Conceptualism
Idealism
Materialism
Naturalism
Nominalism
Realism


















&#160;



Philosophy by region
Philosophy-related lists













By region



African
Ethiopian
Aztec
Native America
Eastern
Chinese
Egyptian
Czech
Indian
Indonesian
Iranian
Japanese
Korean
Vietnam
Pakistani
Western
American
British
Danish
French
German
Greek
Italian
Polish
Romanian
Russian
Slovene








Lists



Outline
Index
Years
Problems
Schools
Glossary
Philosophers
Movements
Publications

















Portal
Category
WikiProject
Changes























Religion portal
Philosophy portal
Atheism portal















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Existence_of_God&amp;oldid=690893916"					
				Categories: Arguments against the existence of GodArguments for the existence of GodReligious controversiesPhilosophical argumentsPhilosophy of religionGodSingular GodHidden categories: All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from May 2013All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from June 2012All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from August 2013Articles with unsourced statements from January 2015Articles with unsourced statements from February 2012Articles with unsourced statements from May 2014				
							
		
		
			