


		
		
		
			

							
						

			George Santayana
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				

George Santayana



A drawing of George Santayana from the early 20th century.



Born
Jorge Agustín Nicolás Ruiz de Santayana y Borrás
(1863-12-16)December 16, 1863
Madrid, Spain


Died
September 26, 1952(1952-09-26) (aged&#160;88)
Rome, Lazio, Italy


Nationality
Spanish


Alma&#160;mater
Harvard University
King's College, Cambridge





Era
20th-century philosophy


Region
Western philosophy


School



Pragmatism
Naturalism






Notable ideas

Lucretian materialism
Skepticism
Natural aristocracy
The Realms of Being




Influences





Democritus
Lucretius
Baruch Spinoza
William James











Influenced





Wallace Stevens
John Lachs











Part of a series on


Conservatism







Variants


Cultural
Fiscal
Green
Liberal
Libertarian
National
Neo-
New Right
Old Right (United States)
One-nation
Religious
Social
Southern Agrarians
Traditionalist








Concepts


Conformity
Tradition
Social norm
Family values
Social order
Patriotism
Social hierarchy
Statutory law
Private property
Protectionism








People


Edmund Burke
Joseph de Maistre
Louis de Bonald
Adam Müller
Pope Pius X
Plínio Salgado
Gustavo Barroso
François de Chateaubriand
Antoine de Rivarol
Klemens von Metternich
Leopold von Ranke
Nikolay Karamzin
John A. Macdonald
Samuel Taylor Coleridge
Juan Donoso Cortés
Jaime Balmes
John C. Calhoun
Benjamin Disraeli
Otto von Bismarck
Hippolyte Taine
Antonio de Oliveira Salazar
Francisco Rolão Preto
Alexis de Tocqueville
Orestes Brownson
Louis Veuillot
Marcel Lefebvre
Frédéric le Play
Juan Vázquez de Mella
Heinrich von Treitschke
Konstantin Leontiev
Maurice Barrès
Robert Frost
Marcelino Menéndez y Pelayo
William Hurrell Mallock
John Henry Newman
Guillaume Groen van Prinsterer
Antoine Blanc de Saint-Bonnet
Konstantin Pobedonostsev
George Santayana
Othmar Spann
Charles Maurras
Keith Joseph
Julius Evola
Ivan Ilyin
Edgar Julius Jung
Jules Barbey d'Aurevilly
Léon Bloy
John Howard
John A. Macdonald
Henri Massis
Robert A. Taft
Samuel P. Huntington
Enoch Powell
William F. Buckley, Jr.
Ronald Reagan
Margaret Thatcher
Carl Schmitt
Ramiro de Maeztu
T. E. Hulme
Pope Benedict XVI
Víctor Pradera Larumbe
Winston Churchill
Eric Voegelin
Erik von Kuehnelt-Leddihn
Michael Oakeshott
G. K. Chesterton
John Howard
Robert Bork
C. S. Lewis
Francisco Elías de Tejada y Spínola
Richard M. Weaver
Leo Strauss
Peter Viereck
Russell Kirk
Geoffrey Blainey
Thomas Molnar
Christopher Dawson
Álvaro d'Ors
Nicolás Gómez Dávila
Robert Nisbet
John Kekes
Roger Scruton








Organizations


American Center for Law &amp; Justice
International Democrat Union
International Young Democrat Union
Asia Pacific Democrat Union
European People's Party
European Democrats

Alliance of European&#160;Conservatives
and Reformists (AECR)

List of conservative parties








Religious


Christian right
Conservative Christianity
Conservative Islam
High Church Anglicanism
Traditionalist Catholics








National variants


Australia
Britain (UK)
Canada
China (PRC)
Colombia
Germany
South Korea
Serbia
Turkey
United States








Related topics


Agrarianism
Aristocracy
Capitalism
Carlism
Center-right
Corporatism
Conservative Revolution
Counter-revolutionary
Monarchism
Neo-liberalism
New Right
Radical centrism
Reactionary
Reaganism
Right-wing politics
Small government
Thatcherism
Toryism








Conservatism portal
Politics portal







v
t
e





Jorge Agustín Nicolás Ruiz de Santayana y Borrás, known as George Santayana (December 16, 1863&#160;– September 26, 1952), was a philosopher, essayist, poet, and novelist. Spanish-born, Santayana was raised and educated in the United States and identified himself as an American, although he always kept a valid Spanish passport.[1] He wrote in English and is generally considered an American man of letters. At the age of forty-eight, Santayana left his position at Harvard and returned to Europe permanently, never to return to the United States. His last wish was to be buried in the Spanish pantheon in Rome.
Santayana is known for famous sayings, such as "Those who cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it",[2] and "Only the dead have seen the end of war."[3] Santayana, like many philosophers from the late nineteenth century, was a naturalist (that is, he denied the existence of supernatural beings, like gods and ghosts), but he found profound meaning in literary writings and in religious ideas and texts (which he regarded as fundamentally akin to literature). Santayana was a broad ranging cultural critic whose observations spanned many disciplines. He said that he stood in philosophy "exactly where [he stood] in daily life."[4]



Contents


1 Biography

1.1 Early life
1.2 Education
1.3 Later life
1.4 Philosophical work and publications
1.5 Man of letters


2 Awards
3 Legacy
4 Bibliography
5 See also
6 References
7 Further reading
8 External links



Biography[edit]
Early life[edit]
Born Jorge Agustín Nicolás Ruiz de Santayana y Borrás on December 16, 1863, in Madrid, he spent his early childhood in Ávila, Spain. His mother, Josefina Borrás, was the daughter of a Spanish official in the Philippines, and Jorge was the only child of her second marriage. She was the widow of George Sturgis, a Boston merchant with whom she had five children, two of whom died in infancy. She lived in Boston for a few years following her husband's death in 1857, but in 1861 moved with her three surviving children to live in Madrid. There she encountered Agustín Ruiz de Santayana, an old friend from her years in the Philippines. They married in 1862. A colonial civil servant, Ruiz de Santayana was also a painter and minor intellectual.
The family lived in Madrid and Ávila until 1869, when Josefina Borrás de Santayana returned to Boston with her three Sturgis children, as she had promised her first husband to raise the children in the United States. She left the six-year-old Jorge with his father in Spain. Jorge and his father followed her in 1872, but his father, finding neither Boston nor his wife's attitude to his liking, soon returned alone to Ávila. He remained there the rest of his life. Jorge did not see him again until he entered Harvard College and took his summer vacations in Spain. Sometime during this period, Jorge's first name was anglicized as George, the English equivalent.
Education[edit]




Santayana lived in Hollis Hall as a student at Harvard.


Santayana attended Boston Latin School and Harvard College, where he studied under the philosophers William James and Josiah Royce and was involved in eleven clubs as an alternative to athletics. He was founder and president of the Philosophical Club, a member of the literary society known as the O.K., an editor and cartoonist for The Harvard Lampoon, and co-founder of the literary journal The Harvard Monthly.[5] In December, 1885, he played the role of Lady Elfrida in the Hasty Pudding theatrical Robin Hood, followed by the production Papillonetta in the spring of his senior year.[6] After graduating Phi Beta Kappa from Harvard[7] in 1886, Santayana studied for two years in Berlin.[8] He then returned to Harvard to write his dissertation on Hermann Lotze and teach philosophy, becoming part of the Golden Age of the Harvard philosophy department. Some of his Harvard students became famous in their own right, including T. S. Eliot, Robert Frost, Gertrude Stein, Horace Kallen, Walter Lippmann, and W. E. B. Du Bois. Wallace Stevens was not among his students but became a friend.[9] From 1896 to 1897, Santayana studied at King's College, Cambridge.[10]
Later life[edit]
In 1912, Santayana resigned his position at Harvard to spend the rest of his life in Europe. He had saved money and been aided by a legacy from his mother. After some years in Ávila, Paris and Oxford, after 1920, he began to winter in Rome, eventually living there year-round until his death. During his forty years in Europe, he wrote nineteen books and declined several prestigious academic positions. Many of his visitors and correspondents were Americans, including his assistant and eventual literary executor, Daniel Cory. In later life, Santayana was financially comfortable, in part because his 1935 novel, The Last Puritan, had become an unexpected best-seller. In turn, he financially assisted a number of writers, including Bertrand Russell, with whom he was in fundamental disagreement, philosophically and politically. Santayana never married. His romantic life, if any, is not well understood.
Some evidence, including a comment Santayana made late in life comparing himself to A. E. Housman, and his friendships with people who were openly homosexual and bisexual, has led scholars to speculate that Santayana was perhaps homosexual or bisexual himself, but it remains unclear whether he had any actual heterosexual or homosexual relationships.[11]
Philosophical work and publications[edit]




Although schooled in German idealism, Santayana was critical of it and made an effort to distance himself from its epistemology.


Santayana's main philosophical work consists of The Sense of Beauty (1896), his first book-length monograph and perhaps the first major work on aesthetics written in the United States; The Life of Reason five volumes, 1905–6, the high point of his Harvard career; Scepticism and Animal Faith (1923); and The Realms of Being (4 vols., 1927–40). Although Santayana was not a pragmatist in the mold of William James, Charles Sanders Peirce, Josiah Royce, or John Dewey, The Life of Reason arguably is the first extended treatment of pragmatism written.
Like many of the classical pragmatists, and because he was well-versed in evolutionary theory, Santayana was committed to metaphysical naturalism. He believed that human cognition, cultural practices, and social institutions have evolved so as to harmonize with the conditions present in their environment. Their value may then be adjudged by the extent to which they facilitate human happiness. The alternate title to The Life of Reason, "the Phases of Human Progress", is indicative of this metaphysical stance.
Santayana was an early adherent of epiphenomenalism, but also admired the classical materialism of Democritus and Lucretius (of the three authors on whom he wrote in Three Philosophical Poets, Santayana speaks most favorably of Lucretius). He held Spinoza's writings in high regard, calling him his "master and model".[12]
Although an atheist,[13][14] he held a fairly benign view of religion, in contrast to Bertrand Russell who held that religion was harmful. Santayana's views on religion are outlined in his books Reason in Religion, The Idea of Christ in the Gospels, and Interpretations of Poetry and Religion. Santayana described himself as an "aesthetic Catholic". He spent the last decade of his life at the Convent of the Blue Nuns of the Little Company of Mary on the Celian Hill at 6 Via Santo Stefano Rotondo in Rome, where he was cared for by the Irish sisters.
Man of letters[edit]




Santayana early in his career.


Santayana's one novel, The Last Puritan, is a bildungsroman, centering on the personal growth of its protagonist, Oliver Alden. His Persons and Places is an autobiography. These works also contain many of his sharper opinions and bons mots. He wrote books and essays on a wide range of subjects, including philosophy of a less technical sort, literary criticism, the history of ideas, politics, human nature, morals, the influence of religion on culture and social psychology, all with considerable wit and humor. While his writings on technical philosophy can be difficult, his other writings are far more accessible and pithy. He wrote poems and a few plays, and left an ample correspondence, much of it published only since 2000.
Like Alexis de Tocqueville, Santayana observed American culture and character from a foreigner's point of view. Like William James, his friend and mentor, he wrote philosophy in a literary way. Ezra Pound includes Santayana among his many cultural references in The Cantos, notably in "Canto LXXXI" and "Canto XCV". Santayana is usually considered an American writer, although he declined to become an American citizen, resided in fascist Italy for decades, and said that he was most comfortable, intellectually and aesthetically, at Oxford University.
Awards[edit]

Royal Society of Literature Benson Medal, 1925.[15]
Columbia University Butler Gold Medal, 1945.[16]
Honorary degree from the University of Wisconsin, 1911.[17]

Legacy[edit]







Santayana's famous aphorism "Those who cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it" is inscribed on a plaque at the Auschwitz concentration camp in Polish translation and English back-translation (above), and on a subway placard in Germany (below)



Santayana is remembered in large part for his aphorisms, many of which have been so frequently used as to have become clichéd. His philosophy has not fared quite as well. He is regarded by most as an excellent prose stylist, and Professor John Lachs (who is sympathetic with much of Santayana's philosophy) writes, in On Santayana, that his eloquence may ironically be the very cause of this neglect.
Santayana influenced those around him, including Bertrand Russell, who in his critical essay admits that Santayana single-handedly steered him away from the ethics of G. E. Moore.[18] He also influenced many prominent people such as Harvard students T. S. Eliot, Robert Frost, Gertrude Stein, Horace Kallen, Walter Lippmann, W. E. B. Du Bois, Conrad Aiken, Van Wyck Brooks, and Supreme Court Justice Felix Frankfurter, as well as Max Eastman and the poet Wallace Stevens. Stevens was especially influenced by Santayana's aesthetics and became a friend even though Stevens did not take courses taught by Santayana.[19][20][21]
Santayana is quoted by the Canadian-American sociologist Erving Goffman as a central influence in the thesis of his famous book The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life (1959). Religious historian Jerome A. Stone credits Santayana with contributing to the early thinking in the development of religious naturalism.[22] English mathematician and philosopher Alfred North Whitehead quotes Santayana extensively in his magnum opus Process and Reality.[23]
Chuck Jones used Santayana's description of fanaticism as "redoubling your effort after you've forgotten your aim" to describe his cartoons starring Wile E. Coyote and Road Runner.[24]




Along with Wendell Phillips and John F. Kennedy, Santayana is quoted on a military plaque at Veterans Memorial Park in Rhome, Texas.


Bibliography[edit]




Santayana's Reason in Common Sense was published in five volumes between 1905 and 1906; this edition is from 1920.



1894. Sonnets And Other Verses.
1896. The Sense of Beauty: Being the Outline of Aesthetic Theory.
1899. Lucifer: A Theological Tragedy.
1900. Interpretations of Poetry and Religion.
1901. A Hermit of Carmel And Other Poems.
1905–1906. The Life of Reason: or the Phases of Human Progress, 5 vols.
1910. Three Philosophical Poets: Lucretius, Dante, and Goethe.
1913. Winds of Doctrine: Studies in Contemporary Opinion.
1915. Egotism in German Philosophy.
1920. Character and Opinion in the United States: With Reminiscences of William James and Josiah Royce and Academic Life in America.
1920. Little Essays, Drawn From the Writings of George Santayana. by Logan Pearsall Smith, With the Collaboration of the Author.
1922. Soliloquies in England and Later Soliloquies.
1922. Poems.
1923. Scepticism and Animal Faith: Introduction to a System of Philosophy.
1926. Dialogues in Limbo
1927. Platonism and the Spiritual Life.
1927–40. The Realms of Being, 4 vols.
1931. The Genteel Tradition at Bay.
1933. Some Turns of Thought in Modern Philosophy: Five Essays
1935. The Last Puritan: A Memoir in the Form of a Novel.
1936. Obiter Scripta: Lectures, Essays and Reviews. Justus Buchler and Benjamin Schwartz, eds.
1944. Persons and Places.
1945. The Middle Span.
1946. The Idea of Christ in the Gospels; or, God in Man: A Critical Essay.
1948. Dialogues in Limbo, With Three New Dialogues.
1951. Dominations and Powers: Reflections on Liberty, Society, and Government.
1953. My Host The World

Posthumous edited/selected works

1955. The Letters of George Santayana. Daniel Cory, ed. Charles Scribner's Sons. New York. (296 letters)
1956. Essays in Literary Criticism of George Santayana. Irving Singer, ed.
1957. The Idler and His Works, and Other Essays. Daniel Cory, ed.
1967. The Genteel Tradition: Nine Essays by George Santayana. Douglas L. Wilson, ed.
1967. George Santayana's America: Essays on Literature and Culture. James Ballowe, ed.
1967. Animal Faith and Spiritual Life: Previously Unpublished and Uncollected Writings by George Santayana With Critical Essays on His Thought. John Lachs, ed.
1968. Santayana on America: Essays, Notes, and Letters on American Life, Literature, and Philosophy. Richard Colton Lyon, ed.
1968. Selected Critical Writings of George Santayana, 2 vols. Norman Henfrey, ed.
1969. Physical Order and Moral Liberty: Previously Unpublished Essays of George Santayana. John and Shirley Lachs, eds.
1979. The Complete Poems of George Santayana: A Critical Edition. Edited, with an introduction, by W. G. Holzberger. Bucknell University Press.
1995. The Birth of Reason and Other Essays. Daniel Cory, ed., with an Introduction by Herman J. Saatkamp, Jr. Columbia Univ. Press.
2009. The Essential Santayana. Selected Writings Edited by the Santayana Edition, Compiled and with an introduction by Martin A. Coleman. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.

The Works of George Santayana
Unmodernized, critical editions of George Santayana’s published and unpublished writing. The Works is edited by the Santayana Edition and published by The MIT Press.

1986. Persons and Places. Santayana's autobiography, incorporating Persons and Places, 1944; The Middle Span, 1945; and My Host the World, 1953.
1988 (1896). The Sense of Beauty: Being the Outline of Aesthetic Theory.
1990 (1900). Interpretations of Poetry and Religion.
1994 (1935). The Last Puritan: A Memoir in the Form of a Novel.
The Letters of George Santayana. Containing over 3,000 of his letters, many discovered posthumously, to more than 350 recipients.

2001. Book One, 1868–1909.
2001. Book Two, 1910–1920.
2002. Book Three, 1921–1927.
2003. Book Four, 1928–1932.
2003. Book Five, 1933–1936.
2004. Book Six, 1937–1940.
2006. Book Seven, 1941–1947.
2008. Book Eight, 1948–1952.


2011. George Santayana's Marginalia: A Critical Selection, Books 1 and 2. Compiled by John O. McCormick and edited by Kristine W. Frost.
The Life of Reason in five books.

2011 (1905). Reason in Common Sense.
2013 (1905) Reason in Society.
2014 (1905). Reason in Religion.



See also[edit]




Philosophy portal



Poetry portal



Biography portal



Conservatism portal




American philosophy
List of American philosophers
The Harvard Monthly

References[edit]


^ George Santayana, "Apologia Pro Mente Sua," in P. A. Schilpp, The Philosophy of George Santayana, (1940), 603.
^ George Santayana (1905) Reason in Common Sense, p. 284, volume&#160;1 of The Life of Reason
^ George Santayana (1922) Soliloquies in England and Later Soliloquies, number 25
^ Santayana, George (March 5, 2009), Coleman, Martin A., ed., The Essential Santayana: Selected Writings (Paperback)|format= requires |url= (help) (1st ed.), Bloomington, Indiana, United States: Indiana University Press, p.&#160;xxv, ISBN&#160;0-253-22105-6&#160;
^ Parri, Alice Two Harvard Friends: Charles Loeser and George Santayana[1]
^ Garrison, Lloyd McKim, An Illustrated History of the Hasty Pudding Club Theatricals, Cambridge, Hasty Pudding Club, 1897.
^ Who Belongs To Phi Beta Kappa, ’Phi Beta Kappa website’’, accessed Oct 4, 2009
^ "SANTAYANA, George". Who's Who, 59: p. 1555. 1907.&#160; CS1 maint: Extra text (link)
^ Lensing, George S. (1986). Wallace Stevens: A Poet's Growth. LSU Press. 313 pp. ISBN 0807112976. p.12-13.
^ "Santayana, George (SNTN896G)". A Cambridge Alumni Database. University of Cambridge.&#160;
^ http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/santayana/#1
^ The Letters of George Santayana: Book Eight, 1948–1952 By George Santayana p 8:39
^ "My atheism, like that of Spinoza, is true piety towards the universe, and denies only gods fashioned by men in their own image, to be servants of their human interests." George Santayana, 'On My Friendly Critics', in Soliloquies in England and Later Soliloquies, 1922 (from Rawson's Dictionary of American Quotations via credoreference.com). Accessed August 1, 2008.
^ "Santayana playfully called himself 'a Catholic atheist,' but in spite of the fact that he deliberately immersed himself in the stream of Catholic religious life, he never took the sacraments. He neither literally regarded himself as a Catholic nor did Catholics regard him as a Catholic." Empiricism, Theoretical Constructs, and God, by Kai Nielsen, The Journal of Religion, Vol. 54, No. 3 (Jul., 1974), pp. 199-217 (p. 205), published by The University of Chicago Press.
^ http://www.rslit.org/benson-medal
^ George Santayana; William G. Holzberger (Editor). (2006). The Letters of George Santayana, Book Seven, 1941-1947. (MIT Press (MA), Hardcover, 9780262195560, 569pp.) (p. 143).
^ http://www.secfac.wisc.edu/committees/honorarydegrees/PastRecipients.asp
^ Michael K. Potter. Bertrand Russell’s Ethics. London and New York: Continuum, 2006. Pp. xiii, 185. ISBN 0826488102, p.4
^ Lensing, George S. (1986). Wallace Stevens: A Poet's Growth. LSU Press. 313 pp. ISBN 0807112976. p.12-23.
^ http://pabook.libraries.psu.edu/palitmap/bios/Stevens__Wallace.html
^ Saatkamp, Herman, "George Santayana", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2010 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = &lt;http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2010/entries/santayana/&gt;
^ Religious Naturalism Today, page 44–52
^ Whitehead, A.N. (1929). Process and Reality. An Essay in Cosmology. Gifford Lectures Delivered in the University of Edinburgh During the Session 1927–1928, Macmillan, New York, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge UK.
^ See the sixth paragraph, That's Not All, Folks! "Of course you know this means war." Who said it?, by Terry Teachout, The Wall Street Journal, November 25, 2003, (Archived at WebCite).


Further reading[edit]

W. Arnett, 1955. Santayana and the Sense of Beauty, Bloomington, Indiana University Press.
H.T. Kirby-Smith, 1997. A Philosophical Novelist: George Santayana and the Last Puritan. Southern Illinois University Press.
Jeffers, Thomas L., 2005. Apprenticeships: The Bildungsroman from Goethe to Santayana. New York: Palgrave: 159–84.
Lamont, Corliss (ed., with the assistance of Mary Redmer), 1959. Dialogue on George Santayana. New York: Horizon Press.
McCormick, John, 1987. George Santayana: A Biography. Alfred A. Knopf. The biography.
Singer, Irving, 2000. George Santayana, Literary Philosopher. Yale University Press.
Miguel Alfonso, Ricardo (ed.), 2010, La estética de George Santayana, Madrid: Verbum.

External links[edit]



Find more about
George Santayana
at Wikipedia's sister projects




Media from Commons



Quotations from Wikiquote



Source texts from Wikisource



Data from Wikidata



Works by George Santayana at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about George Santayana at Internet Archive
Works by George Santayana at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
George Santayana entry by Herman Saatkamp in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Includes a complete bibliography of the primary literature, and a fair selection of the secondary literature
The Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy: George Santayana by Matthew C. Flamm
The Santayana Edition
Overheard in Seville: Bulletin of the Santayana Society
"George Santayana: Catholic Atheist" by Richard Butler in Spirituality Today, Vol. 38 (Winter 1986), p. 319
George Santayana at DMOZ
George Santayana at Find a Grave
George Santayana, Many Nations in One Empire (1934)









v
t
e


George Santayana






Works



The Sense of Beauty (1896)
The Life of Reason (1905–1906)
Scepticism and Animal Faith (1923)
The Last Puritan (1935)
The Realms of Being (1942)
















v
t
e


Philosophy of religion






Concepts in religion



Afterlife
Euthyphro dilemma
Faith
Intelligent design
Miracle
Problem of evil
Religious belief
Soul
Spirit
Theodicy
Theological veto








Conceptions of God







Aristotelian view
Brahman
Demiurge
Divine simplicity
Egoism
Holy Spirit
Maltheism
Pandeism
Personal god
Process theology
Supreme Being
Unmoved mover








God in



Abrahamic religions
Buddhism
Christianity
Hinduism
Islam
Jainism
Judaism
Mormonism
Sikhism
Bahá'í Faith
Wicca











Existence of God




For



Beauty
Christological
Consciousness
Cosmological

Kalam
Contingency


Degree
Desire
Experience
Fine-tuning of the Universe
Love
Miracles
Morality
Ontological
Pascal's Wager
Proper basis
Reason
Teleological

Natural law
Watchmaker analogy


Transcendental








Against



747 Gambit
Atheist's Wager
Evil
Free will
Hell
Inconsistent revelations
Nonbelief
Noncognitivism
Occam's razor
Omnipotence
Poor design
Russell's teapot











Theology



Acosmism
Agnosticism
Animism
Antireligion
Atheism
Creationism
Dharmism
Deism
Divine command theory
Dualism
Esotericism
Exclusivism
Existentialism

Christian
Agnostic
Atheistic


Feminist theology

Thealogy
Womanist theology


Fideism
Fundamentalism
Gnosticism
Henotheism
Humanism

Religious
Secular
Christian


Inclusivism
Theories about religions
Monism
Monotheism
Mysticism
Naturalism

Metaphysical
Religious
Humanistic


New Age
Nondualism
Nontheism
Pandeism
Panentheism
Pantheism
Perennialism
Polytheism
Process theology
Religious skepticism
Spiritualism
Shamanism
Taoic
Theism
Transcendentalism
more...








Religious language



Eschatological verification
Language-game
Logical positivism
Apophatic theology
Verificationism








Problem of evil



Augustinian theodicy
Best of all possible worlds
Euthyphro dilemma
Inconsistent triad
Irenaean theodicy
Natural evil
Theodicy









Philosophers
of religion

(by date active)




Ancient
and
Medieval



Heraclitus


Augustine of Hippo
Boethius
Anselm of Canterbury
Gaunilo of Marmoutiers
Averroes
Thomas Aquinas
Maimonides


Pico della Mirandola
Desiderius Erasmus








Enlightenment



René Descartes
Blaise Pascal
Baruch Spinoza
Nicolas Malebranche
Gottfried W Leibniz
William Wollaston
Thomas Chubb


David Hume
Baron d'Holbach
Immanuel Kant
Johann G Herder








1800
1850



Friedrich Schleiermacher
Karl C F Krause
Georg W F Hegel


William Whewell
Ludwig Feuerbach
Søren Kierkegaard
Karl Marx
Albrecht Ritschl








1880
1900



Ernst Haeckel
W K Clifford
Friedrich Nietzsche
Harald Høffding
William James


Vladimir Solovyov
Ernst Troeltsch
Rudolf Otto
Lev Shestov
Sergei Bulgakov
Pavel Florensky
Ernst Cassirer
Joseph Maréchal








1920
postwar



George Santayana
Bertrand Russell
Martin Buber
René Guénon
Paul Tillich
Karl Barth
Emil Brunner
Rudolf Bultmann
Reinhold Niebuhr


Charles Hartshorne
Mircea Eliade
J L Mackie
Walter Kaufmann
Martin Lings
Peter Geach
George I Mavrodes
William Alston
Antony Flew








1970
1990
2010



William L Rowe
Dewi Z Phillips
Alvin Plantinga
Anthony Kenny
Nicholas Wolterstorff
Richard Swinburne
Robert Merrihew Adams


Peter van Inwagen
Daniel Dennett
Loyal Rue
Jean-Luc Marion
William Lane Craig
Ali Akbar Rashad


Alexander Pruss











Related topics



Criticism of religion
Ethics in religion
Exegesis
History of religions
Religion
Religious language
Religious philosophy
Relationship between religion and science
Political science of religion
Faith and rationality
more...











 Portal
 Category
















v
t
e


Aesthetics






Philosophers



Abhinavagupta
Theodor W. Adorno
Leon Battista Alberti
Thomas Aquinas
Hans Urs von Balthasar
Alexander Gottlieb Baumgarten
Clive Bell
Bernard Bosanquet
Edward Bullough
R. G. Collingwood
Ananda Coomaraswamy
Arthur Danto
John Dewey
Denis Diderot
Hubert Dreyfus
Curt John Ducasse
Thierry de Duve
Roger Fry
Nelson Goodman
Clement Greenberg
Georg Hegel
Martin Heidegger
David Hume
Immanuel Kant
Paul Klee
Susanne Langer
Theodor Lipps
György Lukács
Jean-François Lyotard
Joseph Margolis
Jacques Maritain
Thomas Munro
Friedrich Nietzsche
José Ortega y Gasset
Dewitt H. Parker
Stephen Pepper
David Prall
Ayn Rand
George Lansing Raymond
I. A. Richards
George Santayana
Friedrich Schiller
Arthur Schopenhauer
Roger Scruton
Irving Singer
Rabindranath Tagore
Giorgio Vasari
Morris Weitz
Richard Wollheim
more...








Theories



Classicism
Evolutionary aesthetics
Historicism
Modernism
New Classical
Postmodernism
Psychoanalytic theory
Romanticism
Symbolism
more...








Concepts



Aesthetic emotions
Aesthetic interpretation
Art manifesto
Avant-garde
Beauty
Boredom
Camp
Comedy
Creativity
Cuteness
Disgust
Ecstasy
Elegance
Entertainment
Eroticism
Gaze
Harmony
Judgement
Kama
Kitsch
Life imitating art
Magnificence
Mimesis
Perception
Quality
Rasa
Reverence
Style
Sublime
Taste
Work of art
more...








Related topics



Aesthetics of music
Applied aesthetics
Architecture
Art
Arts criticism
Gastronomy
History of painting
Humour
Japanese aesthetics
Literary merit
Mathematical beauty
Mathematics and art
Music theory
Neuroesthetics
Painting
Philosophy of design
Philosophy of film
Philosophy of music
Poetry
Sculpture
Theory of painting
Theory of art
Tragedy











Category
Discussion
Portal
Stubs
Task Force













Authority control



WorldCat
VIAF: 59098309
LCCN: n79043580
ISNI: 0000 0001 1064 5919
GND: 118794507
SUDOC: 028486110
BNF: cb12031254s (data)
ULAN: 500325473
NDL: 00525837
NKC: jn20000604788
ICCU: IT\ICCU\RAVV\041446















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=George_Santayana&amp;oldid=685128654"					
				Categories: 1863 births1952 deaths19th-century American writers19th-century philosophers20th-century American novelists20th-century philosophersAlumni of King's College, CambridgeAmerican atheistsAmerican essayistsAmerican memoiristsAmerican male novelistsAmerican writers of Filipino descentAmerican people of Spanish descentAmerican philosophersAphoristsCancer deaths in ItalyDeaths from stomach cancerHarvard Lampoon peopleHarvard University alumniHarvard University facultyMaterialistsWriters from Boston, MassachusettsWriters from MadridPeople from RomePhilosophers of artPhilosophers of sexualityPragmatistsSpanish atheistsSpanish essayistsSpanish emigrants to the United StatesSpanish memoiristsSpanish novelistsSpanish people of Filipino descentSpanish philosophersSpanish poets20th-century American poetsAmerican male poetsMale essayistsSpanish male novelistsSpanish male poetsHidden categories: Pages using citations with format and no URLCS1 maint: Extra textArticles with hCardsArticles with DMOZ linksWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with ULAN identifiersWikipedia articles with SBN identifiers				
							
		
		
			