


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Government
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				For government in linguistics, see Government (linguistics).


Part of the Politics series


Basic forms of government


Power structure




Confederation
Empire
Federation
Hegemony
Unitary state




Power source





Authoritarian state




Autocracy
Despotism
Illiberal democracy
Semi-authoritarian
Dictatorship
Totalitarianism




Democracy




Direct
Representative
Semi
others




Monarchy




Absolute
Constitutional
Legalist




Oligarchy




Aristocracy
Military junta
Plutocracy
Stratocracy
Timocracy




Other




Anarchy
Anocracy
Kritarchy
Minarchy
Particracy
Republic
Theocracy







Politics portal





v
t
e







Part of a series on


Politics







Primary topics



Index of politics articles
Politics by country
Politics by subdivision
Political economy
Political history
Political history of the world
Political philosophy









Political systems



Anarchism


City-state
Democracy


Federacy
Feudalism


Dictatorship
Directorialism


Meritocracy
Monarchy


Parliamentary
Presidential


Semi-presidential
Theocracy









Academic disciplines




Political science
(political scientists)


International relations
(theory)

Comparative politics









Public administration



Bureaucracy (street-level)
Adhocracy









Policy



Public policy (doctrine)


Public interest
Foreign policy









Organs of government



Separation of powers


Legislature
Executive


Judiciary
Electoral branch









Related topics



Sovereignty
Theories of political behavior
Political psychology
Biology and political orientation
Political organisations









Subseries



Electoral systems


Elections (voting)


Federalism
Form of government


Ideology
Political campaigning


Political parties







Politics portal





v
t
e





A government is the system by which a state or community is controlled.[1] In the Commonwealth of Nations, the word government is also used more narrowly to refer to the collective group of people that exercises executive authority in a state.[2][3][4] This usage is analogous to what is called an "administration" in American English. Furthermore, especially in American English, the concepts of the state and the government may be used synonymously to refer to the person or group of people exercising authority over a politically organized territory.[5][6] Finally, government is also sometimes used in English as a synonym for governance.
In the case of its broad associative definition, government normally consists of legislators, administrators, and arbitrators. Government is the means by which state policy is enforced, as well as the mechanism for determining the policy of the state. A form of government, or form of state governance, refers to the set of political systems and institutions that make up the organisation of a specific government.
Government of any kind currently affects every human activity in many important ways. For this reason, political scientists generally argue that government should not be studied by itself; but should be studied along with anthropology, economics, environmentalism, history, philosophy, science, and sociology.



Contents


1 Political science

1.1 Classifying government
1.2 The dialectical forms of government
1.3 Etymology


2 Forms of government by associated attributes

2.1 By elements of where decision-making power is held

2.1.1 Aristarchic attributes
2.1.2 Autocratic attributes
2.1.3 Monarchic attributes
2.1.4 Pejorative attributes


2.2 By elements of who elects the empowered

2.2.1 Authoritarian attributes
2.2.2 Democratic attributes
2.2.3 Oligarchic attributes
2.2.4 Other attributes


2.3 By elements of how power distribution is structured

2.3.1 Republican attributes
2.3.2 Federalism attributes
2.3.3 Other power structure attributes




3 Forms of government by other characteristic attributes

3.1 By socio-economic system attributes
3.2 By significant constitutional attributes
3.3 By approach to regional autonomy
3.4 Theoretical and speculative attributes


4 Maps
5 See also
6 References
7 Bibliography
8 Further reading
9 External links



Political science[edit]
Classifying government[edit]
In political science, it has long been a goal to create a typology or taxonomy of polities, as typologies of political systems are not obvious.[7] It is especially important in the political science fields of comparative politics and international relations.
On the surface, identifying a form of government appears to be simple, as all governments have an official form. The United States is a Constitutional republic, while the former Soviet Union was a socialist republic. However self-identification is not objective, and as Kopstein and Lichbach argue, defining regimes can be tricky.[8] For example, elections are a defining characteristic of a democracy,[citation needed] but in practice elections in the former Soviet Union were not "free and fair" and took place in a single party state. Thus in many practical classifications it would not be considered democratic.
Identifying a form of government is also difficult because a large number of political systems originate as socio-economic movements and are then carried into governments by specific parties naming themselves after those movements; all with competing political-ideologies. Experience with those movements in power, and the strong ties they may have to particular forms of government, can cause them to be considered as forms of government in themselves.
Other complications include general non-consensus or deliberate "distortion or bias" of reasonable technical definitions to political ideologies and associated forms of governing, due to the nature of politics in the modern era. For example: The meaning of "conservatism" in the United States has little in common with the way the word's definition is used elsewhere. As Ribuffo (2011) notes, "what Americans now call conservatism much of the world calls liberalism or neoliberalism".[9] Since the 1950s conservatism in the United States has been chiefly associated with the Republican Party. However, during the era of segregation many Southern Democrats were conservatives, and they played a key role in the Conservative Coalition that controlled Congress from 1937 to 1963.[10]
Every country in the world is ruled by a system of governance that combines at least 2 (or more) of the following attributes (for example, the United States is not a true capitalist society, since the government actually provides social services for its citizens). Additionally, one person's opinion of the type of government may differ from another's (for example, some may argue that the United States is a plutocracy rather than a democracy since they may believe it is ruled by the wealthy).[11] There are always shades of gray in any government. Even the most liberal democracies limit rival political activity to one extent or another, and even the most tyrannical dictatorships must organise a broad base of support, so it is very difficult "pigeonholing" every government into narrow categories.
[clarification needed]

MaxRange, a dataset defining level of democracy and institutional structure(regime-type) on a 100-graded scale where every value represents a unique regimetype. Values are sorted from 1-100 based on level of democracy and political accountability. MaxRange defines the value corresponding to all states and every month from 1789 to 2015 and updating. MaxRange is created and developed by Max Range, and is now associated with the university of Halmstad, Sweden [12]

The dialectical forms of government[edit]
Main article: Plato's five regimes
The Classical Greek philosopher Plato discusses five types of regimes. They are aristocracy, timocracy, oligarchy, democracy and tyranny. Plato also assigns a man to each of these regimes to illustrate what they stand for. The tyrannical man would represent tyranny for example. These five regimes progressively degenerate starting with aristocracy at the top and tyranny at the bottom.
In Republic, while Plato spends much time having Socrates narrate a conversation about the city he founds with Glaucon and Adeimantus "in speech", the discussion eventually turns to considering four regimes that exist in reality and tend to degrade successively into each other: timocracy, oligarchy (also called plutocracy), democracy and tyranny (also called despotism).
Etymology[edit]
arch-, prefix derived from the Greek archon, 'rulership', which means "higher in hierarchy".[13] The Greek word κράτος krátos, 'power', which means "right to lead" is the suffix root in words like aristocrat and democracy.
Forms of government by associated attributes[edit]
Descriptions of governments can be based on the following attributes:
By elements of where decision-making power is held[edit]
Aristarchic attributes[edit]
Governments with aristarchy attributes are traditionally controlled and organised by a small group of the most-qualified people, with no intervention from the most part of society; this small group usually shares some common trait. The opposite of an aristarchic government is kakistocracy.


Term
Definition


Aristocracy
Rule by elite citizens. It has come to mean rule by "the aristocracy" who are people of noble birth. An aristocracy is a government by the "best" people. A person who rules in an aristocracy is an aristocrat. Aristocracy is different from nobility, in that nobility means that one bloodline would rule; an aristocracy would mean that a few or many bloodlines would rule, or that rulers be chosen in a different manner.


Geniocracy
Rule by the intelligent; a system of governance where creativity, innovation, intelligence and wisdom are required for those who wish to govern. See Aristocracy of the wise.


Kratocracy
Rule by the strong; a system of governance where those who are strong enough seize power through physical force, social maneuvering or political cunning. The process can mimic Darwinian selection.


Meritocracy
Rule by the meritorious; a system of governance where groups are selected on the basis of people's ability, knowledge in a given area, and contributions to society.


Timocracy
Rule by honour; a system of governance ruled by honorable citizens and property owners. Socrates defines a timocracy as a government ruled by people who love honour and are selected according to the degree of honour they hold in society. This form of timocracy is very similar to meritocracy, in the sense that individuals of outstanding character or faculty are placed in the seat of power. European feudalism and post-Revolutionary America are historical examples of this type; the city-state of Sparta provided another real-world model for this form of government.


Technocracy
Rule by the educated or technical experts; a system of governance where people who are skilled or proficient govern in their respective areas of expertise in technology would be in control of all decision making. Doctors, engineers, scientists, professionals and technologists who have knowledge, expertise, or skills, would compose the governing body, instead of politicians, businessmen, and economists.[14] In a technocracy, decision makers would be selected based upon how knowledgeable and skillful they are in their field.


Autocratic attributes[edit]
Governments with autocratic attributes are dominated by one person who has all the power over the people in a country. The Roman Republic made dictators to lead during times of war; the Roman dictators only held power for a small time. In modern times, an autocrat's rule is not stopped by any rules of law, constitutions, or other social and political institutions. After World War II, many governments in Latin America, Asia, and Africa were ruled by autocratic governments. Examples of autocrats include Idi Amin, Muammar Gaddafi, Adolf Hitler and Gamal Abdul Nasser.


Term
Definition


Autocracy
Rule by one individual, whose decisions are subject to neither external legal restraints nor regular mechanisms of popular control (except perhaps for implicit threat). An autocrat needs servants while a despot needs slaves.


Despotism
Rule by a single entity with absolute power. That entity may be an individual, as in an autocracy, or it may be a group, as in an oligarchy. The word despotism means to "rule in the fashion of a despot" and does not necessarily require a single, or individual, "despot". A despot needs slaves while an autocrat needs servants.


Dictatorship
Rule by an individual who has full power over the country. The term may refer to a system where the dictator came to power, and holds it, purely by force; but it also includes systems where the dictator first came to power legitimately but then was able to amend the constitution so as to, in effect, gather all power for themselves.[15] In a military dictatorship, the army is in control. Usually, there is little or no attention to public opinion or individual rights. See also Autocracy and Stratocracy.


Fascism
Rule by leader base only. Focuses heavily on patriotism and national identity. The leader(s) has the power to make things illegal that do not relate to nationalism, or increase belief in national pride. They believe their nation is based on commitment to an organic national community where its citizens are united together as one people through a national identity. It exalts nation and race above the individual and stands for severe economic and social regimentation, and forcible suppression of opposition.


Monarchic attributes[edit]
Governments with monarchic attributes are ruled by a king/emperor or a queen/empress who usually holds their position for life. There are two types of monarchies: absolute monarchies and constitutional monarchies. In an absolute monarchy, the ruler has no limits on their wishes or powers. In a constitutional monarchy a ruler's powers are limited by a document called a constitution. The constitution was put in place to put a check to these powers.


Term
Definition


Monarchy
Rule by royalty; a system of government where the role has been inherited by an individual, the monarch, who expects to bequeath it to their heir.[16]


Absolute monarchy
Variant of monarchy; a system of governance in which a monarch exercises ultimate governing authority as head of state and head of government such as the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.


Constitutional monarchy
Variant of monarchy; a system of governance that has a monarch, but one whose powers are limited by law or by a formal constitution, such as that in the United Kingdom.[17][18]


Diarchy
Variant of monarchy; a system of government in which two individuals, the diarchs, are the heads of state. In most diarchies, the diarchs hold their position for life and pass the responsibilities and power of the position to their children or family when they die. Diarchy is one of the oldest forms of government. In modern usage diarchy means a system of dual rule, whether this be of a government or of an organisation. Such 'diarchies' are not hereditary.


Elective monarchy
Variant of monarchy; a system of governance that has an elected monarch, in contrast to a hereditary monarchy in which the office is automatically passed down as a family inheritance. The democratic manner of election, the nature of candidate qualifications, and the electors vary from case to case.


Emirate
Similar to a monarchy or sultanate; a system of governance in which the supreme power is in the hands of an emir (the ruler of a Muslim state); the emir may be an absolute overlord or a sovereign with constitutionally limited authority.[19]


Federal monarchy
Variant of monarchy; a system of governance where a federation of states with a single monarch as overall head of the federation, but retaining different monarchs, or a non-monarchical system of government, in the various states joined to the federation.


Pejorative attributes[edit]
Regardless of the form of government, the actual governance may be influenced by sectors with political power which are not part of the formal government. Certain actions of the governors, such as corruption, demagoguery, or fear mongering, may disrupt the intended way of working of the government if they are widespread enough.


Term
Definition


Bankocracy
Rule by banks;[20] a system of governance with excessive power or influence of banks and other financial authorities on public policy-making. It can also refer to a form of government where financial institutions rule society.


Corporatocracy
Rule by corporations; a system of governance where an economic and political system is controlled by corporations or corporate interests.[21] Its use is generally pejorative. Examples include company rule in India and business voters for the City of London Corporation.


Nepotocracy
Rule by nephews; favouritism granted to relatives regardless of merit; a system of governance in which importance is given to the relatives of those already in power, like a nephew (where the word comes from). In such governments even if the relatives aren't qualified they are given positions of authority just because they know someone who already has authority. Pope Alexander VI (Borgia) was accused of this.


Kakistocracy
Rule by the stupid; a system of governance where the worst or least-qualified citizens govern or dictate policies. Due to human nature being inherently flawed, it has been suggested that every government which has ever existed has been a prime example of kakistocracy. See Idiocracy.


Kleptocracy (Mafia state)
Rule by thieves; a system of governance where its officials and the ruling class in general pursue personal wealth and political power at the expense of the wider population. In strict terms kleptocracy is not a form of government but a characteristic of a government engaged in such behavior. Examples include Mexico as being considered a narcokleptocracy, since its democratic government is perceived to be corrupted by those who profit from trade in illegal drugs smuggled into the United States.


Ochlocracy
Rule by the general populace; a system of governance where mob rule is government by mob or a mass of people, or the intimidation of legitimate authorities. As a pejorative for majoritarianism, it is akin to the Latin phrase mobile vulgus meaning "the fickle crowd", from which the English term "mob" was originally derived in the 1680s. Ochlocratic governments are often a democracy spoiled by demagoguery, "tyranny of the majority" and the rule of passion over reason; such governments can be as oppressive as autocratic tyrants. Ochlocracy is synonymous in meaning and usage to the modern, informal term "mobocracy."


By elements of who elects the empowered[edit]
Authoritarian attributes[edit]



This section requires expansion. (December 2012)




Term
Definition


Authoritarian
Rule by authoritarian governments is identified in societies where a specific set of people possess the authority of the state in a republic or union. It is a political system controlled by unelected rulers who usually permit some degree of individual freedom.


Totalitarian
Rule by a totalitarian government is characterised by a highly centralised and coercive authority that regulates nearly every aspect of public and private life.


Democratic attributes[edit]
Further information: Outline of democracy
Governments with democratic attributes are most common in the Western world and in some countries of the east that have been influenced by western society, often by being colonised by western powers over the course of history. In democracies, large proportions of the population may vote, either to make decisions or to choose representatives to make decisions. Commonly significant in democracies are political parties, which are groups of people with similar ideas about how a country or region should be governed. Different political parties have different ideas about how the government should handle different problems.


Term
Definition


Demarchy
Variant of democracy; government in which the state is governed by randomly selected decision makers who have been selected by sortition (lot) from a broadly inclusive pool of eligible citizens. These groups, sometimes termed "policy juries", "citizens' juries", or "consensus conferences", deliberately make decisions about public policies in much the same way that juries decide criminal cases.
Demarchy, in theory, could overcome some of the functional problems of conventional representative democracy, which is widely subject to manipulation by special interests and a division between professional policymakers (politicians and lobbyists) vs. a largely passive, uninvolved and often uninformed electorate. According to Australian philosopher John Burnheim, random selection of policymakers would make it easier for everyday citizens to meaningfully participate, and harder for special interests to corrupt the process.
More generally, random selection of decision makers from a larger group is known as sortition (from the Latin base for lottery). The Athenian democracy made much use of sortition, with nearly all government offices filled by lottery (of full citizens) rather than by election. Candidates were almost always male, Greek, educated citizens holding a minimum of wealth and status.



Democracy
Rule by a government chosen by election where most of the populace are enfranchised. The key distinction between a democracy and other forms of constitutional government is usually taken to be that the right to vote is not limited by a person's wealth or race (the main qualification for enfranchisement is usually having reached a certain age). A democratic government is, therefore, one supported (at least at the time of the election) by a majority of the populace (provided the election was held fairly). A "majority" may be defined in different ways. There are many "power-sharing" (usually in countries where people mainly identify themselves by race or religion) or "electoral-college" or "constituency" systems where the government is not chosen by a simple one-vote-per-person headcount.


Direct democracy
Variant of democracy; government in which the people represent themselves and vote directly for new laws and public policy


Liberal democracy
Variant of democracy; a form of government in which representative democracy operates under the principles of liberalism. It is characterised by fair, free, and competitive elections between multiple distinct political parties, a separation of powers into different branches of government, the rule of law in everyday life as part of an open society, and the protection of human rights and civil liberties for all persons. To define the system in practice, liberal democracies often draw upon a constitution, either formally written or uncodified, to delineate the powers of government and enshrine the social contract. After a period of sustained expansion throughout the 20th century, liberal democracy became the predominant political system in the world. A liberal democracy may take various constitutional forms: it may be a constitutional republic, such as France, Germany, India, Ireland, Italy, or the United States; or a constitutional monarchy, such as Japan, Spain, or the United Kingdom. It may have a presidential system (Argentina, Brazil, Mexico, or the United States), a semi-presidential system (France or Taiwan), or a parliamentary system (Australia, Canada, India, New Zealand, Poland, or the United Kingdom).


Representative democracy
Variant of democracy; wherein the people or citizens of a country elect representatives to create and implement public policy in place of active participation by the people.


Social democracy
Variant of democracy; social democracy rejects the "either/or" phobiocratic/polarisation interpretation of capitalism versus socialism. It claims that fostering a progressive evolution of capitalism will gradually result in the evolution of capitalist economy into socialist economy. Social democracy argues that all citizens should be legally entitled to certain social rights. These are made up of universal access to public services such as: education, health care, workers' compensation, public transportation, and other services including child care and care for the elderly. Social democracy is connected with the trade union labour movement and supports collective bargaining rights for workers. Contemporary social democracy advocates freedom from discrimination based on differences of: ability/disability, age, ethnicity, sex, gender, language, race, religion, sexual orientation, and social class.


Totalitarian democracy
Variant of democracy; refers to a system of government in which lawfully elected representatives maintain the integrity of a nation state whose citizens, while granted the right to vote, have little or no participation in the decision-making process of the government.


Oligarchic attributes[edit]
Governments with oligarchic attributes are ruled by a small group of segregated, powerful and/or influential people, who usually share similar interests and/or family relations. These people may spread power and elect candidates equally or not equally. An oligarchy is different from a true democracy because very few people are given the chance to change things. An oligarchy does not have to be hereditary or monarchic. An oligarchy does not have one clear ruler, but several rulers.
Some historical examples of oligarchy are the former Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. Some critics of representative democracy think of the United States as an oligarchy. The Athenian democracy used sortition to elect candidates, almost always male, white, Greek, educated citizens holding a minimum of land, wealth and status.


Term
Definition


Ergatocracy
Rule by the proletariat, the workers, or the working class. Examples of ergatocracy include communist revolutionaries and rebels which control most of society and create an alternative economy for people and workers. See Dictatorship of the proletariat. [clarification needed]


Kritarchy
Rule by various judges, the kritarchs; a system of governance composed of law enforcement institutions in which the state and the legal systems are traditionally and/or constitutionally the same entity. The kritarchs, magistrates and other adjudicators have the legal power to legislate and administrate the enforcement of government laws, in addition to the interposition of laws and the resolution of disputes. (Not to be confused with "judiciary" or "judicial system".) Somalia, ruled by judges with the tradition of xeer,[22] as well as the Islamic Courts Union, is a historical example.[citation needed]


Netocracy
Rule by social connections; a term invented by the editorial board of the American technology magazine Wired in the early 1990s. A portmanteau of Internet and aristocracy, netocracy refers to a perceived global upper-class that bases its power on a technological advantage and networking skills, in comparison to what is portrayed as a bourgeoisie of a gradually diminishing importance. The netocracy concept has been compared with Richard Florida's concept of the creative class. Bard and Söderqvist have also defined an under-class in opposition to the netocracy, which they refer to as the consumtariat.


Oligarchy
Rule by a system of governance with small group of individuals, the oligarchs, who share similar interests or family relations.[23]


Plutocracy
Rule by the rich; a system of governance composed of the wealthy class. Any of the forms of government listed here can be plutocracy. For instance, if all of the elected representatives in a republic are wealthy, then it is a republic and a plutocracy.[24]


Stratocracy
Rule by military service; a system of governance composed of military government in which the state and the military are traditionally and/or constitutionally the same entity. Citizens with mandatory or voluntary active military service, or who have been honorably discharged, have the right to govern. (Not to be confused with "military junta" or "military dictatorship".) The Spartan city-state is a historical example; its social system and constitution, were completely focused on military training and excellence. Stratocratic ideology often attaches to the honor-oriented timocracy.


Theocracy
Rule by a religious elite; a system of governance composed of religious institutions in which the state and the church are traditionally and/or constitutionally the same entity. Citizens who are clergy have the right to govern.[25] The Vatican's (see Pope), the Tibetan government's (see Dalai Lama) and Islamic states are historically considered theocracies.


Other attributes[edit]


Term
Definition


Anarchy
A society without a publicly enforced government or violently enforced political authority.[26][27] Sometimes said to be non-governance; it is a structure which strives for non-hierarchical voluntary associations among agents. Anarchy is a situation where there is no government. When used in this sense, anarchy may[28] or may not[29] be intended to imply political disorder or lawlessness within a society.
This can happen after a civil war in a country, when a government has been destroyed and many anti-government individuals, the anarchs, are fighting to take its place and corrupt the society. These individuals are most often called anarchists, for they believe that any government is a bad thing – this belief is called anarchism. Anarchists think governments stop people organising their own lives. Instead they think people would be better off if they ruled their own lives and worked together to create a society in any form they choose.
Outside of the U.S., and by most individuals that self-identify as anarchists, it implies a system of governance, mostly theoretical at a nation state level. There are also other forms of anarchy that attempt to avoid the use of coercion, violence, force and authority, while still producing a productive and desirable society.[30][31]



Anocracy
An regime type where power is not vested in public institutions (as in a normal democracy) but spread amongst elite groups who are constantly competing with each other for power. Examples of anocracies in Africa include the warlords of Somalia and the shared governments in Kenya and Zimbabwe. Anocracies are situated midway between an autocracy and a democracy.[32]
The Polity IV dataset[clarification needed] recognised anocracy as a category. In that dataset, anocracies are exactly in the middle between autocracies and democracies.
Often the word is defined more broadly. For example, a 2010 International Alert publication defined anocracies as "countries that are neither autocratic nor democratic, most of which are making the risky transition between autocracy and democracy".[33] Alert noted that the number of anocracies had increased substantially since the end of the Cold War. Anocracy is not surprisingly the least resilient political system to short-term shocks: it creates the promise but not yet the actuality of an inclusive and effective political economy, and threatens members of the established elite; and is therefore very vulnerable to disruption and armed violence.



Banana republic
A politically unstable kleptocratic government that economically depends upon the exports of a limited resource (fruits, minerals), and usually features a society composed of stratified social classes, such as a great, impoverished ergatocracy and a ruling plutocracy, composed of the aristocracy of business, politics, and the military.[34] In political science, the term banana republic denotes a country dependent upon limited primary-sector productions, which is ruled by a plutocracy who exploit the national economy by means of a politico-economic oligarchy.[35] In American literature, the term banana republic originally denoted the fictional Republic of Anchuria, a servile dictatorship that abetted, or supported for kickbacks, the exploitation of large-scale plantation agriculture, especially banana cultivation.[35] In U.S. politics, the term banana republic is a pejorative political descriptor coined by the American writer O. Henry in Cabbages and Kings (1904), a book of thematically related short stories derived from his 1896–97 residence in Honduras, where he was hiding from U.S. law for bank embezzlement.[36]


Maoism
The theory and practice of Marxism-Leninism developed in China by Mao Zedong (Mao Tse-tung), which states that a continuous revolution is necessary if the leaders of a communist state are to keep in touch with the people.


By elements of how power distribution is structured[edit]
Republican attributes[edit]
A republic is a form of government in which the country is considered a "public matter" (Latin: res publica), not the private concern or property of the rulers, and where offices of states are subsequently directly or indirectly elected or appointed rather than inherited.


Term
Definition


Republic
Rule by a form of government in which the people, or some significant portion of them, have supreme control over the government and where offices of state are elected or chosen by elected people.[37][38] A common simplified definition of a republic is a government where the head of state is not a monarch.[39][40] Montesquieu included both democracies, where all the people have a share in rule, and aristocracies or oligarchies, where only some of the people rule, as republican forms of government.[41]


Constitutional republic
Rule by a government whose powers are limited by law or a formal constitution, and chosen by a vote amongst at least some sections of the populace (Ancient Sparta was in its own terms a republic, though most inhabitants were disenfranchised). Republics that exclude sections of the populace from participation will typically claim to represent all citizens (by defining people without the vote as "non-citizens"). Examples include the United States, South Africa, India, etc.


Democratic republic
A republic form of government where the country is considered a "public matter" (Latin: res publica), not a private concern or property of rulers/3rd world, and where offices of states are subsequently, directly or indirectly, elected or appointed – rather than inherited – where all eligible citizens have an equal say in the local and national decisions that affect their lives.


Parliamentary republic
A republic, like India, Singapore and Poland, with an elected head of state, but where the head of state and head of government are kept separate with the head of government retaining most executive powers, or a head of state akin to a head of government, elected by a parliament.


Federal republic
A federal union of states or provinces with a republican form of government. Examples include Argentina, Austria, Brazil, Germany, India, Russia, and Switzerland.


Islamic Republic
Republics governed in accordance with Islamic law. Examples include Afghanistan, Pakistan, and Iran.


Socialist republic
Countries like China and Vietnam are meant to be governed for and by the people, but with no direct elections. The term People's Republic is used to differentiate themselves from the earlier republic of their countries before the people's revolution, like the Republic of China and Republic of Korea.


Federalism attributes[edit]



This section requires expansion. (January 2013)


Federalism is a political concept in which a group of members are bound together by covenant (Latin: foedus, covenant) with a governing representative head. The term "federalism" is also used to describe a system of government in which sovereignty is constitutionally divided between a central governing authority and constituent political units (such as states or provinces). Federalism is a system based upon democratic rules and institutions in which the power to govern is shared between national and provincial/state governments, creating what is often called a federation. Proponents are often called federalists.


Term
Definition


Federalism
Rule by a form of government in which the people, or some significant portion of them, have supreme control over the government and where offices of state are elected or chosen by elected people.[37][38] Montesquieu included both democracies, where all the people have a share in rule, and aristocracies or oligarchies, where only some of the people rule, as republican forms of government.[41]


Federal monarchy
A federal monarchy is a federation of states with a single monarch as overall head of the federation, but retaining different monarchs, or a non-monarchical system of government, in the various states joined to the federation.


Federal republic
A federal union of states or provinces with a republican form of government. Examples include Argentina, Austria, Brazil, Germany, India, Russia, and Switzerland.


Other power structure attributes[edit]


Term
Definition


Adhocracy
Rule by a government based on relatively disorganised principles and institutions as compared to a bureaucracy, its exact opposite.


Band society
Rule by a government based on small (usually family) unit with a semi-informal hierarchy, with strongest (either physical strength or strength of character) as leader. Very much like a pack seen in other animals, such as wolves.


Bureaucracy
Rule by a system of governance with many bureaus, administrators, and petty officials


Chiefdom (Tribal)
Rule by a government based on small complex society of varying degrees of centralisation that is led by an individual known as a chief.


Cybersynacy
Ruled by a data fed group of secluded individuals that regulates aspects of public and private life using data feeds and technology having no interactivity with the citizens but using "facts only" to decide direction.


Parliamentary system
A system of democratic government in which the ministers of the executive branch derive their legitimacy from and are accountable to a legislature or parliament; the executive and legislative branches are interconnected. It is a political system in which the supreme power lies in a body of citizens who can elect people to represent them.


Presidential system
A system of government where an executive branch is led by a president who serves as both head of state and head of government. In such a system, this branch exists separately from the legislature, to which it is not responsible and which it cannot, in normal circumstances, dismiss.


Nomocracy
Rule by a government under the sovereignty of rational laws and civic right as opposed to one under theocratic systems of government. In a nomocracy, ultimate and final authority (sovereignty) exists in the law.


Forms of government by other characteristic attributes[edit]
By socio-economic system attributes[edit]
Further information: Economic system
Historically, most political systems originated as socioeconomic ideologies; experience with those movements in power, and the strong ties they may have to particular forms of government, can cause them to be considered as forms of government in themselves.


Term
Definition


Capitalism
In a capitalist economy, owners of capital (machines, tools, factories, etc.) arrange for workers to use that capital, in exchange for payment. The capital owners are entitled to the products of the workers' labor, and may sell them, use them, or otherwise do with them as they see fit.


Communism
A form of socialism, in which all capital is commonly owned (either by the people directly or through the commune), and production is undertaken for use, rather than for exchange. Communist society is thus stateless, classless, moneyless, and democratic.


Distributism
A form of widespread Property ownership as fundamental right;[42] the means of production are spread as widely as possible rather than being centralized under the control of the state (state socialism), a few individuals (plutocracy), or corporations (corporatocracy).[43] Distributism fundamentally opposes socialism and capitalism,[44][45] which distributists view as equally flawed and exploitative. In contrast, distributism seeks to subordinate economic activity to human life as a whole, to our spiritual life, our intellectual life, our family life".[46]


Feudalism
A system of land ownership and duties. Under feudalism, all the land in a kingdom was the king's. However, the king would give some of the land to the lords or nobles who fought for him. These presents of land were called manors. Then the nobles gave some of their land to vassals. The vassals then had to do duties for the nobles. The lands of vassals were called fiefs.


Socialism
In a socialist society, workers democratically through cooperatives own all industry, public services may be commonly or state owned, such as foodstuff, healthcare and education.


Welfare state
Concept of government in which the state plays a key role in the protection and promotion of the economic and social well-being of its citizens. It is based on the principles of equality of opportunity, equitable distribution of wealth, and public responsibility for those unable to avail themselves of the minimal provisions for a good life.


By significant constitutional attributes[edit]
Certain major characteristics are defining of certain types; others are historically associated with certain types of government.

Rule according to higher law (unwritten ethical principles) vs. written constitutionalism
Separation of church and state or free church vs. state religion
Civilian control of the military vs. stratocracy
Totalitarianism or authoritarianism vs. libertarianism

Police state


Majority rule or parliamentary sovereignty vs. constitution or bill of rights with separation of powers and supermajority rules to prevent tyranny of the majority and protect minority rights
Androcracy (patriarchy) or gynarchy (matriarchy) vs. gender quotas, gender equality provision, or silence on the matter

By approach to regional autonomy[edit]
This list focuses on differing approaches that political systems take to the distribution of sovereignty, and the autonomy of regions within the state.

Sovereignty located exclusively at the centre of political jurisdiction.





Empire
Unitary state





Sovereignty located at the centre and in peripheral areas.





Hegemony
Federation and federal republic
Confederation
Federal monarchy





Diverging degrees of sovereignty.





Alliance
Asymmetrical federalism
Federacy
Associated state
Corpus separatum
Colony
Crown colony
Chartered company
Dependent territory
Occupied territory
Occupied zone
Mandate
Exclusive Mandate
Protectorate
Military Frontier
Colonial dependency
Thalassocracy
Unrecognized state
Government in exile
Provisional government
States with limited recognition
Territoral disputes
Non-Self-Governing Territories
League of Nations
League
Commonwealth
Decentralisation and devolution (powers redistributed from central to regional or local governments)




Theoretical and speculative attributes[edit]
These currently have no citable real-world examples outside of fiction.


Term
Definition


Corporate republic
Theoretical form of government occasionally hypothesised in works of science fiction, though some historical nations such as medieval Florence might be said to have been governed as corporate republics. The colonial megacorporations such as the Dutch East India Company should possibly be considered corporate states, being semi-sovereign with the power to wage war and establish colonies.
While retaining some semblance of republican government, a corporate republic would be run primarily like a business, involving a board of directors and executives. Utilities, including hospitals, schools, the military, and the police force, would be privatised. The social welfare function carried out by the state is instead carried out by corporations in the form of benefits to employees. Although corporate republics do not exist officially in the modern world, they are often used in works of fiction or political commentary as a warning of the perceived dangers of unbridled capitalism. In such works, they usually arise when a single, vastly powerful corporation deposes a weak government, over time or in a coup d'état.
Some political scientists have also considered state socialist nations to be forms of corporate republics, with the state assuming full control of all economic and political life and establishing a monopoly on everything within national boundaries – effectively making the state itself amount to a giant corporation.



Magocracy
Rule by a government with the highest and main authority being either a magician, sage, sorcerer, wizard or witch. This is often similar to a theocratic structured regime and is largely portrayed in fiction and fantasy genre categories.


Uniocracy
Ruled by a singularity of all human minds connected via some form of technical or non-technical telepathy acting as a form of super computer to make decisions based on shared patterned experiences to deliver fair and accurate decisions to problems as they arrive. Also known as the "Hive Mind" principle, it differs from voting in that each person would make a decision while in the "hive" the synapses of all minds work together following a longer path of memories to make "one" decision.


Maps[edit]




States by their systems of government. For the complete list of systems by country, see List of countries by system of government.

&#160;&#160;presidential republics
&#160;&#160;semi-presidential republics
&#160;&#160;parliamentary republics
&#160;&#160;parliamentary republics, an executive presidency elected by and dependent on parliament
&#160;&#160;parliamentary constitutional monarchies in which the monarch does not personally exercise power
&#160;&#160;constitutional monarchies in which the monarch personally exercises power, often alongside a weak parliament
&#160;&#160;absolute monarchies
&#160;&#160;states whose constitutions grant only a single party the right to govern
&#160;&#160;states where constitutional provisions for government have been suspended







Countries highlighted in blue are designated "electoral democracies" in Freedom House's 2015 survey "Freedom in the World", covering the year 2014.[47] Freedom House considers democracy in practice, not merely official claims.






A world map distinguishing countries of the world as monarchies (red) from other forms of government (blue). Many monarchies are considered electoral democracies because the monarch is largely ritual; in other cases the monarch is the only powerful political authority.



See also[edit]



Wikiquote has quotations related to: Government



Central government
Civics
Comparative government
Constitutional economics
Digital democracy
E-Government
History of politics
Legal rights
List of countries by system of government
List of European Union member states by political system
Ministry
Political economy
Political history
Politics
State (polity)
Voting system
World government

References[edit]


^ "government". Oxford English Dictionary, Oxford University Press. November 2010.&#160;
^ "government.". Oxford Dictionaries e. Oxford University Press. Retrieved 7 December 2014.&#160;
^ Bealey, Frank, ed. (1999). "government". The Blackwell dictionary of political science: a user's guide to its terms. Wiley-Blackwell. p.&#160;147. ISBN&#160;0631206957.&#160;
^ "government.". Macquarie Dictionary. Macmillan Publishers Group. 2014. Retrieved 9 December 2014.&#160;
^ See "government" under List of words having different meanings in American and British English: A–L
^ "'State' (definition 5) and 'Government' (definitions 4, 5, and 6)", Merriam-Webster Dictionary (Merriam-Webster, Incorporated), 2015&#160;
^ Lewellen, Ted C. Political Anthropology: An Introduction Third Edition. Praeger Publishers; 3rd edition (30 November 2003)
^ Comparative politics&#160;: interests, identities, and institutions in a changing global order, Jeffrey Kopstein, Mark Lichbach (eds.), 2nd ed, Cambridge University Press, 2005, ISBN 0521708400, p. 4
^ Leo P. Ribuffo, "20 Suggestions for Studying the Right now that Studying the Right is Trendy," Historically Speaking Jan 2011 v.12#1 pp 2–6, quote on p. 6
^ Kari Frederickson, The Dixiecrat Revolt and the End of the Solid South, 1932–1968, p. 12, "...conservative southern Democrats viewed warily the potential of New Deal programs to threaten the region's economic dependence on cheap labor while stirring the democratic ambitions of the disfranchised and undermining white supremacy.", The University of North Carolina Press, 2000, ISBN 978-0-8078-4910-1
^ "Plutocrats – The Rise of the New Global Super-Rich and the Fall of Everyone Else" Chrystia Freeland is Global Editor-at-Large at Reuters news agency, following years of service at the Financial Times both in New York and London. She was the deputy editor of Canada's Globe and Mail and has reported for the Financial Times, Economist, and Washington Post. She lives in New York City.
^ "MaxRange". hh.se.&#160;
^ archon. Online Etymology Dictionary. Etymonline.com. Retrieved on 2013-03-15.
^ Ernst R. Berndt, (1982)."From Technocracy To Net Energy Analysis: Engineers, Economists And Recurring Energy Theories Of Value", Studies in Energy and the American Economy, Discussion Paper No. 11, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Revised September 1982
^ American 503
^ American 1134
^ Fotopoulos, Takis, The Multidimensional Crisis and Inclusive Democracy. (Athens: Gordios, 2005). (English translation of the book with the same title published in Greek).
^ "Victorian Electronic Democracy&#160;: Glossary". 28 July 2005. Archived from the original on 13 December 2007.&#160;
^ Field Listing&#160;:: Government type. CIA – The World Factbook. Retrieved on 2013-03-15.
^ Waibl, Elmar; Herdina, Philip (1997). Dictionary of Philosophical Terms vol. II – English-German / Englisch-Deutsch. Walter de Gruyter. p.&#160;33. ISBN&#160;3110979497. Retrieved 18 September 2012.&#160;
^ "Corporatocracy". Oxford Dictionaries. Retrieved 29 May 2012. /ˌkôrpərəˈtäkrəsē/ .... a society or system that is governed or controlled by corporations:&#160;
^ Spencer Heath MacCallum (1 June 1998) A Peaceful Ferment in Somalia. The Independent Institute. Independent.org. Retrieved on 2013-03-15.
^ American 1225
^ "Plutocracy Rising" Moyers &amp; Company. Billmoyers.com (2012-10-19). Retrieved on 2013-03-15.
^ American 1793
^ "Decentralism: Where It Came From-Where Is It Going?". Amazon.com. ISBN&#160;1551642484.&#160; Missing or empty |url= (help)
^ "Anarchy." Oxford English Dictionary. Oxford University Press. 2004. The first quoted usage is 1667
^ "Anarchy." Oxford English Dictionary. Oxford University Press. 2004. The first quoted usage is 1552
^ "Anarchy." Oxford English Dictionary. Oxford University Press. 2004. The first quoted usage is 1850.
^ "Noam Chomsky on the history of Anarchy". Youtube.com. 2011-09-07. Retrieved 2012-01-30.&#160;
^ "A discussion on what anarchy is, by those that self-identify as anarchists". anarchy.net.&#160;
^ Marshall, Monty G.; Cole, Benjamin R. (1 December 2011). "Global Report 2011: Conflict, Governance, and State Fragility" (PDF). Vienna: Center for Systemic Peace. Retrieved 2012-08-15.&#160;
^ Vernon, Phil; Baksh, Deborrah (September 2010). "Working with the Grain to Change the Grain: Moving Beyond the Millennium Development Goals" (PDF). London: International Alert. p.&#160;29. Retrieved 2012-08-15.&#160;
^ Richard Alan White (1984). The Morass. United States Intervention in Central America. New York: Harper &amp; Row. p.&#160;319. ISBN&#160;9780060911454.&#160;
^ a b "Big-business Greed Killing the Banana (p. A19)". The Independent, via The New Zealand Herald. 24 May 2008. Retrieved 24 June 2012.&#160;
^ O. Henry (15 December 2009). Cabbages and Kings. MobileReference. p.&#160;198. ISBN&#160;978-1-60778-412-8. Retrieved 15 March 2013. While he was in Honduras, Porter coined the term 'banana republic'&#160;
^ a b Montesquieu, The Spirit of the Laws (1748), Bk. II, ch. 1.
^ a b "Republic". Encyclopædia Britannica.&#160;
^ "republic". WordNet 3.0 (Dictionary.com). Retrieved 20 March 2009.&#160;
^ "Republic". Merriam-Webster. Retrieved 14 August 2010.&#160;
^ a b Montesquieu, Spirit of the Laws, Bk. II, ch. 2–3.
^ Shiach, Morag (2004). Modernism, Labour and Selfhood in British Literature and Culture, 1890-1930. Cambridge University Press. p. 224. ISBN 978-0-521-83459-9
^ Zwick, Mark and Louise (2004). The Catholic Worker Movement: Intellectual and Spiritual Origins . Paulist Press. p. 156. ISBN 978-0-8091-4315-3
^ Boyle, David; Simms, Andrew (2009). The New Economics. Routledge. p. 20. ISBN 978-1-84407-675-8
^ Novak, Michael; Younkins, Edward W. (2001). Three in One: Essays on Democratic Capitalism, 1976-2000. Rowman and Littlefield. p. 152. ISBN 978-0-7425-1171-2
^ Storck, Thomas. "Capitalism and Distributism: two systems at war," in Beyond Capitalism &amp; Socialism. Tobias J. Lanz, ed. IHS Press, 2008. p. 75
^ "Freedom in The World 2015" (PDF). freedomhouse.org.&#160;


Bibliography[edit]

American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language (4th ed.). 222 Berkeley Street, Boston, MA 02116: Houghton Mifflin Company. ISBN 0-395-82517-2

Further reading[edit]

Krader, Lawrence (1968). Formation of the State, in Foundations of Modern Anthropology Series. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall. x, 118 p.

External links[edit]



Look up government in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.





Look up Appendix:List of forms of government in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Government.



The Phrontistery Word List: Types of Government and Leadership
What Are the Different Types of Governments?
Types of Governments from Historical Atlas of the 20th Century
Other classifications examples from Historical Atlas of the 20th Century
World Affairs: Types of Government
Regime Types
CBBC Newsround: types of government
Bill Moyers: Plutocracy Rising
Phobiocracy by Chris Claypoole
Forms of Government









v
t
e


Autonomous types of first-tier subdivision administration






Federalism



Federation (Federated state)
Asymmetric federalism
Dual federalism
Federacy
Federal monarchy
Federal republic








See also



Centralization
Decentralization
Devolution

Regional state
Constituent country
Constituent state


Subsidiarity
Home rule
Autonomy (Autonomous area)
Confederation
Fiscal federalism
Supranationalism
Multinational state
Personal union
















v
t
e


Global governance and identity






Organisations



United Nations Parliamentary Assembly
World government











Theories



Cosmopolitanism
Counter-hegemonic globalization
Democratic globalization
Democratic mundialization
Global citizenship
Global governance
Globalism
Internationalism
Transnational governance
World currency
World taxation system
















v
t
e


Political culture






Types of political culture



Anarchism
Corporatism
Oligarchy
Liberalism
Authoritarianism
Socialism
Fascism








Country-specific articles



Political culture of Canada
Political culture of Germany
Political culture of the United Kingdom











 Politics portal
 Political science portal
















v
t
e


Political ideologies









Left-wing politics
Centrism
Right-wing politics











Authoritarianism
Anarchism
Capitalism
Christian democracy
Communalism
Communism
Communitarianism
Conservatism
Constitutionalism
Distributism
Environmentalism
Extremism
Fanaticism
Fascism
Feminism
Fundamentalism
Globalism
Green politics
Individualism
Industrialism
Intellectualism
Islamism
Liberalism
Libertarianism
Masculism
Militarism
Monarchism
Nationalism
Progressivism
Radicalism
Reformism
Republicanism
Social democracy
Socialism
Utilitarianism











Politics portal
















v
t
e


Social and political philosophy






Philosophers



Alinsky
Aristotle
Augustine
Aurobindo
Aquinas
Averroes
Azurmendi
Badiou
Bakunin
Baudrillard
Benoist
Bentham
Berlin
Bonald
Bosanquet
Burke
Camus
Chanakya
Chomsky
Cicero
Comte
Confucius
Debord
Đilas
Durkheim
Engels
Foucault
Fourier
Gandhi
Gehlen
Gentile
Al-Ghazali
Gramsci
Grotius
Habermas
Han Fei
Hobbes
Hume
Kant
Kirk
Kropotkin
Le Bon
Le Play
Leibniz
Locke
Luxemburg
Machiavelli
Maistre
Malebranche
Marcuse
Maritain
Marsilius
Marx
Mencius
Michels
Mill
Montesquieu
Möser
Mozi
Muhammad
Negri
Nietzsche
Nozick
Oakeshott
Ortega
Pareto
Plamenatz
Plato
Popper
Rand
Rawls
Renan
Rousseau
Royce
Russell
Santayana
Sarkar
Sartre
Schmitt
Searle
Shang
Smith
Sombart
Spann
Spencer
Spirito
Stirner
Strauss
Taine
Taylor
Thoreau
Vivekananda
Walzer
Žižek








Social theories



Vaisheshika
Anarchism
Authoritarianism
Collectivism
Communism
Communitarianism
Conflict theories
Confucianism
Consensus theory
Conservatism
Contractualism
Culturalism
Gandhism
Individualism
Legalism
Liberalism
Libertarianism
Mohism
National liberalism
Social constructionism
Social constructivism
Social Darwinism
Social determinism
Socialism
Utilitarianism








Social concepts



Civil disobedience
Democracy
Four occupations
Justice
Law
Mandate of Heaven
Peace
Property
Revolution
Rights
Social contract
Society
War
more...








Related articles



Jurisprudence
Philosophy and economics
Philosophy of education
Philosophy of history
Philosophy of love
Philosophy of sex
Philosophy of social science
Social epistemology











Category
Portal
Task Force













Authority control



GND: 4049012-9















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Government&amp;oldid=690979680"					
				Categories: Forms of governmentGovernmentGovernment institutionsPolitical terminologyHidden categories: Pages using web citations with no URLUse dmy dates from May 2012Use British English from January 2014All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from October 2012Wikipedia articles needing clarification from October 2012Articles to be expanded from December 2012All articles to be expandedArticles with unsourced statements from May 2011Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2012Articles to be expanded from January 2013Commons category with page title same as on WikidataWikipedia articles with GND identifiers				
							
		
		
			