


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Henry Sidgwick
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				

Henry Sidgwick





Born
(1838-05-31)31 May 1838
Skipton, Yorkshire


Died
28 August 1900(1900-08-28) (aged&#160;62)
Cambridge





Era
19th-century philosophy


Region
Western Philosophy


School
Utilitarianism



Main interests

Ethics, Politics



Notable ideas

Ethical Hedonism, paradox of hedonism




Influences


Jeremy Bentham, David Hume, John Stuart Mill








Influenced


R M Hare, Mordecai Kaplan, John Rawls, Alfred Marshall, Peter Singer, Derek Parfit, J. J. C. Smart, Hastings Rashdall






Henry Sidgwick (/ˈsɪdʒwɪk/; 31 May 1838 – 28 August 1900) was an English utilitarian philosopher and economist.[1] He was one of the founders and first president of the Society for Psychical Research and a member of the Metaphysical Society, and promoted the higher education of women. His work in economics has also had a lasting influence. He also founded Newnham College in Cambridge in 1875. Newnham College is a women-only constituent college of the University of Cambridge, England. It was the second Cambridge college to admit women after Girton College. The co-founder of the college was Millicent Garrett Fawcett. He joined the Cambridge Apostles intellectual secret society in 1856.



Contents


1 Biography
2 Eusapia Palladino
3 Works
4 Bibliography

4.1 by Sidgwick
4.2 about Sidgwick


5 See also
6 References
7 External links



Biography[edit]
He was born at Skipton in Yorkshire, where his father, the Reverend W. Sidgwick (d. 1841), was headmaster of the local grammar school, Ermysted's Grammar School. His mother was Mary Sidgwick, née Crofts, 1807–1879.
Henry himself was educated at Rugby (where his cousin, subsequently his brother-in-law, Edward White Benson – later Archbishop of Canterbury – was a master), and at Trinity College, Cambridge. While at Trinity, Sidgwick became a member of the Cambridge Apostles. In 1859 he was senior classic, 33rd wrangler, chancellor's medallist and Craven scholar. In the same year he was elected to a fellowship at Trinity, and soon afterwards became a lecturer in classics there, a post he held for ten years.[2] The Sidgwick Site, home to several of the university's arts and humanities faculties in the university, is named after him.
In 1869, he exchanged his lectureship for one in moral philosophy, a subject to which he had been turning his attention. In the same year, deciding that he could no longer in good conscience declare himself a member of the Church of England, he resigned his fellowship. He retained his lectureship, and in 1881 was elected an honorary fellow. In 1874 he published The Methods of Ethics (6th ed. 1901, containing emendations written just before his death), by common consent a major work, which made his reputation outside the university. John Rawls called it the "first truly academic work in moral theory, modern in both method and spirit."[3]
In 1875, he was appointed praelector on moral and political philosophy at Trinity, and in 1883 he was elected Knightbridge Professor of Philosophy. In 1885, the religious test having been removed, his college once more elected him to a fellowship on the foundation.
Besides his lecturing and literary labours, Sidgwick took an active part in the business of the university, and in many forms of social and philanthropic work. He was a member of the General Board of Studies from its foundation in 1882 till 1899; he was also a member of the Council of the Senate of the Indian Civil Service Board and the Local Examinations and Lectures Syndicate, and chairman of the Special Board for Moral Science.[citation needed]
He married Eleanor Mildred Sidgwick, who was a member of the Ladies Dining Society in Cambridge, with 11 other members.
Bart Schultz's 2005 biography of Sidgwick sought to establish that Sidgwick was a lifelong homosexual, though it is unknown whether he ever expressed his inclinations in intercourse. According to Schultz, Sidgwick struggled internally throughout his life with issues of hypocrisy and openness in connection with his own forbidden desires.[4]
He was an agnostic.[5]
He is buried in Terling All Saints Churchyard, Terling, Essex, with his wife.
Eusapia Palladino[edit]




Eusapia Palladino.


In July 1895, the medium Eusapia Palladino was invited to England to Frederic William Henry Myers' house in Cambridge for a series of investigations into her mediumship. According to reports by the investigators Myers and Oliver Lodge, all the phenomena observed in the Cambridge sittings were the result of trickery. Her fraud was so clever, according to Myers, that it "must have needed long practice to bring it to its present level of skill."[6]
In the Cambridge sittings the results proved disastrous for her mediumship. During the séances Palladino was caught cheating in order to free herself from the physical controls of the experiments.[7] Palladino was found liberating her hands by placing the hand of the controller on her left on top of the hand of the controller on her right. Instead of maintaining any contact with her, the observers on either side were found to be holding each other's hands and this made it possible for her to perform tricks.[8] Richard Hodgson had observed Palladino free a hand to move objects and use her feet to kick pieces of furniture in the room. Because of the discovery of fraud, the British SPR investigators such as Sidgwick and Frank Podmore considered Palladino's mediumship to be permanently discredited and because of her fraud she was banned from any further experiments with the SPR in Britain.[8]
In the British Medical Journal on 9 November 1895 an article was published titled Exit Eusapia!. The article questioned the scientific legitimacy of the SPR for investigating Palladino a medium who had a reputation of being a fraud and imposture.[9] Part of the article read "It would be comic if it were not deplorable to picture this sorry Egeria surrounded by men like Professor Sidgwick, Professor Lodge, Mr. F. H. Myers, Dr. Schiaparelli, and Professor Richet, solemnly receiving her pinches and kicks, her finger skiddings, her sleight of hand with various articles of furniture as phenomena calling for serious study."[9] This caused Sidgwick to respond in a published letter to the British Medical Journal, 16 November 1895. According to Sidgwick SPR members had exposed the fraud of Palladino at the Cambridge sittings, Sidgwick wrote "Throughout this period we have continually combated and exposed the frauds of professional mediums, and have never yet published in our Proceedings, any report in favour of the performances of any of them."[10] The response from the Journal questioned why the SPR wastes time investigating phenomena that are the "result of jugglery and imposture" and not urgently concerning the welfare of mankind.[10]
In 1898, Myers was invited to a series of séances in Paris with Charles Richet. In contrast to the previous séances in which he had observed fraud he claimed to have observed convincing phenomena.[11] Sidgwick reminded Myers of Palladino's trickery in the previous investigations as "overwhelming" but Myers did not change his position. This enraged Richard Hodgson, then editor of SPR publications to ban Myers from publishing anything on his recent sittings with Palladino in the SPR journal. Hodgson was convinced Palladino was a fraud and supported Sidgwick in the "attempt to put that vulgar cheat Eusapia beyond the pale."[11] It wasn't until the 1908 sittings in Naples that the SPR reopened the Palladino file.[12]
Works[edit]


Part of a series on


Utilitarianism




Predecessors



Epicurus
David Hume
Claude Adrien Helvétius
William Godwin
Francis Hutcheson
William Paley









Key people



Jeremy Bentham
John Stuart Mill
Henry Sidgwick
Richard Mervyn Hare
Peter Singer









Types of utilitarianism



Preference
Rule
Act
Two-level
Total
Average
Negative
Hedonism
Enlightened self-interest









Key concepts



Pain
Suffering
Pleasure
Utility
Happiness
Eudaimonia
Consequentialism
Felicific calculus









Problems



Mere addition paradox
Paradox of hedonism
Utility monster









Related topics



Rational choice theory
Game theory
Social choice
Neoclassical economics







Politics portal





v
t
e





He was one of the founders and first president of the Society for Psychical Research, and was a member of the Metaphysical Society. Prominently, he took in promoting the higher education of women. He helped to start the higher local examinations for women, and the lectures held at Cambridge in preparation for these. It was at his suggestion and with his help that Anne Clough opened a house of residence for students, which developed into Newnham College, Cambridge. When, in 1880, the North Hall was added, Sidgwick, who in 1876 had married Eleanor Mildred Balfour (sister of A. J. Balfour), lived there for two years. After Clough's death in 1892 Mrs Sidgwick became principal of the college, and she and her husband lived there for the rest of his life. During this whole period Sidgwick took the deepest interest in the welfare of the college. In British politics he was a liberal, and became a Liberal Unionist (a party that later effectively merged with the Conservative party) in 1886. Early in 1900 he was forced by ill-health to resign his professorship, and died a few months later.[citation needed]
Sidgwick was a famous teacher. He treated his pupils as fellow students. He was deeply interested in psychical phenomena, but his energies were primarily devoted to the study of religion and philosophy. Brought up in the Church of England, he drifted away from orthodox Christianity, and as early as 1862 he described himself as a theist, independent from established religion.[13] For the rest of his life, though he regarded Christianity as "indispensable and irreplaceable – looking at it from a sociological point of view," he found himself unable to return to it as a religion.
In political economy he was a utilitarian on the lines of John Stuart Mill and Jeremy Bentham. His work was characterized by its careful investigation of first principles, as in his distinction of positive and normative reasoning, and by critical analysis, not always constructive. His influence was such that for example Alfred Marshall, founder of the Cambridge School of economics, would describe him as his "spiritual mother and father."[14] In philosophy he devoted himself to ethics, and especially to the examination of the ultimate intuitive principles of conduct and the problem of free will. He adopted a position which may be described as ethical hedonism, according to which the criterion of goodness in any given action is that it produces the greatest possible amount of pleasure. This hedonism, however, is not confined to the self (egoistic), but involves a due regard to the pleasure of others, and is, therefore, distinguished further as universalistic. Lastly, Sidgwick returns to the principle that no man should act so as to destroy his own happiness. However, as Alasdair MacIntyre notes (in After Virtue, 2007), Sidgwick reluctantly had to confess that he had gone in search for Cosmos and found only Chaos, i.e., he could find no rational foundation to basic moral beliefs; where he had hoped to find unity, he could only locate heterogeneity.[citation needed]
See also the Palm Sunday Case.
Bibliography[edit]
by Sidgwick[edit]

The Ethics of Conformity and Subscription. 1870.
The Methods of Ethics. London, 1874, 7th edition 1907.
The Theory of Evolution in its application to Practice, in Mind, Volume I, Number 1 January 1876, 52–67,
Principles of Political Economy. London, 1883, 3rd edition 1901.
The Scope and Method of Economic Science. 1885.
Outlines of the History of Ethics for English Readers. 1886 5th edition 1902 (enlarged from his article ethics in the Encyclopædia Britannica).
The Elements of Politics. London, 1891, 4th edition 1919.
"The Philosophy of Common Sense", in Mind, New Series, Volume IV, Number 14, April 1895, 145–158.
Economic science and economics, Palgrave's Dictionary of Political Economy, 1896, v. 1, reprinted in The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics, 1987, v. 2, 58-59.
Practical Ethics. London, 1898, 2nd edition 1909.
Philosophy; its Scope and Relations. London, 1902.
Lectures on the Ethics of T. H. Green, Mr Herbert Spencer and J. Martineau. 1902.
The Development of European Polity. 1903, 3rd edition 1920
Miscellaneous Essays and Addresses. 1904.
Lectures on the Philosophy of Kant and other philosophical lectures and essays. 1905.
Sidgwick's writings available online

about Sidgwick[edit]

Schultz, Bart. Henry Sidgwick: Eye of the Universe. An Intellectual Biography. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004.
Schultz, Bart. Henry Sidgwick. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 5 October 2004.
Blum, Deborah. Ghost Hunters. Arrow Books, 2007.
Dawes, Ann. "Henry Sidgwick". Biograph, 2007
(French) Geninet, Hortense. POLITIQUES COMPAREES, Henry Sidgwick et la politique moderne dans les Eléménts Politiques, Edited by Hortense Geninet, France, September 2009. ISBN 978-2-7466-1043-9
Nakano-Okuno, Mariko. Sidgwick and Contemporary Utilitarianism. Palgrave Macmillan, 2011. ISBN 978-0-230-32178-6
Phillips, David. Sidgwickian Ethics. Oxford University Press, 2011.
Schneewind, Jerome. Sidgwick's Ethics and Victorian Moral Philosophy. Clarendon Press, 1977.

See also[edit]




People


Derek Parfit




Topics


Analytical Philosophy
Utilitarianism




References[edit]


^ Bryce, James (1903). "Henry Sidgwick". Studies in Contemporary Biography. New York: Macmillan. pp.&#160;327–342.&#160;
^ "Sidgwick, Henry (SGWK855H)". A Cambridge Alumni Database. University of Cambridge.&#160;
^ Rawls, J. 1980. 'Kantian Constructivism in Moral Theory'. In: Journal of Philosophy 77 (1980).
^ The Nation, 6 June 2005. "The Epistemology of the Closet."
^ Christopher Nugent Lawrence Brooke, Damian Riehl Leader (1988). "1: Prologue". A History of the University of Cambridge: 1870-1990. Cambridge University Press. p.&#160;1. ISBN&#160;9780521343503. In 1869 Henry Sidgwick, who had become a devout agnostic, made protest against the survival of religious tests in Cambridge by resigning his Trinity fellowship.&#160;
^ Joseph McCabe. (1920). Is Spiritualism Based on Fraud?: The Evidence Given by Sir A.C. Doyle and Others. London, Watts &amp; Co. p. 14
^ Walter Mann. (1919). The Follies and Frauds of Spiritualism. Rationalist Association. London: Watts &amp; Co. pp. 115-130
^ a b M. Brady Brower. (2010). Unruly Spirits: The Science of Psychic Phenomena in Modern France. University of Illinois Press. p. 62. ISBN 978-0252077517
^ a b The British Medical Journal. (9 November 1895). Exit Eusapia!. Volume. 2, No. 1819. p. 1182.
^ a b The British Medical Journal. (16 November 1895). Exit Eusapia. Volume 2, No. 1820. pp. 1263-1264.
^ a b Janet Oppenheim. (1985). The Other World: Spiritualism and Psychical Research in England, 1850-1914. Cambridge University Press. pp. 150-151. ISBN 978-0521265058
^ Massimo Polidoro. (2003). Secrets of the Psychics: Investigating Paranormal Claims. Prometheus Books. p. 61. ISBN 978-1591020868
^ "Losing My Religion":Sidgwick, Theism, and the Struggle for Utilitarian Ethics in Economic Analysis by Steven G. Medema: http://hope.dukejournals.org/cgi/reprint/40/5/189.pdf
^ Phyllis Deane, "Sidgwick, Henry," The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics, 1987, v. 4, pp. 328-29.


External links[edit]

Henry Sidgwick at Find a Grave
Henry Sidgwick Website English and French.
Henry Sidgwick blog English and French.
Bibliography and Library of Sidgwick's writings
Official website of the 2nd International congress&#160;: Henry Sidgwick Ethics, Psychics, Politics. University of Catania - Italy Italian, English, French.
Henry Sidgwick. Comprehensive list of online writings by and about Sidgwick.
Stanford's Encyclopedia's Entry.
Contains Sidgwick's "Methods of Ethics", modified for easier reading


&#160;This article&#160;incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:&#160;Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.&#160;









v
t
e


Ethics






Theories



Casuistry
Consequentialism
Deontology

Kantian ethics


Ethics of care
Existentialist ethics
Meta-ethics
Particularism
Pragmatic ethics
Role ethics
Virtue ethics








Concepts



Autonomy
Axiology
Belief
Conscience
Consent
Equality
Care
Evil
Free will
Good
Happiness
Justice
Morality
Norm
Freedom
Principles
Suffering or Pain
Stewardship
Sympathy
Trust
Value
Virtue
Wrong
full index...








Philosophers



Plato
Aristotle
Cicero
Confucius
Augustine of Hippo
Mencius
Mozi
Xunzi
Thomas Aquinas
Baruch Spinoza
David Hume
Immanuel Kant
Georg W. F. Hegel
Arthur Schopenhauer
Jeremy Bentham
John Stuart Mill
Søren Kierkegaard
Henry Sidgwick
Friedrich Nietzsche
G. E. Moore
Karl Barth
Paul Tillich
Dietrich Bonhoeffer
Philippa Foot
John Rawls
Bernard Williams
J. L. Mackie
G. E. M. Anscombe
William Frankena
Alasdair MacIntyre
R. M. Hare
Peter Singer
Derek Parfit
Thomas Nagel
Robert Merrihew Adams
Charles Taylor
Joxe Azurmendi
Christine Korsgaard
Martha Nussbaum
more...








Applied ethics



Bioethics
Business ethics
Discourse ethics
Environmental ethics
Legal ethics
Medical ethics
Nursing ethics
Professional ethics
Sexual ethics
Ethics of eating meat
Ethics of technology








Related articles



Christian ethics
Descriptive ethics
Ethics in religion
Evolutionary ethics
History of ethics
Islamic ethics
Jewish ethics
Normative ethics











Portal
Category
Task Force
Stubs
Discussion
















v
t
e


Parapsychology







Outline






Topics



Apparitional experience
Astral projection
Auras
Bilocation
Clairvoyance
Deathbed phenomena
Dermo-optical perception
Dream telepathy
Ectoplasm
Electronic voice phenomenon
Extrasensory perception
Ganzfeld experiment
Ghosts
Kirlian photography
Materialization
Mediumship
Near-death experience
Out-of-body experience
Pam Reynolds case
Past life regression
Plant perception (paranormal)
Poltergeist
Precognition
Psychic
Psychic detective
Psychic reading
Psychic surgery
Psychokinesis
Psychometry
Pyrokinesis
Reincarnation
Remote viewing
Retrocognition
Second sight
Sensory leakage
Spoon bending
Telepathy
Thoughtography
Xenoglossy
Zener cards








Organizations



American Society for Psychical Research
College of Psychic Studies
Institute of Noetic Sciences
International Association for Near-Death Studies
Koestler Parapsychology Unit
National Laboratory of Psychical Research
Parapsychological Association
Parapsychology Foundation
Princeton Engineering Anomalies Research Laboratory
Rhine Research Center
Society for Psychical Research








Parapsychologists



William Barrett
John Beloff
Daryl Bem
Hans Bender
Stephen E. Braude
Whately Carington
Hereward Carrington
Tony Cornell
William Crookes
Eric Dingwall
Peter Fenwick
Camille Flammarion
Nandor Fodor
Alan Gauld
Bruce Greyson
Erlendur Haraldsson
John Hasted
Rosalind Heywood
Richard Hodgson
Hans Holzer
Charles Honorton
James Hyslop
Brian Inglis
Robert G. Jahn
William James
Raynor Johnson
Brian Josephson
Stanley Krippner
Thomas Lethbridge
Oliver Lodge
James McKenzie
Edgar Mitchell
Raymond Moody
Robert L. Morris
Gardner Murphy
Frederic Myers
Karlis Osis
Sam Parnia
Michael Persinger
Guy Lyon Playfair
Frank Podmore
Joseph Gaither Pratt
Harry Price
Walter Franklin Prince
Andrija Puharich
Harold Puthoff
Dean Radin
J. B. Rhine
Charles Richet
D. Scott Rogo
William Roll
Helmut Schmidt
Gary Schwartz
Rupert Sheldrake
Henry Sidgwick
Samuel Soal
Ian Stevenson
Russell Targ
Charles Tart
Montague Ullman
Jessica Utts
Evan Harris Walker
Caroline Watt








Publications



Extrasensory Perception
Irreducible Mind: Toward a Psychology for the 21st Century
Journal of Near-Death Studies
Journal of Parapsychology
Journal of Scientific Exploration
Life After Life: The Investigation of a Phenomenon—Survival of Bodily Death
Life Before Life: A Scientific Investigation of Children's Memories of Previous Lives
Mental Radio
Old Souls: The Scientific Evidence For Past Lives
Parapsychology: Frontier Science of the Mind
The Roots of Coincidence
Twenty Cases Suggestive of Reincarnation
Varieties of Anomalous Experience








Skeptics



James Alcock
Robert Baker
Barry Beyerstein
Susan Blackmore
John Booth
Derren Brown
Mario Bunge
William Carpenter
Robert Todd Carroll
Sean Carroll
Milbourne Christopher
Edward Clodd
Brian Dunning
Bergen Evans
Antony Flew
Kendrick Frazier
Chris French
Martin Gardner
Thomas Gilovich
Henry Gordon
G. Stanley Hall
Trevor Hall
C. E. M. Hansel
Melvin Harris
Daniel Webster Hering
Terence Hines
Bruce Hood
Harry Houdini
Nicholas Humphrey
Ray Hyman
Joseph Jastrow
Paul Kurtz
Daniel Loxton
Scott Lilienfeld
Charles Mackay
David Marks
Joseph McCabe
Albert Moll
Joe Nickell
Steven Novella
Robert Park
Henry Maudsley
Massimo Pigliucci
Massimo Polidoro
George Price
Benjamin Radford
James Randi
Graham Reed
Joseph Rinn
Milton Rothman
Carl Sagan
Theodore Schick
Michael Shermer
John Sladek
Gordon Stein
Victor Stenger
Stuart Sutherland
John Taylor
Sarah Thomason
Ivor Lloyd Tuckett
John Wheeler
Richard Wiseman











 Category
 Commons













Authority control



WorldCat
VIAF: 36986233
LCCN: n82064052
ISNI: 0000 0001 0888 155X
GND: 118797050
SELIBR: 320063
SUDOC: 032065825
BNF: cb12316694f (data)
NLA: 35498332
NDL: 00526181
NKC: vse2008449674















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Henry_Sidgwick&amp;oldid=688648113"					
				Categories: 1838 births1900 deathsCambridge University Moral Sciences ClubConsequentialistsEnglish agnosticsEnglish political philosophersEnglish philosophersParapsychologistsPsychical researchersPeople from SkiptonAlumni of Trinity College, CambridgeFellows of Trinity College, CambridgePeople educated at Rugby SchoolPresidents of the Cambridge Union SocietyUtilitariansEnglish political theoristsMoral philosophersEnglish feministsMale feministsIndividualist feminists19th-century philosophersEnglish male writersHidden categories: Use dmy dates from August 2012Use British English from August 2012Articles with hCardsAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from March 2009Articles with French-language external linksWikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with no article parameterWikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia BritannicaWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiers				
							
		
		
			