


		
		
		
			

							
						


			Hilary Putnam
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				

Hilary Putnam





Born
Hilary Whitehall Putnam
(1926-07-31) July 31, 1926 (age&#160;89)
Chicago, Illinois, U.S.


Awards
Rolf Schock Prizes in Logic and Philosophy (2011), Nicholas Rescher Prize for Systematic Philosophy (2015)





Era
20th-century philosophy


Region
Western philosophy


School
Analytic
Pragmatism



Main interests

Philosophy of mind
Philosophy of language
Philosophy of science
Philosophy of mathematics
Metaphilosophy
Epistemology



Notable ideas

Multiple realizability
Functionalism
Causal theory of reference
Semantic externalism
Brain in a vat&#160;·  Twin Earth
Internal realism




Influences


W.V.O. Quine, John Dewey, Hans Reichenbach, Alan Turing, Immanuel Kant, Nelson Goodman, Charles Sanders Peirce, William James, Ludwig Wittgenstein, Søren Kierkegaard, Karl Marx, Sigmund Freud, Saul Kripke[1]








Influenced


Jerry Fodor, Ned Block, Tyler Burge, David Marr, Daniel Dennett, David Lewis, Saul Kripke, Donald Davidson, George Boolos, Richard Boyd, Hartry Field, Martha Nussbaum






Hilary Whitehall Putnam (born July 31, 1926) is an American philosopher, mathematician, and computer scientist who has been a central figure in analytic philosophy since the 1960s, especially in philosophy of mind, philosophy of language, philosophy of mathematics, and philosophy of science.[2] He is known for his willingness to apply an equal degree of scrutiny to his own philosophical positions as to those of others, subjecting each position to rigorous analysis until he exposes its flaws.[3] As a result, he has acquired a reputation for frequently changing his own position.[4] Putnam is currently Cogan University Professor Emeritus at Harvard University.
In philosophy of mind, Putnam is known for his argument against the type-identity of mental and physical states based on his hypothesis of the multiple realizability of the mental, and for the concept of functionalism, an influential theory regarding the mind–body problem.[2][5] In philosophy of language, along with Saul Kripke and others, he developed the causal theory of reference, and formulated an original theory of meaning, introducing the notion of semantic externalism based on a famous thought experiment called Twin Earth.[6]
In philosophy of mathematics, he and his mentor W. V. Quine developed the "Quine–Putnam indispensability thesis", an argument for the reality of mathematical entities,[7] later espousing the view that mathematics is not purely logical, but "quasi-empirical".[8] In the field of epistemology, he is known for his critique of the well known "brain in a vat" thought experiment. This thought experiment appears to provide a powerful argument for epistemological skepticism, but Putnam challenges its coherence.[9]
In metaphysics, he originally espoused a position called metaphysical realism, but eventually became one of its most outspoken critics, first adopting a view he called "internal realism",[10] which he later abandoned. Despite these changes of view, throughout his career he remained committed to scientific realism, roughly the view that mature scientific theories are approximately true descriptions of ways things are.[11]
In the philosophy of perception Putnam came to endorse direct realism, according to which perceptual experiences directly present one with the external world. In the past, he further held that there are no mental representations, sense data, or other intermediaries that stand between the mind and the world.[12] By 2012, however, he rejected this further commitment, in favor of "transactionalism", a view that accepts both that perceptual experiences are world-involving transactions, and that these transactions are functionally describable (provided that worldly items and intentional states may be referred to in the specification of the function). Such transactions can further involve qualia.[13][14]
In his later work, Putnam has become increasingly interested in American pragmatism, Jewish philosophy, and ethics, thus engaging with a wider array of philosophical traditions. He has also displayed an interest in metaphilosophy, seeking to "renew philosophy" from what he identifies as narrow and inflated concerns.
Outside philosophy, Putnam has contributed to mathematics and computer science. Together with Martin Davis he developed the Davis–Putnam algorithm for the Boolean satisfiability problem[15] and he helped demonstrate the unsolvability of Hilbert's tenth problem.[16] He has been at times a politically controversial figure, especially for his involvement with the Progressive Labor Party in the late 1960s and early 1970s.[17][18]



Contents


1 Personal life
2 Philosophy of mind

2.1 Multiple realizability
2.2 Machine state functionalism
2.3 Rejection of functionalism


3 Philosophy of language

3.1 Semantic externalism
3.2 Theory of meaning


4 Philosophy of mathematics
5 Mathematics and computer science
6 Epistemology
7 Metaphilosophy and ontology
8 Neopragmatism and Wittgenstein
9 Criticism
10 Major works and bibliography
11 Works about Putnam
12 See also
13 Notes
14 References
15 External links



Personal life[edit]
Putnam was born in Chicago, Illinois in 1926. His father, Samuel Putnam, was a scholar of Romance languages, columnist and translator who wrote for the Daily Worker, a publication of the American Communist Party, from 1936 to 1946 (when he became disillusioned with communism).[19] As a result of his father's commitment to communism, Putnam had a secular upbringing, although his mother, Riva, was Jewish.[3] The family lived in France until 1934, when they returned to the United States, settling in Philadelphia.[3] Putnam attended Central High School; there he met Noam Chomsky, who was a year behind him. The two have been friends—and often intellectual opponents—ever since.[20] Putnam studied mathematics and philosophy at the University of Pennsylvania, receiving his BA (undergraduate degree) and becoming a member of the Philomathean Society, one of the oldest collegiate literary societies in the U.S.[3][17] He went on to do graduate work in philosophy at Harvard University,[3] and later at UCLA's Philosophy Department, where he received his Ph.D. in 1951 for a dissertation entitled "The Meaning of the Concept of Probability in Application to Finite Sequences". Putnam's teacher Hans Reichenbach (his dissertation supervisor) was a leading figure in logical positivism, the dominant school of philosophy of the day; one of Putnam's most consistent positions has been his rejection of logical positivism as self-defeating.[17]
After briefly teaching at Northwestern, Princeton, and MIT, he moved to Harvard in 1965 with his wife, Ruth Anna Jacobs, who took a teaching position in philosophy at Wellesley College.[17] Hilary and Ruth Anna were married in 1962.[21] Ruth Anna Jacobs, descendant of a family with a long scholarly tradition in Gotha (her ancestor was the German classical scholar Christian Friedrich Wilhelm Jacobs), was born in Berlin, Germany,[22] in 1927 to anti-Nazi political-activist parents and, like Putnam himself, she was raised an atheist (her mother was Jewish and her father had been from a Christian background).[21] The Putnams, rebelling against the anti-Semitism that they had experienced during their youth, decided to establish a traditional Jewish home for their children.[21] Since they had no experience with the rituals of Judaism, they sought out invitations to other Jews' homes for Seder. They had "no idea how to do it [themselves]", in the words of Ruth Anna. They therefore began to study Jewish ritual and Hebrew, and became more Jewishly interested, identified, and active. In 1994, Hilary Putnam celebrated a belated Bar Mitzvah service. His wife had a Bat Mitzvah service four years later.[21]
Hilary was a popular teacher at Harvard. In keeping with the family tradition, he was politically active.[17] In the 1960s and early 1970s, he was an active supporter of civil rights causes and an opponent of American military intervention in Vietnam.[18] In 1963, he organized one of the first faculty and student committees at MIT against the war. Putnam was disturbed when he learned from reading the reports of David Halberstam that the U.S. was "defending" South Vietnamese peasants from the Vietcong by poisoning their rice crops.[17] After moving to Harvard in 1965, he organized campus protests and began teaching courses on Marxism. Hilary became an official faculty advisor to the Students for a Democratic Society and, in 1968, became a member of the Progressive Labor Party (PLP).[17]
He was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1965.[23] After 1968, his political activities were centered on the PLP.[18] The Harvard administration considered these activities disruptive and attempted to censure Putnam, but two other faculty members criticized the procedures.[24] Putnam permanently severed his ties with the PLP in 1972.[25] In 1997, at a meeting of former draft resistance activists at Arlington Street Church in Boston, Putnam described his involvement with the PLP as a mistake. He said that he had been impressed at first with PLP's commitment to alliance-building, and its willingness to attempt to organize from within the armed forces.[18]
In 1976, he was elected President of the American Philosophical Association. The following year, he was selected as Walter Beverly Pearson Professor of Mathematical Logic, in recognition of his contributions to philosophy of logic and mathematics.[17] While breaking with his radical past, Putnam has never abandoned his belief that academics have a particular social and ethical responsibility toward society. He has continued to be forthright and progressive in his political views, as expressed in the articles "How Not to Solve Ethical Problems" (1983) and "Education for Democracy" (1993).[17]
Putnam is a Corresponding Fellow of the British Academy. He retired from teaching in June 2000, but, as of 2009, he still gives a seminar almost yearly at Tel Aviv University. He also held the Spinoza Chair of Philosophy at the University of Amsterdam in 2001.[26] He is the Cogan University Professor Emeritus at Harvard University. He is also a founding patron of the small liberal arts college Ralston College. His corpus includes five volumes of collected works, seven books, and more than 200 articles. Putnam's renewed interest in Judaism has inspired him to publish several recent books and essays on the topic.[27] With his wife, he has co-authored several books and essays on the late-19th-century American pragmatist movement.[17]
Putnam began a blog in May 2014: http://putnamphil.blogspot.com.
Philosophy of mind[edit]
Multiple realizability[edit]




An illustration of multiple realizability. M stands for mental and P stands for physical. It can be seen that more than one P can instantiate one M, but not vice versa. Causal relations between states are represented by the arrows (M1 goes to M2, etc.)


Putnam's best-known work concerns philosophy of mind. His most noted original contributions to that field came in several key papers published in the late 1960s that set out the hypothesis of multiple realizability.[28] In these papers, Putnam argues that, contrary to the famous claim of the type-identity theory, it is not necessarily true that "Pain is identical to C-fibre firing." Pain, according to Putnam's papers, may correspond to utterly different physical states of the nervous system in different organisms, and yet they all experience the same mental state of "being in pain".
Putnam cited examples from the animal kingdom to illustrate his thesis. He asked whether it was likely that the brain structures of diverse types of animals realize pain, or other mental states, the same way. If they do not share the same brain structures, they cannot share the same mental states and properties. The answer to this puzzle had to be that mental states were realized by different physical states in different species. Putnam then took his argument a step further, asking about such things as the nervous systems of alien beings, artificially intelligent robots and other silicon-based life forms. These hypothetical entities, he contended, should not be considered incapable of experiencing pain just because they lack the same neurochemistry as humans. Putnam concluded that type-identity theorists had been making an "ambitious" and "highly implausible" conjecture which could be disproven with one example of multiple realizability.[29] This argument is sometimes referred to as the "likelihood argument".[28]
Putnam formulated a complementary argument based on what he called "functional isomorphism". He defined the concept in these terms: "Two systems are functionally isomorphic if 'there is a correspondence between the states of one and the states of the other that preserves functional relations'." In the case of computers, two machines are functionally isomorphic if and only if the sequential relations among states in the first are exactly mirrored by the sequential relations among states in the other. Therefore, a computer made out of silicon chips and a computer made out of cogs and wheels can be functionally isomorphic but constitutionally diverse. Functional isomorphism implies multiple realizability.[29] This argument is sometimes referred to as an "a priori argument".[28]
Jerry Fodor, Putnam, and others noted that, along with being an effective argument against type-identity theories, multiple realizability implies that any low-level explanation of higher-level mental phenomena is insufficiently abstract and general.[29][30][31] Functionalism, which identifies mental kinds with functional kinds that are characterized exclusively in terms of causes and effects, abstracts from the level of microphysics, and therefore seemed to be a better explanation of the relation between mind and body. In fact, there are many functional kinds, such as mousetraps, software and bookshelves, which are multiply realized at the physical level.[29]
Machine state functionalism[edit]




A Turing machine can be visualized as a finite-length tape of slots (which can be, however, made -before the run- arbitrarily longer if needed) that are written or erased one at a time, with the choice of action determined by a "state". According to Putnam's machine-state functionalism, the notions of state in an abstract computer and mental state are essentially the same.


The first formulation of such a functionalist theory was put forth by Putnam himself. This formulation, which is now called "machine-state functionalism", was inspired by analogies noted by Putnam and others between the mind and theoretical "Turing machines" capable of computing any given algorithm.[32]
In non-technical terms, a Turing machine can be visualized as an infinitely long tape divided into squares (the memory) with a box-shaped scanning device that sits over and scans one square of the memory at a time. Each square is either blank (B) or has a 1 written on it. These are the inputs to the machine. The possible outputs are:

Halt: Do nothing.
R: move one square to the right.
L: move one square to the left.
B: erase whatever is on the square.
1: erase whatever is on the square and print a 1.

A simple example of a Turing machine which writes out the sequence '111' after scanning three blank squares and then stopping is specified by the following machine table:



State 1
State 2
State 3


B
write 1; stay in state 1
write 1; stay in state 2
write 1; stay in state 3


1
go right; go to state 2
go right; go to state 3
[halt]


This table states that if the machine is in state one and scans a blank square (B), it will print a 1 and remain in state one. If it is in state one and reads a 1, it will move one square to the right and also go into state two. If it is in state two and reads a B, it will print a 1 and stay in state two. If it's in state two and reads a 1, it will move one square to the right and go into state three. Finally, if it is in state three and reads a B, it prints a 1 and remains in state three.[33]
The point, for functionalism, is the nature of the "states" of the Turing machine. Each state can be defined in terms of its relations to the other states and to the inputs and outputs. State one, for example, is simply the state in which the machine, if it reads a B, writes a 1 and stays in that state, and in which, if it reads a 1, it moves one square to the right and goes into a different state. This is the functional definition of state one; it is its causal role in the overall system. The details of how it accomplishes what it accomplishes and of its material constitution are completely irrelevant.
According to machine-state functionalism, the nature of a mental state is just like the nature of the automaton states described above. Just as "state one" simply is the state in which, given an input B, such-and-such happens, so being in pain is the state which disposes one to cry "ouch", become distracted, wonder what the cause is, and so forth.[34]
Rejection of functionalism[edit]
In the late 1980s, Putnam abandoned his adherence to functionalism and other computational theories of mind. His change of mind was primarily due to the difficulties that computational theories have in explaining certain intuitions with respect to the externalism of mental content. This is illustrated by Putnam's own Twin Earth thought experiment (see Philosophy of language).[12] He also developed a separate argument against functionalism in 1988, based on Fodor's generalized version of multiple realizability. Asserting that functionalism is really a watered-down identity theory in which mental kinds are identified with functional kinds, Putnam argued that mental kinds may be multiply realizable over functional kinds. The argument for functionalism is that the same mental state could be implemented by the different states of a universal Turing machine.[35]
Despite Putnam's rejection of functionalism, it has continued to flourish and has been developed into numerous versions by thinkers as diverse as David Marr, Daniel Dennett, Jerry Fodor, and David Lewis.[36] Functionalism helped lay the foundations for modern cognitive science[36] and is the dominant theory of mind in philosophy today.[37]
By 2012 Putnam accepted a modification of functionalism called "liberal functionalism". The view holds that "what matters for consciousness and for mental properties generally is the right sort of functional capacities and not the particular matter that subserves those capacities".[13] The specification of these capacities (1) may refer to what goes on outside the organism’s “brain”, (2) may include intentional idioms, and (3) need not describe a capacity to compute something or other.[13]
Philosophy of language[edit]
Semantic externalism[edit]
One of Putnam's contributions to philosophy of language is his claim that "meaning just ain't in the head". He illustrated this using his "Twin Earth" thought experiment to argue that environmental factors play a substantial role in determining meaning. Twin Earth shows this, according to Putnam, since on Twin Earth everything is identical to Earth, except that its lakes, rivers and oceans are filled with XYZ whereas those of earth are filled with H2O. Consequently, when an earthling, Fredrick, uses the Earth-English word "water", it has a different meaning from the Twin Earth-English word "water" when used by his physically identical twin, Frodrick, on Twin Earth. Since Fredrick and Frodrick are physically indistinguishable when they utter their respective words, and since their words have different meanings, meaning cannot be determined solely by what is in their heads. This led Putnam to adopt a version of semantic externalism with regard to meaning and mental content.[9][29] The late philosopher of mind and language Donald Davidson, despite his many differences of opinion with Putnam, wrote that semantic externalism constituted an "anti-subjectivist revolution" in philosophers' way of seeing the world. Since the time of Descartes, philosophers had been concerned with proving knowledge from the basis of subjective experience. Thanks to Putnam, Tyler Burge and others, Davidson said, philosophy could now take the objective realm for granted and start questioning the alleged "truths" of subjective experience.[38]
Theory of meaning[edit]
Putnam, along with Saul Kripke, Keith Donnellan, and others, contributed to what is known as the causal theory of reference.[2] In particular, Putnam maintained in The Meaning of "Meaning" that the objects referred to by natural kind terms—such as tiger, water, and tree—are the principal elements of the meaning of such terms. There is a linguistic division of labor, analogous to Adam Smith's economic division of labor, according to which such terms have their references fixed by the "experts" in the particular field of science to which the terms belong. So, for example, the reference of the term "lion" is fixed by the community of zoologists, the reference of the term "elm tree" is fixed by the community of botanists, and the reference of the term "table salt" is fixed as "NaCl" by chemists. These referents are considered rigid designators in the Kripkean sense and are disseminated outward to the linguistic community.[29]
Putnam specifies a finite sequence of elements (a vector) for the description of the meaning of every term in the language. Such a vector consists of four components:

the object to which the term refers, e.g., the object individuated by the chemical formula H2O;
a set of typical descriptions of the term, referred to as "the stereotype", e.g., "transparent", "colorless", and "hydrating";
the semantic indicators that place the object into a general category, e.g., "natural kind" and "liquid";
the syntactic indicators, e.g., "concrete noun" and "mass noun".

Such a "meaning-vector" provides a description of the reference and use of an expression within a particular linguistic community. It provides the conditions for its correct usage and makes it possible to judge whether a single speaker attributes the appropriate meaning to that expression or whether its use has changed enough to cause a difference in its meaning. According to Putnam, it is legitimate to speak of a change in the meaning of an expression only if the reference of the term, and not its stereotype, has changed. However, since there is no possible algorithm that can determine which aspect—the stereotype or the reference—has changed in a particular case, it is necessary to consider the usage of other expressions of the language.[29] Since there is no limit to the number of such expressions which must be considered, Putnam embraced a form of semantic holism.[39]
Philosophy of mathematics[edit]
Putnam made a significant contribution to philosophy of mathematics in the Quine–Putnam "indispensability argument" for mathematical realism.[32] This argument is considered by Stephen Yablo to be one of the most challenging arguments in favor of the acceptance of the existence of abstract mathematical entities, such as numbers and sets.[40] The form of the argument is as follows.

One must have ontological commitments to all entities that are indispensable to the best scientific theories, and to those entities only (commonly referred to as "all and only").
Mathematical entities are indispensable to the best scientific theories. Therefore,
One must have ontological commitments to mathematical entities.[41]

The justification for the first premise is the most controversial. Both Putnam and Quine invoke naturalism to justify the exclusion of all non-scientific entities, and hence to defend the "only" part of "all and only". The assertion that "all" entities postulated in scientific theories, including numbers, should be accepted as real is justified by confirmation holism. Since theories are not confirmed in a piecemeal fashion, but as a whole, there is no justification for excluding any of the entities referred to in well-confirmed theories. This puts the nominalist who wishes to exclude the existence of sets and non-Euclidean geometry, but to include the existence of quarks and other undetectable entities of physics, for example, in a difficult position.[41]
Putnam holds the view that mathematics, like physics and other empirical sciences, uses both strict logical proofs and "quasi-empirical" methods. For example, Fermat's last theorem states that for no integer  are there positive integer values of x, y, and z such that . Before this was proven for all  in 1995 by Andrew Wiles,[42] it had been proven for many values of n. These proofs inspired further research in the area, and formed a quasi-empirical consensus for the theorem. Even though such knowledge is more conjectural than a strictly proven theorem, it was still used in developing other mathematical ideas.[8]
Mathematics and computer science[edit]
Putnam has contributed to scientific fields not directly related to his work in philosophy.[2] As a mathematician, Putnam contributed to the resolution of Hilbert's tenth problem in mathematics. This problem was settled by Yuri Matiyasevich in 1970, with a proof that relied heavily on previous research by Putnam, Julia Robinson and Martin Davis.[43]
In computability theory, Putnam investigated the structure of the ramified analytical hierarchy, its connection with the constructible hierarchy and its Turing degrees. He showed that there exist many levels of the constructible hierarchy which do not add any subsets of the integers[44] and later, with his student George Boolos, that the first such "non-index" is the ordinal  of ramified analysis[45] (this is the smallest  such that  is a model of full second-order comprehension), and also, together with a separate paper with Richard Boyd (another of Putnam's students) and Gustav Hensel,[46] how the Davis–Mostowski–Kleene hyperarithmetical hierarchy of arithmetical degrees can be naturally extended up to .
In computer science, Putnam is known for the Davis-Putnam algorithm for the Boolean satisfiability problem (SAT), developed with Martin Davis in 1960.[2] The algorithm finds if there is a set of true or false values that satisfies a given Boolean expression so that the entire expression becomes true. In 1962, they further refined the algorithm with the help of George Logemann and Donald W. Loveland. It became known as the DPLL algorithm. This algorithm is efficient and still forms the basis of most complete SAT solvers.[15]
Epistemology[edit]




A "brain in a vat"—Putnam uses this thought experiment to argue that skeptical scenarios are impossible.


In the field of epistemology, Putnam is known for his "brain in a vat" thought experiment (a modernized version of Descartes' evil demon hypothesis). The argument is that one cannot coherently state that one is a disembodied "brain in a vat" placed there by some "mad scientist".[9]
This follows from the causal theory of reference. Words always refer to the kinds of things they were coined to refer to, thus the kinds of things their user, or the user's ancestors, experienced. So, if some person, Mary, were a "brain in a vat", whose every experience is received through wiring and other gadgetry created by the "mad scientist", then Mary's idea of a "brain" would not refer to a "real" brain, since she and her linguistic community have never seen such a thing. Rather, she saw something that looked like a brain, but was actually an image fed to her through the wiring. Similarly, her idea of a "vat" would not refer to a "real" vat. So, if, as a "brain in a vat", she were to say "I'm a brain in a vat", she would actually be saying "I'm a brain-image in a vat-image", which is incoherent. On the other hand, if she is not a "brain in a vat", then saying that she is still incoherent, but now because she actually means the opposite. This is a form of epistemological externalism: knowledge or justification depends on factors outside the mind and is not solely determined internally.[9]
Putnam has clarified that his real target in this argument was never skepticism, but metaphysical realism.[47] Since realism of this kind assumes the existence of a gap between how man conceives the world and the way the world really is, skeptical scenarios such as this one (or Descartes' Evil demon) present a formidable challenge. Putnam, by arguing that such a scenario is impossible, attempts to show that this notion of a gap between man's concept of the world and the way it is, is in itself absurd. Man cannot have a "God's eye" view of reality. He is limited to his conceptual schemes. Metaphysical realism is therefore false, according to Putnam.[48]
Metaphilosophy and ontology[edit]
In the late 1970s and the 1980s, stimulated by results from mathematical logic and by some ideas of Quine, Putnam abandoned his long-standing defence of metaphysical realism—the view that the categories and structures of the external world are both causally and ontologically independent of the conceptualizations of the human mind. He adopted a rather different view, which he called "internal realism".[10][49]
Internal realism was the view that, although the world may be causally independent of the human mind, the structure of the world—its division into kinds, individuals and categories—is a function of the human mind, and hence the world is not ontologically independent. The general idea is influenced by Kant's idea of the dependence of our knowledge of the world on the categories of thought.[50]
The problem with metaphysical realism, according to Putnam, was that it fails to explain the possibility of reference and truth. According to the metaphysical realist, our concepts and categories refer because they match up in some mysterious manner with the pre-structured categories, kinds and individuals that are inherent in the external world. But how is it possible that the world "carves up" into certain structures and categories, the mind carves up the world into its own categories and structures, and the two "carvings" perfectly coincide? The answer must be that the world does not come pre-structured but that structure must be imposed on it by the human mind and its conceptual schemes. In Reason, Truth, and History, Putnam identified truth with what he termed "idealized rational acceptability." The theory, which owes something to C. S. Peirce, is that a belief is true if it would be accepted by anyone under ideal epistemic conditions.[10]
Nelson Goodman had formulated a similar notion in Fact, Fiction and Forecast in 1956. In that work, Goodman went as far as to suggest that there is "no one world, but many worlds, each created by the human mind."[51] Putnam rejected this form of social constructivism, but retained the idea that there can be many correct descriptions of reality. No one of these descriptions can be scientifically proven to be the "one, true" description of the world. This does not imply relativism, for Putnam, because not all descriptions are equally correct and the ones that are correct are not determined subjectively.[52]
Putnam renounced internal realism in his reply to Simon Blackburn in the volume Reading Putnam.[53] The reasons he gave up his "antirealism" are stated in the first three of his replies in "The Philosophy of Hilary Putnam", an issue of the journal Philosophical Topics, where he gives a history of his use(s) of the term "internal realism", and, at more length, in his The Threefold Cord: Mind, Body and World (1999).[54]
Although he abandoned internal realism, Putnam still resists the idea that any given thing or system of things can only be described in exactly one complete and correct way. He thus accepts "conceptual relativity" - the view that it may be a matter of choice or convention, e.g., whether mereological sums exist, or whether space-time points are individuals or mere limits. In other words, having abandoned internal realism Putnam came to accept metaphysical realism in simply the broad sense of rejecting all forms of verificationism and all talk of our ‘making’ the world.[55]
Under the influence of C. S. Peirce and William James, Putnam also became convinced that there is no fact–value dichotomy; that is, normative (e.g., ethical and aesthetic) judgments often have a factual basis, while scientific judgments have a normative element.[52]
Neopragmatism and Wittgenstein[edit]
At the end of the 1980s, Putnam became increasingly disillusioned with what he perceived as the "scientism" and the rejection of history that characterize modern analytic philosophy. He rejected internal realism because it assumed a "cognitive interface" model of the relation between the mind and the world. Putnam claimed that the very notion of truth would have to be abandoned by a consistent eliminative materialist.[56] Under the increasing influence of James and the pragmatists, he adopted a direct realist view of this relation. For a time, under the influence of Ludwig Wittgenstein, he adopted a pluralist view of philosophy itself and came to view most philosophical problems as nothing more than conceptual or linguistic confusions created by philosophers by using ordinary language out of its original context.[52]
Many of Putnam's most recent works have addressed the concerns of ordinary people, particularly their concerns about social problems.[57] For example, he has written about the nature of democracy, social justice and religion. He has discussed the ideas of the continental philosopher, Jürgen Habermas, and has written articles influenced by "continental" ideas.[17]
Criticism[edit]
Putnam himself may be his own most formidable philosophical adversary.[6] His frequent changes of mind have led him to attack his previous positions. However, many significant criticisms of his views have come from other philosophers and scientists. For example, multiple realizability has been criticized on the grounds that, if it were true, research and experimentation in the neurosciences would be impossible.[58] According to Bechtel and Mundale, to be able to conduct such research in the neurosciences, universal consistencies must either exist or be assumed to exist in brain structures. It is the similarity (or homology) of brain structures that allows us to generalize across species.[58] If multiple realizability were an empirical fact, results from experiments conducted on one species of animal (or one organism) would not be meaningful when generalized to explain the behavior of another species (or organism of the same species).[59] Other criticisms of MR have been proposed by Jaegwon Kim, David Lewis, Robert Richardson and Patricia Churchland.[60][61][62][63]
One of the main arguments against functionalism was formulated by Putnam himself: the Twin Earth thought experiment. However, there have been other criticisms. The Chinese room argument by John Searle (1980) is a direct attack on the claim that thought can be represented as a set of functions. The thought experiment is designed to show that it is possible to mimic intelligent action, without any interpretation or understanding, through the use of a purely functional system. In short, Searle describes a situation in which a person who speaks only English is locked in a room with Chinese symbols in baskets and a rule book in English for moving the symbols around. The person is instructed, by people outside the room, to follow the rule book for sending certain symbols out of the room when given certain symbols. Further, suppose that the people outside the room are Chinese speakers and are communicating with the person inside via the Chinese symbols. According to Searle, it would be absurd to claim that the English speaker inside "knows" Chinese based on these syntactic processes alone. This thought experiment attempts to show that systems that operate merely on syntactic processes cannot realize any semantics (meaning) or intentionality (aboutness). Thus, Searle attacks the idea that thought can be equated with the following of a set of syntactic rules. Thus, functionalism is an inadequate theory of the mind.[64] Several other arguments against functionalism have been advanced by Ned Block.[65]
Putnam has consistently adhered to the idea of semantic holism, in spite of the many changes in his other positions. The problems with this position have been described by Michael Dummett, Jerry Fodor, Ernest Lepore, and others. In the first place, they suggest that, if semantic holism is true, it is impossible to understand how a speaker of a language can learn the meaning of an expression, for any expression of the language. Given the limits of our cognitive abilities, we will never be able to master the whole of the English (or any other) language, even based on the (false) assumption that languages are static and immutable entities. Thus, if one must understand all of a natural language to understand a single word or expression, language learning is simply impossible. Semantic holism also fails to explain how two speakers can mean the same thing when using the same linguistic expression, and therefore how any communication at all is possible between them. Given a sentence P, since Fred and Mary have each mastered different parts of the English language and P is related in different ways to the sentences in each part, the result is that P means one thing for Fred and something else for Mary. Moreover, if a sentence P derives its meaning from its relations with all of the sentences of a language, as soon as the vocabulary of an individual changes by the addition or elimination of a sentence, the totality of relations changes, and therefore also the meaning of P. As this is a common phenomenon, the result is that P has two different meanings in two different moments in the life of the same person. Consequently, if I accept the truth of a sentence and then reject it later on, the meaning of that which I rejected and that which I accepted are completely different and therefore I cannot change my opinions with regard to the same sentences.[66][67][68]
The brain in a vat argument has also been subject to criticism.[69] Crispin Wright argues that Putnam's formulation of the brain-in-a-vat scenario is too narrow to refute global skepticism. The possibility that one is a recently disembodied brain in a vat is not undermined by semantic externalism. If a person has lived her entire life outside the vat—speaking the English language and interacting normally with the outside world—prior to her "envatment" by a mad scientist, when she wakes up inside the vat, her words and thoughts (e.g., "tree" and "grass") will still refer to the objects or events in the external world that they referred to before her envatment.[47] In another scenario, a brain in a vat may be hooked up to a supercomputer that randomly generates perceptual experiences. In this case, one's words and thoughts would not refer to anything, and would therefore be devoid of content. Semantics would no longer exist and the argument would be meaningless.[70]
In philosophy of mathematics, Stephen Yablo has argued that the Quine–Putnam indispensability thesis does not demonstrate that mathematical entities are truly indispensable. The argumentation is sophisticated, but the upshot is that one can achieve the same logical results by simply replacing all occurrences of the expression "so-and-so exists" (e.g., numbers exist) by occurrences of the expression "so-and-so is assumed (or hypothesized) to exist". For example, one can take the argument for indispensability described above and replace all references to existent entities with references to entities assumed to exist as follows.

1*. One must have ontological commitments to all and only the entities that are assumed to exist and are indispensable to the best scientific theories.
2*. Mathematical entities that are assumed to exist are indispensable to the best scientific theories. Therefore,
3*. One must have ontological commitments to mathematical entities that are assumed to exist.[40]

Finally, Putnam's internal realism has been accused by Curtis Brown of being a disguised form of subjective idealism. If this is the case, it is subject to the traditional arguments against that position. In particular, it falls into the trap of solipsism. That is, if existence depends on experience, as subjective idealism maintains, and if one's consciousness were to stop existing, then the rest of the universe would stop existing as well.[50]
Major works and bibliography[edit]
There is a detailed bibliography of Hilary Putnam's writings (with 16 books and 198 articles) compiled by Vincent C. Müller and published in 1993. Online in PhilPapers. A later version of this is on Harvard's Servers.

The "Innateness Hypothesis" and Explanatory Models in Linguistics, Synthese, Vol. 17, No. 1, March 1967, pp.&#160;12–22.[71]
Philosophy of Mathematics: Selected Readings. Edited with Paul Benacerraf. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1964. 2nd ed., Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983. ISBN 0-521-29648-X
Philosophy of Logic. New York: Harper and Row, 1971. London: George Allen and Unwin, 1972. ISBN 0-04-160009-6
Mathematics, Matter and Method. Philosophical Papers, vol. 1. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1975. 2nd. ed., 1985 paperback: ISBN 0-521-29550-5
Mind, Language and Reality. Philosophical Papers, vol. 2. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1975. 2003 paperback: ISBN 0-521-29551-3
Meaning and the Moral Sciences. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1978.
Reason, Truth, and History. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981. 2004 paperback: ISBN 0-521-29776-1
Realism and Reason. Philosophical Papers, vol. 3. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983. 2002 paperback: ISBN 0-521-31394-5
Methodology, Epistemology, and Philosophy of Science: Essays in Honour of Wolfgang Stegmüller. edited with Wilhelm K. Essler and Carl G. Hempel. Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1983.
Epistemology, Methodology, and Philosophy of Science: Essays in Honour of Carl G. Hempel. edited with Wilhelm K. Essler and Wolfgang Stegmüller. Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1985.
The Many Faces of Realism. La Salle, Ill.: Open Court, 1987. ISBN 0-8126-9043-5
Representation and Reality. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1988. ISBN 0-262-66074-1
Realism with a Human Face. edited by James F. Conant. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1990. 9780674749450 Description. ISBN 0-674-74945-6
Renewing Philosophy. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1992. 9780674760943 Description. ISBN 0-674-76094-8
Pursuits of Reason: Essays in Honor of Stanley Cavell. edited with Ted Cohen and Paul Guyer. Lubbock: Texas Tech University Press, 1993. ISBN 0-89672-266-X
Words and Life. edited by James F. Conant. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1994. 9780674956070 Description. ISBN 0-674-95607-9
Pragmatism: An Open Question. Oxford: Blackwell, 1995. ISBN 0-631-19343-X
The Threefold Cord: Mind, Body, and World. New York: Columbia University Press, 1999. ISBN 0-231-10287-9
Enlightenment and Pragmatism. Assen: Koninklijke Van Gorcum, 2001. 48pp.
The Collapse of the Fact/Value Dichotomy and Other Essays. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2002. Description. ISBN 0-674-01380-8
Ethics Without Ontology. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2002. 9780674018518 Description. ISBN 0-674-01851-6
Jewish Philosophy as a Guide to Life: Rosenzweig, Buber, Levinas, Wittgenstein. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2008.
Philosophy in an Age of Science. edited by Mario De Caro and David Macarthur. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2012. 9780674050136 Description.

Works about Putnam[edit]

Y. Ben-Menahem (ed.), Hilary Putnam, Contemporary Philosophy in Focus, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2005.
P. Clark-B. Hale (eds.), Reading Putnam, Blackwell, Cambridge (Massachusetts)-Oxford 1995.
C. S. Hill (ed.), The Philosophy of Hilary Putnam, Fayetteville, Arkansas 1992.
M. Rüdel, Erkenntnistheorie und Pragmatik: Untersuchungen zu Richard Rorty und Hilary Putnam, (Dissertation) Hamburg 1987.
Maximilian de Gaynesford, Hilary Putnam, McGill-Queens University Press / Acumen, 2006.

See also[edit]




Biography portal



Logic portal




American philosophy
List of American philosophers
Rietdijk–Putnam argument

Notes[edit]


^ Borradori, G et al. The American Philosopher, p. 58
^ a b c d e Casati R., "Hillary Putnam" in Enciclopedia Garzanti della Filosofia, ed. Gianni Vattimo. 2004. Garzanti Editori. Milan. ISBN 88-11-50515-1
^ a b c d e King, P.J. One Hundred Philosophers: The Life and Work of the World's Greatest Thinkers. Barron's 2004, p. 170.
^ Jack Ritchie (June 2002). "TPM:Philosopher of the Month". Archived from the original on 2011-07-09.&#160;
^ LeDoux, J. (2002). The Synaptic Self; How Our Brains Become Who We Are. New York: Viking Penguin. ISBN&#160;88-7078-795-8.&#160;
^ a b P. Clark-B. Hale (eds.), "Reading Putnam", Blackwell, Cambridge (Massachusetts)-Oxford 1995.
^ Colyvan, Mark, "Indispensability Arguments in the Philosophy of Mathematics", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2004 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.)
^ a b Putnam, H. Philosophy of Mathematics: Selected Readings. Edited with Paul Benacerraf. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1964. 2nd ed., Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983.
^ a b c d Putnam, H. (1981): "Brains in a vat" in Reason, Truth, and History, Cambridge University Press; reprinted in DeRose and Warfield, editors (1999): Skepticism: A Contemporary Reader, Oxford UP.
^ a b c Putnam, H. Realism with a Human Face. Edited by James Conant. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1990.
^ Putnam, H. 2012. From Quantum Mechanics to Ethics and Back Again. In his (Au.), De Caro, M. and Macarthur D. (Eds.) "Philosophy in an Age of Science". Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
^ a b Putnam, H.. The Threefold Cord: Mind, Body, and World. New York: Columbia University Press, 1999.
^ a b c http://putnamphil.blogspot.com/2014/10/what-wiki-doesnt-know-about-me-in-1976.html
^ Putnam, H. 2012. How to Be a Sophisticated "Naive Realist". In his (Au.), De Caro, M. and Macarthur D. (Eds.) "Philosophy in an Age of Science". Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
^ a b Davis, M. and Putnam, H. "A computing procedure for quantification theory" in Journal of the ACM, 7:201–215, 1960.
^ Matiyesavic, Yuri (1993). Hilbert's Tenth Problem. Cambridge: MIT. ISBN&#160;0-262-13295-8.&#160;
^ a b c d e f g h i j k To appear in the "American Philosophers" edition of Literary Biography, ed. Bruccoli, Layman and Clarke
^ a b c d Foley, M. (1983). Confronting the War Machine. North Carolina: North Carolina Press. ISBN&#160;0-8078-2767-3.&#160;
^ Wolfe, Bertram David. "Strange Communists I Have Known", Stein and Day, 1965, p.79.
^ Robert F. Barsky, Noam Chomsky: A Life of Dissent, Ch. 2: Undergraduate Years. "A Very Powerful Personality"[dead link], MIT Press, 1997
^ a b c d Linda Wertheimer (July 30, 2006). "Finding My Religion". The Boston Globe.&#160;
^ Hortsch, Michael. "Dr. Hans Nathan Kohn&#160;– ein Berliner Jüdischer Arzt und Forscher am Vorabend des Nationalsozialismus." Berlin Medical, Vol. 4:26–28 August 2007
^ "Book of Members, 1780-2010: Chapter P" (PDF). American Academy of Arts and Sciences. Retrieved 19 April 2011.&#160;
^ "Crimson article on Putnam and Harvard admin.". May 7, 1971. Retrieved 2006-08-02.&#160;
^ "New York Times correction, March 6, 2005". The New York Times. March 6, 2005. Retrieved 2006-08-01.&#160;
^ http://www.uva.nl/en/disciplines/philosophy/home/components-centrecolumn/the-spinoza-chair.html
^ "Hilary Putnam: The Chosen People". Boston Review. Retrieved 2010-12-14.&#160;
^ a b c Bickle, John "Multiple Realizability", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2006 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.)
^ a b c d e f g Putnam, H. (1975) Mind, Language and Reality. Philosophical Papers, vol. 2. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1975. ISBN 88-459-0257-9
^ Fodor, J. (1974) "Special Sciences" in Synthese, 28, pp. 97–115
^ Fodor, J. (1980) "The Mind-Body Problem", Scientific American, 244, pp. 124–132
^ a b C. S. Hill (ed.), "The Philosophy of Hilary Putnam", Fayetteville, Arkansas 1992.
^ Sipser, M. (1997) Introduction to the Theory of Computation. PWS Publishing Company. Boston, Mass. ISBN 0-534-94728-X
^ Block, Ned (August 1983). "What is Functionalism".&#160;
^ Putnam, Hilary (1988). Representation and Reality. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
^ a b Marhaba, Sadi. (2004) Funzionalismoin "Enciclopedia Garzantina della Filosofia" (ed.) Gianni Vattimo. Milan: Garzanti Editori. ISBN 88-11-50515-1
^ Levin, Janet, "Functionalism", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2004 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.)
^ Davidson, D. (2001) Subjective, Intersubjective, Objective. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 88-7078-832-6
^ Dell'Utri, Massimo. (2002) Olismo. Quodlibet. Macerata. ISBN 88-86570-85-6
^ a b Yablo, S. (November 8, 1998). "A Paradox of Existence".&#160;
^ a b Putnam, H. Mathematics, Matter and Method. Philosophical Papers, vol. 1. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1975. 2nd. ed., 1985.
^ J J O'Connor and E F Robertson (April 1997). "Andrew Wiles summary".&#160;
^ S. Barry Cooper, Computability theory, p. 98
^ Putnam, Hilary (1963). "A note on constructible sets of integers". Notre Dame J. Formal Logic 4 (4): 270–273. doi:10.1305/ndjfl/1093957652.&#160;
^ Boolos, George; Putnam, Hilary (1968). "Degrees of unsolvability of constructible sets of integers". J. Symbolic Logic (The Journal of Symbolic Logic, Vol. 33, No. 4) 33 (4): 497–513. doi:10.2307/2271357. JSTOR&#160;2271357.&#160;
^ Boyd, Richard; Hensel, Gustav; Putnam, Hilary (1969). "A recursion-theoretic characterization of the ramified analytical hierarchy". Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. (Transactions of the American Mathematical Society, Vol. 141) 141: 37–62. doi:10.2307/1995087. JSTOR&#160;1995087.&#160;
^ a b Wright, C. (1992), "On Putnam's Proof That We Are Not Brains-in-a-Vat", Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 92.
^ Dell'Utri, M. (1990), "Choosing Conceptions of Realism: the Case of the Brains in a Vat", Mind 99.
^ Putnam, H. The Many Faces of Realism. La Salle, Ill.: Open Court, 1987.
^ a b Curtis Brown (1988). "Internal Realism: Transcendental Idealism?". Midwest Studies in Philosophy (12): 145–55.&#160;
^ Goodman, N. Fact, Fiction, and Forecast. University of London: Athlone Press, 1954. Cambridge, MA: Harvard UP, 1955. 2nd ed. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1965. 3rd. ed. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1973. 4th ed. Cambridge, MA: Harvard UP, 1983
^ a b c Putnam, H. (1997). "A Half Century of Philosophy, Viewed from Within". Daedalus 126 (1): 175–208. JSTOR&#160;20027414.&#160;
^ Peter Clark and Bob Hale, eds., Reading Putnam. Oxford: Blackwell, 1994.
^ See also Philosophical Topics (vol. 20, Number 1, Spring 1992). And Hilary Putnam, "When 'Evidence Transcendence' is Not Malign", Journal of Philosophy, XCVIII, 11 (Nov. 2001), 594–600.
^ http://putnamphil.blogspot.com/2014/11/wiki-catches-up-bit-in-1976-when-i.html
^ Feser, Edward, The Last Superstition, St. Augustine Press 2008, p. 234
^ Reed, Edward (1997). "Defending Experience: A Philosophy For The Post-Modern World" in The Genetic Epistemologist: The Journal of the Jean Piaget Society, Volume 25, Number 3.
^ a b Bechtel, William and Mundale, Jennifer. Multiple Realizability Revisited in Philosophy of Science 66: 175–207.
^ Kim, Sungsu. Testing Multiple Realizability: A Discussion of Bechtel and Mundale in Philosophy of Science. 69: 606–610.
^ Kim, Jaegwon. Multiple Realizability and the Metaphysics of Reduction on Philosophy and Phenomenological Research. 52: 1–26.
^ Lewis, David (1969). "Review of Art, Mind, and Religion." Journal of Philosophy, 66: 23–35.
^ Richardson, Robert (1979). "Functionalism and Reductionism." Philosophy of Science, 46: 533–558.
^ Churchland, Patricia (1986). Neurophilosophy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
^ Searle, John. (1980). "Minds, Brains and Programs", Behavioral and Brain Sciences, vol.3. (online)
^ Block, Ned. (1980b). "Troubles With Functionalism", in Block (1980a).
^ Fodor, J. and Lepore, E. Holism: A Shopper's Guide. Blackwell. Oxford. 1992.
^ Dummett, Michael. The Logical Basis of Metaphysics. Harvard University Press. Cambridge (MA). 1978.
^ Penco, Carlo. Olismo e Molecularismo in Olismo ed. Massimo Dell'Utri. Quodlibet. Macerata. 2002.
^ Steinitz, Y. (1994), "Brains in a Vat: Different Perspectives", Philosophical Quarterly 44.
^ Brueckner, A. (1986), "Brains in a Vat", Journal of Philosophy 83.
^ "The 'innateness hypothesis' and explanatory models in linguistics" (PDF). Retrieved 2014-06-19.&#160;


References[edit]


Bechtel, William and Mundale, Jennifer. "Multiple Realizability Revisited" in Philosophy of Science 66: 175–207.
Bickle, John., "Multiple Realizability" in The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2006 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), (online).
Brown, C., "Internal Realism: Transcendental Idealism?" Midwest Studies in Philosophy 12 (1988): 145–155.
Casati R., "Hillary Putnam" in Enciclopedia Garzanti della Filosofia. Gianni Vattimo (ed). Milan: Garzanti Editori, 2004. ISBN 88-11-50515-1.
Churchland, Patricia. Neurophilosophy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1986.
Clark, P. &amp; Hale, B. (eds.) Reading Putnam. Oxford: Blackwell, 1995.
Dummett, Michael. The Logical Basis of Metaphysics. Harvard University Press. Cambridge (MA) 1972.
Fodor, J. and Lepore, E. Holism: A Shopper's Guide. Oxford: Blackwell, 1992.
Foley, M., Confronting the War Machine. North Carolina: North Carolina Press. 1983. ISBN 0-8078-2767-3.
Gaynesford, M. de Hilary Putnam, Acumen, 2006. (See Robert Maximilian de Gaynesford)
Hickey, L.P., "Hilary Putnam" To appear in the "American Philosophers" edition of Literary Biography, ed. Bruccoli, Layman and Clarke.
Hill, C.S. (ed.) The Philosophy of Hilary Putnam, Fayetteville, Arkansas. 1992.
Kim, Jaegwon. "Multiple Realizability and the Metaphysics of Reduction." Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 52: 1–26.
King, Peter J. One Hundred Philosophers: The Life and Work of the World's Greatest Thinkers. Barron's 2004, p.&#160;170.
Lewis, David. "Review of Art, Mind, and Religion." Journal of Philosophy 66 (1969): 23–35.
Matiyesavic, Yuri. Hilbert's Tenth Problem. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1993. ISBN 0-262-13295-8.
Penco, Carlo. Olismo e Molecularismo in Olismo, ed. Massimo Dell'Utri. Quodlibet. Macerata. 2002.
Putnam, Hilary. Philosophy of Mathematics: Selected Readings. Edited with Paul Benacerraf. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, (1964). 2nd ed., Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983.
———. Mind, Language and Reality. Philosophical Papers, vol. 2. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, (1975).
———. "Brains in a Vat" in Reason, Truth, and History, Cambridge University Press (1981); reprinted in DeRose and Warfield, editors (1999): Skepticism: A Contemporary Reader, Oxford University Press.
———. Realism with a Human Face. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1990.
———. The Threefold Cord: Mind, Body, and World. New York: Columbia University Press, 1999.
Richardson, Robert. "Functionalism and Reductionism." Philosophy of Science 46 (1979): 533–558.
Searle, John. "Minds, Brains and Programs." Behavioral and Brain Sciences 3 (1980).
Wertheimer, Linda. ""Finding My Religion." Boston Globe, July 30, 2006.
Yablo, S. "A Paradox of Existence", June 8, 1998.


External links[edit]

 Quotations related to Hilary Putnam at Wikiquote
Hilary Putnam at PhilPapers
Hilary Putnam at the Indiana Philosophy Ontology Project
Harvard University Philosophy Faculty page[dead link]
An extensive bibliography
An extensive directory
Hilary Putnam at the Mathematics Genealogy Project
London Review of Books contributor page
Hilary Putnam: On Mind, Meaning and Reality, Interview by Josh Harlan, The Harvard Review of Philosophy, spring 1992.
Putnam, Hilary and Ruth Anna, "The Quarrel Between Poetry and Philosophy"[dead link], read to the Santayana Society at its annual meeting in New York on December 28, 1995.
"To Think with Integrity", Hilary Putnam's Farewell Lecture, The Harvard Review of Philosophy, Spring 2000.
Putnam, "The Depths and Shallows of Experience"[dead link], video lecture, UCSB, September 1, 2003. Comments by Hubert Schwyzer and Bruno Latour.
Putnam, "The Fact/Value Dichotomy and its critics"; Roundtable on Externalism audio/video lecture, audio discussion, March 2007, University College Dublin.
Hilary Putnam - Externalism: Its Motivation And Its Critics, video of a lecture, delivered at Harvard University on October 4, 2007
A short film about the Putnam-Rorty debate and its influence on the pragmatist revival on YouTube
The Moscow Center for Consciousness Studies video interview with Hilary Putnam 2010-04-21 (with transcript)









v
t
e


Analytic philosophy






Philosophers



Robert Merrihew Adams
William P. Alston
J. L. Austin
A. J. Ayer
G. E. M. Anscombe
David Malet Armstrong
Robert Audi
Robert Brandom
C. D. Broad
Tyler Burge
John P. Burgess
Rudolf Carnap
Roderick Chisholm
Patricia Churchland
Paul Churchland
David Chalmers
Noam Chomsky
Donald Davidson
Daniel Dennett
Michael Dummett
Bas van Fraassen
Gottlob Frege
Jerry Fodor
Philippa Foot
Peter Geach
A. C. Grayling
Paul Grice
Alvin Goldman
R. M. Hare
Peter Hacker
John Hawthorne
Ian Hacking
Carl Hempel
Jaakko Hintikka
Peter van Inwagen
Frank Cameron Jackson
Christine Korsgaard
Saul Kripke
David Lewis
J. L. Mackie
Norman Malcolm
John McDowell
G. E. Moore
Thomas Nagel
Robert Nozick
Derek Parfit
D. Z. Phillips
Alvin Plantinga
A. N. Prior
Hilary Putnam
W. V. O. Quine
John Rawls
Hans Reichenbach
Bertrand Russell
Gilbert Ryle
John Searle
Moritz Schlick
Wilfrid Sellars
Peter Singer
Peter Strawson
Richard Swinburne
Peter Unger
Bernard Williams
Timothy Williamson
John Wisdom
Ludwig Wittgenstein
Stephen Yablo
more&#160;...








Theories



Deflationism
Direct reference theory
Empiricism
Holism
Logical atomism
Logical positivism
Naturalism
Naturalized epistemology
Neopragmatism
Neutral monism
Particularism
Reductionism
Scientism
Skepticism
Verificationism
more&#160;...








Concepts



Analysis
Analytic–synthetic distinction
Causal&#160;/ Deductive&#160;/ Epistemic closure
Concept
Counterfactual
Denotation&#160;/ reference
Definite description
Factive
Family resemblance
Intuition
Meaning&#160;(Proposition)
Modality
Natural kind&#160;/ projectability
Necessary–sufficient conditions
Paradox of analysis
Possible world
Reduction
Reflective equilibrium
Rigid-flaccid designators
Sense data
Supervenience
Thought experiment
Truth function
Truthmaker
Truth-bearer
Type–token distinction








Related articles



Australian realism
Ordinary language philosophy
Philosophical logic
Philosophy of language
Philosophy of science
Postanalytic philosophy
more&#160;...











Category
Task force&#160;(discussion)
Philosophy stubs
















v
t
e


Notable logicians









Anderson
Aristotle
Averroes
Avicenna
Bain
Barwise
Bernays
Boole
Boolos
Cantor
Carnap
Church
Chrysippus
Cohen
Curry
De Morgan
Dummett
Frege
Geach
Gentzen
Gödel
Hintikka
Hilbert
Kleene
Kripke
Leibniz
Lewis
Löwenheim
Łukasiewicz
Barcan Marcus
Peano
Peirce
Prior
Putnam
Quine
Russell
Schröder
Scott
Scotus
Skolem
Smullyan
Tarski
Turing
Whitehead
William of Ockham
Wittgenstein
Zermelo
















v
t
e


Metaphysics






Metaphysicians



Parmenides
Plato
Aristotle
Plotinus
Duns Scotus
Thomas Aquinas
Francisco Suárez
Nicolas Malebranche
René Descartes
John Locke
David Hume
Thomas Reid
Immanuel Kant
Isaac Newton
Arthur Schopenhauer
Baruch Spinoza
Georg W. F. Hegel
George Berkeley
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz
Henri Bergson
Friedrich Nietzsche
Charles Sanders Peirce
Joseph Maréchal
Ludwig Wittgenstein
Martin Heidegger
Alfred N. Whitehead
Bertrand Russell
Dorothy Emmet
G. E. Moore
Jean-Paul Sartre
Gilbert Ryle
Hilary Putnam
P. F. Strawson
R. G. Collingwood
Adolph Stöhr
Rudolf Carnap
Saul Kripke
Willard V. O. Quine
G. E. M. Anscombe
Donald Davidson
Michael Dummett
David Malet Armstrong
David Lewis
Alvin Plantinga
Peter van Inwagen
Derek Parfit
more ...








Theories



Abstract object theory
Action theory
Anti-realism
Determinism
Dualism
Enactivism
Essentialism
Existentialism
Free will
Idealism
Libertarianism
Liberty
Materialism
Meaning of life
Monism
Naturalism
Nihilism
Phenomenalism
Realism
Physicalism
Pirsig's metaphysics of Quality
Platonic idealism
Relativism
Scientific realism
Solipsism
Subjectivism
Substance theory
Type theory








Concepts



Abstract object
Anima mundi
Being
Category of being
Causality
Choice
Cogito ergo sum
Concept
Embodied cognition
Entity
Essence
Existence
Experience
Hypostatic abstraction
Idea
Identity
Identity and change
Information
Insight
Intelligence
Intention
Linguistic modality
Matter
Meaning
Memetics
Mental representation
Mind
Motion
Necessity
Notion
Object
Pattern
Perception
Physical body
Principle
Property
Qualia
Quality
Reality
Soul
Subject
Substantial form
Thought
Time
Truth
Type–token distinction
Universal
Unobservable
Value
more ...








Related topics



Axiology
Cosmology
Epistemology
Interpretations of quantum mechanics
Meta-
Ontology
Philosophy of mind
Philosophy of psychology
Philosophy of self
Philosophy of space and time
Teleology
Theoretical physics











 Category
 Portal
 WikiProject
















v
t
e


Epistemology






Epistemologists



Thomas Aquinas
Augustine of Hippo
William Alston
Robert Audi
A. J. Ayer
George Berkeley
Laurence BonJour
René Descartes
Edmund Gettier
Alvin Goldman
Nelson Goodman
Paul Grice
David Hume
Immanuel Kant
Søren Kierkegaard
Saul Kripke
David Lewis
John Locke
G. E. Moore
Robert Nozick
Alvin Plantinga
Plato
Hilary Putnam
Thomas Reid
Gilbert Ryle
P. F. Strawson
W.V.O. Quine
Bertrand Russell
Timothy Williamson
Ludwig Wittgenstein
Nicholas Wolterstorff
Vienna Circle








Theories



Coherentism
Constructivist epistemology
Contextualism
Determinism
Empiricism
Evolutionary epistemology
Fallibilism
Feminist epistemology
Fideism
Foundationalism
Genetic epistemology
Holism
Infinitism
Innatism
Internalism and externalism
Naïve realism
Naturalized epistemology
Phenomenalism
Positivism
Reductionism
Reliabilism
Representative realism
Rationalism
Skepticism
Theory of Forms
Transcendental idealism
Uniformitarianism








Concepts



A priori knowledge
Analysis
Analytic–synthetic distinction
Belief
Causality
Common sense
Descriptive knowledge
Exploratory thought
Gettier problem
Justification
Knowledge
Induction
Objectivity
Problem of induction
Problem of other minds
Perception
Proposition
Regress argument
Simplicity
Speculative reason
Truth
more...








Related articles



Outline of epistemology
Alethiology
Faith and rationality
Formal epistemology
Meta-epistemology
Philosophy of perception
Philosophy of science
Social epistemology











Portal
Category
Task Force
Stubs
Discussion
















v
t
e


Philosophy of language






Philosophers



Plato (Cratylus)
Gorgias
Confucius
Xunzi
Aristotle
Stoics
Pyrrhonists
Scholasticism
Ibn Rushd
Ibn Khaldun
Thomas Hobbes
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz
Johann Herder
Ludwig Noire
Wilhelm von Humboldt
Fritz Mauthner
Paul Ricœur
Ferdinand de Saussure
Gottlob Frege
Franz Boas
Paul Tillich
Edward Sapir
Leonard Bloomfield
Zhuangzi
Henri Bergson
Lev Vygotsky
Ludwig Wittgenstein

Philosophical Investigations
Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus


Bertrand Russell
Rudolf Carnap
Jacques Derrida

Of Grammatology
Limited Inc


Benjamin Lee Whorf
Gustav Bergmann
J. L. Austin
Noam Chomsky
Hans-Georg Gadamer
Saul Kripke
A. J. Ayer
G. E. M. Anscombe
Jaakko Hintikka
Michael Dummett
Donald Davidson
Paul Grice
Gilbert Ryle
P. F. Strawson
Willard Van Orman Quine
Hilary Putnam
David Lewis
John Searle
Joxe Azurmendi
Scott Soames
Stephen Yablo
John Hawthorne
Stephen Neale








Theories



Causal theory of reference
Contrast theory of meaning
Contrastivism
Conventionalism
Cratylism
Deconstruction
Descriptivist theory of names
Direct reference theory
Dramatism
Expressivism
Linguistic determinism
Logical atomism
Logical positivism
Mediated reference theory
Nominalism
Non-cognitivism
Phallogocentrism
Quietism
Relevance theory
Semantic externalism
Semantic holism
Structuralism
Supposition theory
Symbiosism
Theological noncognitivism
Theory of descriptions
Verification theory








Concepts



Ambiguity
Linguistic relativity
Meaning
Language
Truth-bearer
Proposition
Use–mention distinction
Concept
Categories
Set
Class
Intension
Logical form
Metalanguage
Mental representation
Principle of compositionality
Property
Sign
Sense and reference
Speech act
Symbol
Entity
Sentence
Statement
more...








Related articles



Analytic philosophy
Philosophy of information
Philosophical logic
Linguistics
Pragmatics
Rhetoric
Semantics
Formal semantics
Semiotics











Category
Task Force
Discussion
















v
t
e


Philosophy of mind






Philosophers



Anscombe
Austin
Aquinas
Bain
Bergson
Bhattacharya
Block
Brentano
Broad
Burge
Chalmers
Churchland
Dennett
Dharmakirti
Davidson
Descartes
Goldman
Heidegger
Husserl
Fodor
James
Kierkegaard
Leibniz
Lewis
McDowell
Merleau-Ponty
Minsky
Moore
Nagel
Parfit
Putnam
Popper
Rorty
Ryle
Searle
Spinoza
Turing
Vasubandhu
Wittgenstein
Zhuangzi
more...








Theories



Behaviorism
Biological naturalism
Dualism
Eliminative materialism
Emergent materialism
Epiphenomenalism
Functionalism
Idealism
Interactionism
Materialism
Monism
Naïve realism
Neutral monism
Phenomenalism
Phenomenology

existential
neurophenomenology


Physicalism

identity theory


Pragmatism
Property dualism
Representational
Solipsism
Subjectivism
Substance dualism








Concepts



Abstract object
Artificial intelligence
Chinese room
Cognition
Cognitive closure
Concept
Concept and object
Consciousness
Hard problem of consciousness
Hypostatic abstraction
Idea
Identity
Ingenuity
Intelligence
Intentionality
Introspection
Intuition
Language of thought
Materialism
Mental event
Mental image
Mental process
Mental property
Mental representation
Mind
Mind–body problem
New mysterianism
Pain
Problem of other minds
Propositional attitude
Qualia
Tabula rasa
Understanding
Zombie
more...








Related topics



Metaphysics
Philosophy of artificial intelligence&#160;/ information&#160;/ perception&#160;/ self











Portal
Category
Task Force
Discussion
















v
t
e


Rolf Schock Prize laureates






Logic and philosophy



Willard Van Orman Quine (1993)
Michael Dummett (1995)
Dana Scott (1997)
John Rawls (1999)
Saul Kripke (2001)
Solomon Feferman (2003)
Jaakko Hintikka (2005)
Thomas Nagel (2008)
Hilary Putnam (2011)
Derek Parfit (2014)








Mathematics



Elias M. Stein (1993)
Andrew Wiles (1995)
Mikio Sato (1997)
Yuri I. Manin (1999)
Elliott H. Lieb (2001)
Richard P. Stanley (2003)
Luis Caffarelli (2005)
Endre Szemerédi (2008)
Michael Aschbacher (2011)
Yitang Zhang (2014)








Musical arts



Ingvar Lidholm (1993)
György Ligeti (1995)
Jorma Panula (1997)
Kronos Quartet (1999)
Kaija Saariaho (2001)
Anne Sofie von Otter (2003)
Mauricio Kagel (2005)
Gidon Kremer (2008)
Andrew Manze (2011)
Herbert Blomstedt (2014)








Visual arts



Rafael Moneo (1993)
Claes Oldenburg (1995)
Torsten Andersson (1997)
Herzog &amp; de Meuron (1999)
Giuseppe Penone (2001)
Susan Rothenberg (2003)
SANAA / Kazuyo Sejima + Ryue Nishizawa (2005)
Mona Hatoum (2008)
Marlene Dumas (2011)
Anne Lacaton / Jean-Philippe Vassal (2014)













Authority control



WorldCat
VIAF: 108290352
LCCN: n50049338
ISNI: 0000 0001 0931 0564
GND: 118823779
SUDOC: 02829372X
BNF: cb120158769 (data)
MGP: 13387
NDL: 00453471
NKC: js20021118004















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hilary_Putnam&amp;oldid=690650983"					
				Categories: 20th-century philosophersAmerican Jews20th-century American mathematicians21st-century American mathematiciansAmerican philosophersAnalytic philosophersCentral High School (Philadelphia) alumniHarvard University alumniHarvard University facultyJewish philosophersLiving peopleMetaphysiciansPhilosophers of languagePhilosophers of mathematicsPhilosophers of mindPhilosophers of sciencePragmatistsUniversity of Pennsylvania alumniUniversity of California, Los Angeles alumni1926 birthsFellows of the American Academy of Arts and SciencesScientists from Chicago, IllinoisNorthwestern University facultyPrinceton University facultyMassachusetts Institute of Technology facultyMembers of the European Academy of Sciences and ArtsTarski lecturersHidden categories: All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from October 2015Featured articlesArticles with hCardsWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers				
							
		
		
			