


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Ibn Khaldun
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								  (Redirected from Ibn Khaldūn)
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				

Ibn Khaldun



An artist's impression of Ibn Khaldun



Born
27 May 1332
Tunis, Hafsid Sultanate of Ifriqiya


Died
19 March 1406
Cairo, Mamluk Sultanate of Egypt


Era
Medieval era


Region
Maghreb


Religion
Islam


Denomination
Sunni Islam[1]


Jurisprudence
Maliki


Creed
Ash'ari[2]


Main interest(s)
Sociology
Historiography
Economics
Demography
Political science
Complex sciences


Notable idea(s)
Cyclical Theory of Empires, Asabiyyah, Economic Growth Theory,[3] Supply and Demand Theory [4]




Influenced&#160;by

Ibn Jarir, Ibn Hazm, At-Turtushi,[5] Ibn Abi Zar, Muhammad ibn Zakarīya Rāzi







Influenced

Ibn al-Khatib, Ibn al-Azraq, Ibn al-Sakkak, Al-Maqrizi





Ibn Khaldūn (/ˌɪbənxælˈduːn/; Arabic: أبو زيد عبد الرحمن بن محمد بن خلدون الحضرمي‎, Abū Zayd ‘Abd ar-Raḥmān ibn Muḥammad ibn Khaldūn al-Ḥaḍramī; May 27, 1332 – March 19, 1406) was an Ifriqiyan (North Africa) Arab[6][7][8] Muslim historiographer and historian, regarded to be among the founding fathers of modern sociology,[n 1] historiography, demography,[n 1] and economics.[9][n 2]
He is best known for his book, the Muqaddimah (literally the "Introduction", known as the Prolegomena in Greek). The book influenced 17th-century Ottoman historians like Ḥajjī Khalīfa and Mustafa Naima who used the theories in the book to analyze the growth and decline of the Ottoman Empire.[10] 19th-century European scholars also acknowledged the significance of the book and considered Ibn Khaldun as one of the greatest philosophers of the Middle Ages.[11][12]



Contents


1 Biography

1.1 Education
1.2 Early years in Tunis, Fez, Tlemcen and Granada
1.3 Last years in Egypt


2 Works
3 Legacy
4 See also
5 Notes and references
6 External links

6.1 English
6.2 Non-English





Biography[edit]
Ibn Khaldun's life is relatively well-documented, as he wrote an autobiography (التعريف بابن خلدون ورحلته غربا وشرقا, at-Taʻrīf bi-ibn Khaldūn wa-Riḥlatih Gharban wa-Sharqan[13]) in which numerous documents regarding his life are quoted word-for-word.
Generally known as "Ibn Khaldūn" after a remote ancestor, he was born in Tunis in AD 1332 (732 A.H.) into an upper-class Andalusian family of Arab descent,[14][15][16] the Banu Khaldun. The grandfather of the Banu Khaldun was Othman ibn Bakr ibn Khalid, also called Khaldun. He was a Yemenite Arab which claimed descendancy from one of the companions of the islamic prophet called Waíl ibn Hujr.[17] His family, which held many high offices in Andalusia, had emigrated to Tunisia after the fall of Seville to the Reconquista in AD 1248 . Under the Tunisian Hafsid dynasty some of his family held political office; Ibn Khaldūn's father and grandfather however withdrew from political life and joined a mystical order. His brother, Yahya Khaldun, was also a historian who wrote a book on the Abdalwadid dynasty, and who was assassinated by a rival for being the official historiographer of the court.[18]
In his autobiography, Khaldun traces his descent back to the time of Muhammad through an Arab tribe from Yemen, specifically the Hadhramaut, which came to the Iberian Peninsula in the eighth century at the beginning of the Islamic conquest. In his own words: "And our ancestry is from Hadhramaut, from the Arabs of Yemen, via Wa'il ibn Hujr also known as Hujr ibn'Adi, from the best of the Arabs, well-known and respected." (p.&#160;2429, Al-Waraq's edition). However, the biographer Mohammad Enan questions his claim, suggesting that his family may have been Muladis who pretended to be of Arab origin in order to gain social status.[19] Enan also mentions a well documented past tradition, concerning certain Berber groups, whereby they delusively "aggrandize" themselves with some Arab ancestry. The motive of such an invention was always the desire for political and societal ascendancy. Some speculate this of the Khaldun family; they elaborate that Ibn Khaldun himself was the product of the same Berber ancestry as the native majority of his birthplace. A point congenial to this posits that Ibn Khaldun's unusual written focus on, and admiration for Berbers reveals a deference towards them that is born of a vested interest in preserving them in the realm of conscious history.In contrast, Muhammad Hozien chooses to believe: "The false [Berber] identity would be valid however at the time that Ibn Khaldun's ancestors left Andalusia and moved to Tunisia they did not change their claim to Arab ancestry. Even in the times when Berbers were ruling in Al-Andalus, the reigns of Almoravids and Almohads, the Ibn Khalduns did not reclaim their Berber heritage. A second point is that he could have been an arab if he only attacked arabs in general. However he specifically talked about the Banu Hilal tribe that was sent by the Fatimid empire to destabilize North-Africa. A third point is that he critisized the sub-saharan africans by calling them to stupid to realise that they are being used as slaves which also showed his criticism to the africans. A fourth point is that even when he critisized he's own people, that doesn't make him an outsider.".[20] The traceline of his descendancy and surname give the strongest indication of his arab Yemenite ancestry.[6][21]
Education[edit]
His family's high rank enabled Ibn Khaldun to study with the best teachers in Maghreb. He received a classical Islamic education, studying the Qur'an which he memorized by heart, Arabic linguistics, the basis for an understanding of the Qur'an, hadith, sharia (law) and fiqh (jurisprudence). He received certification (ijazah) for all these subjects.[22] The mathematician and philosopher, Al-Abili of Tlemcen, introduced him to mathematics, logic and philosophy, where he above all studied the works of Averroes, Avicenna, Razi and Tusi. At the age of 17, Ibn Khaldūn lost both his parents to the Black Death, an intercontinental epidemic of the plague that hit Tunis in 1348–1349.
Following family tradition, Ibn Khaldūn strove for a political career. In the face of a tumultuous political situation in North Africa, this required a high degree of skill developing and dropping alliances prudently, to avoid falling with the short-lived regimes of the time.[citation needed] Ibn Khaldūn's autobiography is the story of an adventure, in which he spends time in prison, reaches the highest offices and falls again into exile.[citation needed]
Early years in Tunis, Fez, Tlemcen and Granada[edit]




Birth home of Ibn Khaldoun at Tunis







The Mosque where Ibn Khaldoun used to take his lessons






Ibn Khaldun on the 10 Tunisian dinar bill


At the age of 20, he began his political career at the Chancellery of the Tunisian ruler Ibn Tafrakin with the position of Kātib al-'Alāmah, which consisted of writing in fine calligraphy the typical introductory notes of official documents. In 1352, Abū Ziad, the Sultan of Constantine, marched on Tunis and defeated it. Ibn Khaldūn, in any case unhappy with his respected but politically meaningless position, followed his teacher Abili to Fez. Here the Marinid sultan Abū Inan Fares I appointed him as a writer of royal proclamations, which didn't prevent Ibn Khaldūn from scheming against his employer. In 1357 this brought the 25-year-old a 22-month prison sentence. Upon the death of Abū Inan in 1358, the vizier al-Hasān ibn-Umar granted him freedom and reinstated him in his rank and offices. Ibn Khaldūn then schemed against Abū Inan's successor, Abū Salem Ibrahim III, with Abū Salem's exiled uncle, Abū Salem. When Abū Salem came to power, he gave Ibn Khaldūn a ministerial position, the first position which corresponded with Ibn Khaldūn's ambitions.
The treatment Ibn Khaldun received after the fall of Abū Salem through Ibn-Amar ʻAbdullah, a friend of Ibn Khaldūn's, was not to his liking, he received no significant official position. At the same time, Amar successfully prevented Ibn Khaldūn – whose political skills he was well aware of – from allying with the Abd al-Wadids in Tlemcen. Ibn Khaldūn therefore decided to move to Granada. He could be sure of a positive welcome there, since at Fez he had helped the Sultan of Granada, the Nasrid Muhammad V, regain power from his temporary exile. In 1364 Muhammad entrusted him with a diplomatic mission to the King of Castile, Pedro the Cruel, to endorse a peace treaty. Ibn Khaldūn successfully carried out this mission, and politely declined Pedro's offer to remain at his court and have his family's Spanish possessions returned to him.
In Granada, Ibn Khaldūn quickly came into competition with Muhammad's vizier, Ibn al-Khatib, who saw the close relationship between Muhammad and Ibn Khaldūn with increasing mistrust. Ibn Khaldūn tried to shape the young Muhammad into his ideal of a wise ruler, an enterprise which Ibn al-Khatib thought foolish and a danger to peace in the country – and history proved him right. At al-Khatib's instigation, Ibn Khaldūn was eventually sent back to North Africa. Al-Khatib himself was later accused by Muhammad of having unorthodox philosophical views, and murdered, despite an attempt by Ibn Khaldūn to intercede on behalf of his old rival.
In his autobiography, Ibn Khaldūn tells us little about his conflict with Ibn al-Khatib and the reasons for his departure. The orientalist Muhsin Mahdi interprets this as showing that Ibn Khaldūn later realised that he had completely misjudged Muhammad&#160;V.
Back in Africa, the Hafsid sultan of Bougie, Abū ʻAbdallāh, (who had been his companion in prison) received him with great enthusiasm, and made Ibn Khaldūn his prime minister. During this period, Ibn Khaldūn carried out a daring mission to collect taxes among the local Berber tribes. After the death of Abū ʻAbdallāh in 1366, Ibn Khaldūn changed sides once again and allied himself with the Sultan of Tlemcen, Abū l-Abbas. A few years later he was taken prisoner by Abu Faris Abdul Aziz, who had defeated the sultan of Tlemcen and seized the throne. He then entered a monastic establishment, and occupied himself with scholastic duties, until in 1370 he was sent for to Tlemcen by the new sultan. After the death of ʻAbdu l-Azīz, he resided at Fez, enjoying the patronage and confidence of the regent.
Ibn Khaldūn's political skills, above all his good relationship with the wild Berber tribes, were in high demand among the North African rulers, whereas he himself began to tire of politics and constant switching of allegiances. In 1375, sent by Abū Hammu, the ʻAbdu l Wadid Sultan of Tlemcen, on a mission to the Dawadida Arabs tribes of Biskra. After his return to the West Ibn Khaldūn sought refuge with one of the Berber tribes, in the west of Algeria, in the town of Qalat Ibn Salama. He lived there for over three years under their protection, taking advantage of his seclusion to write the Muqaddimah "Prolegomena", the introduction to his planned history of the world. In Ibn Salama, however, he lacked the necessary texts to complete the work. As a result, in 1378, he returned to his native Tunis, which in the mean time had been conquered by Abū l-Abbas, who took Ibn Khaldūn back into his service. There he devoted himself almost exclusively to his studies and completed his history of the world. His relationship with Abū l-Abbas remained strained, as the latter questioned his loyalty. This was brought into sharp contrast after Ibn Khaldūn presented him with a copy of the completed history omitting the usual panegyric to the ruler. Under pretence of going on the Hajj to Mecca – something a Muslim ruler could not simply refuse permission for – Ibn Khaldūn was able to leave Tunis and sail to Alexandria.
Last years in Egypt[edit]




Ibn Khaldoun Statue and Square, Mohandesin, Cairo


Ibn Khaldun said of Egypt, "He who has not seen it does not know the power of Islam."[this quote needs a citation] While other Islamic regions had to cope with border wars and inner strife, under the Mamluks Egypt experienced a period of economic prosperity and high culture. However, even in Egypt, where Ibn Khaldūn lived out his days, he could not stay out of politics completely. In 1384 the Egyptian Sultan, al-Malik udh-Dhahir Barquq, made him Professor of the Qamhiyyah Madrasah, and grand Qadi of the Maliki school of fiqh (one of four schools, the Maliki school was widespread primarily in West Africa). His efforts at reform encountered resistance, however, and within a year he had to resign his judgeship. A contributory factor to his decision to resign may have been the heavy personal blow that struck him in 1384, when a ship carrying his wife and children sank off the coast of Alexandria. Ibn Khaldun now decided to complete the pilgrimage to Mecca after all.
After his return in May 1388, Ibn Khaldūn concentrated more strongly on a purely educational function at various Cairo madrasas. At court he fell out of favor for a time, as during revolts against Barquq he had – apparently under duress – together with other Cairo jurists issued a Fatwa against Barquq. Later relations with Barquq returned to normal, and he was once again named the Maliki qadi. Altogether he was called six times to this high office, which for various reasons he never held long.
In 1401, under Barquq's successor, his son Faraj, Ibn Khaldūn took part in a military campaign against the Mongol conqueror Timur, who besieged Damascus. Ibn Khaldūn cast doubt upon the viability of the venture and didn't really want to leave Egypt. His doubts were vindicated, as the young and inexperienced Faraj, concerned about a revolt in Egypt, left his army to its own devices in Syria and hurried home. Ibn Khaldūn remained at the besieged city for seven weeks, being lowered over the city wall by ropes in order to negotiate with Timur, in a historic series of meetings which he reports extensively in his autobiography. Timur questioned him in detail about conditions in the lands of the Maghreb; at his request, Ibn Khaldūn even wrote a long report about it. As he recognized the intentions behind this, he did not hesitate, on his return to Egypt, to compose an equally extensive report on the history of the Tartars, together with a character study of Timur, sending these to the Merinid rulers in Fez (Maghreb).
Ibn Khaldūn spent the following five years in Cairo completing his autobiography and his history of the world and acting as teacher and judge. During this time, he is alleged to have joined an underground party named Rijal Hawa Rijal. Their reform oriented ideals attracted the attention of local political authorities and the elderly Ibn Khaldun was placed under arrest. He died on 19 March 1406, one month after his sixth selection for the office of the Maliki qadi (Judge).
Works[edit]
See also: Muqaddimah and Asabiyyah


When civilization [population] increases, the available labor again increases. In turn, luxury again increases in correspondence with the increasing profit, and the customs and needs of luxury increase. Crafts are created to obtain luxury products. The value realized from them increases, and, as a result, profits are again multiplied in the town. Production there is thriving even more than before. And so it goes with the second and third increase. All the additional labor serves luxury and wealth, in contrast to the original labor that served the necessity of life.[3]


Ibn Khaldun on economic growth


Ibn Khaldūn has left behind few works other than his history of the world, Kitāb al-ʻIbar. Significantly, such writings are not alluded to in his autobiography, suggesting perhaps that Ibn Khaldūn saw himself first and foremost as a historian and wanted to be known above all as the author of Kitāb al-ʻIbar. From other sources we know of several other works, primarily composed during the time he spent in North Africa and Al-Andalus. His first book, Lubābu l-Muhassal, a commentary on the Islamic theology of Fakhr al-Din al-Razi, was written at the age of 19 under the supervision of his teacher al-Ābilī in Tunis. A work on Sufism, Sifā'u l-Sā'il, was composed around 1373 in Fes, Morocco. Whilst at the court of Muhammed V, Sultan of Granada, Ibn Khaldūn composed a work on logic, ʻallaqa li-s-Sulṭān.
The Kitāb al-ʻIbār (full title: Kitāb al-ʻIbar wa-Dīwān al-Mubtadaʼ wa-l-Khabar fī Taʼrīkh al-ʻArab wa-l-Barbar wa-Man ʻĀṣarahum min Dhawī ash-Shaʼn al-Akbār "Book of Lessons, Record of Beginnings and Events in the History of the Arabs and the Berbers and Their Powerful Contemporaries"), Ibn Khaldūn's main work, was originally conceived as a history of the Berbers. Later, the focus was widened so that in its final form (including its own methodology and anthropology), to represent a so-called "universal history". It is divided into seven books, the first of which, the Muqaddimah, can be considered a separate work. Books two to five cover the history of mankind up to the time of Ibn Khaldūn. Books six and seven cover the history of the Berber peoples and the Maghreb, which remain invaluable to present-day historians, as they are based on Ibn Khaldūn's personal knowledge of the Berbers.[23]


Businesses owned by responsible and organized merchants shall eventually surpass those owned by wealthy rulers.[3]


Ibn Khaldun on economic growth opposing the ideals of Platonism


Concerning the discipline of sociology, he conceived a theory of social conflict. He developed the dichotomy of sedentary life versus nomadic life as well as the concept of a "generation", and the inevitable loss of power that occurs when desert warriors conquer a city. Following a contemporary Arab scholar, Sati' al-Husri, the Muqaddimah may be read as a sociological work: six books of general sociology. Topics dealt with in this work include politics, urban life, economics, and knowledge. The work is based around Ibn Khaldun's central concept of ''aṣabiyyah, which has been translated as "social cohesion", "group solidarity", or "tribalism". This social cohesion arises spontaneously in tribes and other small kinship groups; it can be intensified and enlarged by a religious ideology. Ibn Khaldun's analysis looks at how this cohesion carries groups to power but contains within itself the seeds – psychological, sociological, economic, political – of the group's downfall, to be replaced by a new group, dynasty or empire bound by a stronger (or at least younger and more vigorous) cohesion. Ibn Khaldun has been cited as a racist, but his theories on the rise and fall of empires have no racial component, and this reading of his work has been claimed to be the result of mistranslations.[24]


One should then look at the world of creation. It started out from the minerals and progressed, in an ingenious, gradual manner, to plants and animals. The last stage of minerals is connected with the first stage of plants, such as herbs and seedless plants. The last stage of plants, such as palms and vines, is connected with the first stage of animals, such as snails and shellfish which have only the power of touch. The word "connection" with regard to these created things means that the last stage of each group is fully prepared to become the first stage of the next group.
The animal world then widens, its species become numerous, and, in a gradual process of creation, it finally leads to man, who is able to think and to reflect. The higher stage of man is reached from the world of the monkeys, in which both sagacity and perception are found, but which has not reached the stage of actual reflection and thinking. At this point we come to the first stage of man after (the world of monkeys). This is as far as our (physical) observation extends.[25]



Ibn Khaldun on Evolution


Perhaps the most frequently cited observation drawn from Ibn Khaldūn's work is the notion that when a society becomes a great civilization (and, presumably, the dominant culture in its region), its high point is followed by a period of decay. This means that the next cohesive group that conquers the diminished civilization is, by comparison, a group of barbarians. Once the barbarians solidify their control over the conquered society, however, they become attracted to its more refined aspects, such as literacy and arts, and either assimilate into or appropriate such cultural practices. Then, eventually, the former barbarians will be conquered by a new set of barbarians, who will repeat the process. Some contemporary readers of Khaldun have read this as an early business cycle theory, though set in the historical circumstances of the mature Islamic empire.
Ibn Khaldun outlines an early (possibly even the earliest) example of political economy. He describes the economy as being composed of value-adding processes; that is, labour and skill is added to techniques and crafts and the product is sold at a higher value. He also made the distinction between "profit" and "sustenance", in modern political economy terms, surplus and that required for the reproduction of classes respectively. He also calls for the creation of a science to explain society and goes on to outline these ideas in his major work the Muqaddimah.
Ibn Khaldun also emphasized on the Islamic Monetary System that the currency or money should have intrinsic value. And it should be made up of Gold and Silver i.e. Gold dinar and Silver Dirham. He also emphasized that the weight and purity of these coins should be strictly followed. As the weight of one dinar should be one mithqal i.e. equal the weight of 72 grains of barley (equals to almost 4.25 grams) and the weight of 7 dinar should be equal to weight of 10 Dirhams (which equal 7/10 of Mithqal or 2.975 grams). And according to him these coins must be used in laws concerning the charity tax (Zakat), marriage (fees), fixed legal fines, and other things.[26]


The dirham and the dinar differ in value and weight in different regions, cities, and provinces. The religious law has had occasion to refer to these (coins) and has mentioned them in connection with many laws concerning the charity tax, marriage (fees), fixed legal fines, and other things. Therefore, the religious law must have its own (dirham and dinar) with a specific value given to them by (the religious law itself) and agreeing with the intention of (the religious law). These coins are then the ones to which the laws refer. They are different from the non-legal (coins).[27]


Ibn Khaldun on Islamic Monetary Economics




The Revelation undertook to mention them and attached many judgements to them, for example zakat, marriage, and hudud, etc., therefore within the Revelation they have to have a reality and specific measure for assessment of zakat, etc. upon which its judgements may be based rather than on the non-shari'i other coins.

Know that there is consensus since the beginning of Islam and the age of the Companions and the Followers that the dirham of the shari'ah is that of which ten weigh seven mithqals weight of the dinar of gold... The weight of a mithqal of gold is seventy-two grains of barley, so that the dirham which is seven-tenths of it is fifty and two-fifths grains. All these measurements are firmly established by consensus[28]


Ibn Khaldun on Gold dinar and Silver Dirham as Money


Legacy[edit]




A possible non-symmetric Laffer Curve with a maximum revenue point at around a 70% tax rate, based on "How Far Are We From The Slippery Slope?,[29] Laffer himself does not claim to have invented the concept, attributing it to 14th-century Muslim scholar Ibn Khaldun[30][31] and John Maynard Keynes.


Ibn Khaldun was first brought to the attention of the Western world in 1697, when a biography of him appeared in Barthélemy d'Herbelot de Molainville's Bibliothèque Orientale. Ibn Khaldun began gaining more attention from 1806, when Silvestre de Sacy's Chrestomathie Arabe included his biography together with a translation of parts of the Muqaddimah as the Prolegomena.[32] In 1816, de Sacy again published a biography with a more detailed description on the Prolegomena.[33] More details on and partial translations of the Prolegomena emerged over the years until the complete Arabic edition was published in 1858, followed by a complete French translation a few years later by de Sacy.[34] Since then, the work of Ibn Khaldun has been extensively studied in the Western world with special interest.[35]

British historian Arnold J. Toynbee called the Muqaddimah "a philosophy of history which is undoubtedly the greatest work of its kind that has ever yet been created by any mind in any time or place."[36]
The British philosopher Robert Flint wrote the following on Ibn Khaldun: "as a theorist of history he had no equal in any age or country until Vico appeared, more than three hundred years later. Plato, Aristotle, and Augustine were not his peers, and all others were unworthy of being even mentioned along with him".
Abderrahmane Lakhsassi writes: "No historian of the Maghreb since and particularly of the Berbers can do without his historical contribution."[37]
The British philosopher-anthropologist Ernest Gellner considered Ibn Khaldun's definition of government, "an institution which prevents injustice other than such as it commits itself", the best in the history of political theory.[38]
Egon Orowan, who termed the concept of socionomy, was influenced by Ibn Khaldun's ideas on the evolution of societies.[39]
Arthur Laffer, whom the Laffer curve is named after, noted that, among others, some of Ibn Khaldun's ideas precede his own.[40]
In 2004, the Tunisian Community Center launched the first Ibn Khaldun Award to recognize a Tunisian/American high achiever whose work reflects Ibn Khaldun's ideas of kinship and solidarity. The Award was named after Ibn Khaldun for him being universally acknowledged as the Father of Sociology and also for the convergence of his ideas with the organization's objectives and programs.
In 2006, the Atlas Economic Research Foundation launched an annual essay contest [1][dead link] for students named in Ibn Khaldun's honor. The theme of the contest is "how individuals, think tanks, universities and entrepreneurs can influence government policies to allow the free market to flourish and improve the lives of its citizens based on Islamic teachings and traditions."[this quote needs a citation]
In 2006, Spain commemorated the 600th anniversary of the death of Ibn Khaldun. [2]

See also[edit]


Asabiyyah
Chanakya
Egon Orowan
List of Muslim historians
Historiography of early Islam
Laffer curve
Muqaddimah
Science in medieval Islam
Social cycle theory


Notes and references[edit]

Notes



^ a b

"...regarded by some Westerners as the true father of historiography and sociology".[41]
"Ibn Khaldun has been claimed the forerunner of a great number of European thinkers, mostly sociologists, historians, and philosophers".(Boulakia 1971)
"The founding father of Eastern Sociology".[42]
"This grand scheme to find a new science of society makes him the forerunner of many of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries system-builders such as Vico, Comte and Marx." "As one of the early founders of the social sciences...".[43]


^

"He is considered by some as a father of modern economics, or at least a major forerunner. The Western world recognizes Khaldun as the father of sociology but hesitates in recognizing him as a great economist who laid its very foundations. He was the first to systematically analyze the functioning of an economy, the importance of technology, specialization and foreign trade in economic surplus and the role of government and its stabilization policies to increase output and employment. Moreover, he dealt with the problem of optimum taxation, minimum government services, incentives, institutional framework, law and order, expectations, production, and the theory of value".Cosma, Sorinel (2009). "Ibn Khaldun's Economic Thinking". Ovidius University Annals of Economics (Ovidius University Press) XIV:52–57





Citations



^ http://www.muslimphilosophy.com/ik/klf.htm#Intro
^ Doniger, Wendy (1999). Merriam-Webster's Encyclopedia of World Religions. Merriam-Webstar Inc. p.&#160;82. ISBN&#160;0877790442.&#160;
^ a b c Muqaddimah 2:272–73 quoted in Weiss (1995) p 30
^ Weiss 1995, p.&#160;31 quotes Muqaddimah 2:276–78
^ In al-Muqaddima Ibn Khaldun cites him as a pioneer in sociology
^ a b Genealogy and Knowledge in Muslim Societies: Understanding the Past. Sarah Bowen Savant.
^ Historical Dictionary of Yemen. Robert D. Burrowes.
^ http://muslimheritage.com/article/ibn-khaldun-his-life-and-works
^ • Joseph J. Spengler (1964). "Economic Thought of Islam: Ibn Khaldun", Comparative Studies in Society and History, 6(3), pp. 268-306.
&#160;&#160;• Jean David C. Boulakia (1971). "Ibn Khaldûn: A Fourteenth-Century Economist", Journal of Political Economy, 79(5), pp. 1105–1118.
^ Lewis, Bernard (1986). "Ibn Khaldūn in Turkey". In Ayalon, David; Sharon, Moshe. Studies in Islamic history and civilization: in honour of Professor David Ayalon. BRILL. pp.&#160;527–530. ISBN&#160;978-965-264-014-7&#160;
^ Bernard Lewis: "Ibn Khaldun in Turkey", in: Ibn Khaldun: The Mediterranean in the 14th Century: Rise and Fall of Empires, Foundation El Legado Andalusí, 2006, ISBN 978-84-96556-34-8, pp. 376–380 (376)
^ S. M. Deen (2007) Science under Islam: rise, decline and revival. p. 157. ISBN 1-84799-942-5
^ Published by Muḥammad ibn Tāwīt aṭ-Ṭanjī, Cairo 1951
^ The Historical Muhammad, Irving M. Zeitlin, (Polity Press, 2007), 21;"It is, of course, Ibn Khaldun as an Arab here speaking, for he claims Arab descent through the male line.".
^ The Arab World: Society, Culture, and State, Halim Barakat, (University of California Press, 1993), 48;"The renowned Arab sociologist-historian Ibn Khaldun first interpreted Arab history in terms of badu versus hadar conflicts and struggles for power."
^ Ibn Khaldun, M. Talbi, The Encyclopaedia of Islam, Vol. III, ed. B. Lewis, V.L. Menage, C. Pellat, J. Schacht, (Brill, 1986), 825;"Ibn Khaldun was born in Tunis, on I Ramadan 732/27 May 1332, in an Arab family which came originally from the Hadramawt and had been settled at Seville since the beginning of the Muslim conquest..."
^ Genealogy and Knowledge in Muslim Societies: Understanding the Past: Sarah Bowen Savant.
^ (French) «&#160;Lettre à Monsieur Garcin de Tassy&#160;», Journal asiatique, troisième série, tome XII, éd. Société asiatique, Paris, 1841, p. 491
^ A., Khaldun: His life and Works for Mohammad Enan
^ IBN KHALDUN: His Life and Work by Muhammad Hozien
^ Al-Muqqadimah. Ibn Khaldun
^ Muhammad Hozien. "Ibn Khaldun: His Life and Work". Islamic Philosophy Online. Retrieved 2008-09-19.&#160;
^ Recently there has been a tendency to modify this view. Ibn Khaldun relied not just on his own research, but for the history of the Berber tribes utilized a large number of written sources including some of poor quality (e.g. the Rawḍ al-Qirṭās). He has been criticised for often presenting only a synthesis of multiple (sometimes contradictory) sources where a more careful historian such as ar-Raqīq or al-Mālikī would always give the original texts before pronouncing an opinion. See articles by Modéran and Benabbès in Identités et Cultures dans l'Algérie Antique, University of Rouen, 2005 (ISBN 2-87775-391-3). This criticism applies only to his factual work, not to the theoretical parts like the Muqaddimah
^ http://www.jstor.org/pss/3590803 Translation and the Colonial Imaginary: Ibn Khaldun Orientalist, by Abdelmajid Hannoum © 2003 Wesleyan University.
^ Rosenthal, Franz. Ibn Khaldun: The Muqaddimah. Princeton University Press. ISBN&#160;978-0691017549.&#160;
^ Ibn Khaldun, The Muqaddimah, ch. 3 pt.34-35
^ Ibn Khaldun, The Muqaddimah, ch. 3 pt. 35
^ a b Ibn Khaldun, The Muqaddimah, ch. 3 pt. 34
^ "How Far Are We From The Slippery Slope? The Laffer Curve Revisited" by Mathias Trabandt and Harald Uhlig, NBER Working Paper No. 15343, September 2009.
^ Laffer, Arthur. "The Laffer Curve: Past, Present, and Future". The Heritage Foundation. Retrieved 4 July 2012.&#160;
^ Brederode, Robert F. van (2009). Systems of general sales taxation&#160;: theory, policy and practice. Austin [Tex.]: Wolters Kluwer Law &amp; Business. p.&#160;117. ISBN&#160;9041128328.&#160;
^ Enan, Muhammed Abdullah (2007). Ibn Khaldun: His Life and Works. The Other Press. p.&#160;118. ISBN&#160;983-9541-53-6.&#160;
^ Enan, Muhammed Abdullah (2007). Ibn Khaldun: His Life and Works. The Other Press. pp.&#160;118–9. ISBN&#160;983-9541-53-6.&#160;
^ Enan, Muhammed Abdullah (2007). Ibn Khaldun: His Life and Works. The Other Press. p.&#160;119. ISBN&#160;983-9541-53-6.&#160;
^ Enan, Muhammed Abdullah (2007). Ibn Khaldun: His Life and Works. The Other Press. pp.&#160;119–20. ISBN&#160;983-9541-53-6.&#160;
^ Encyclopædia Britannica, 15th ed., vol. 9, p. 148.
^ Lakhsassi, A. (1996) 'Ibn Khaldun', in S.H. Nasr and O. Leaman (eds) History of Islamic Philosophy, London: Routledge, ch. 25, 350–64. ... http://www.muslimphilosophy.com/ip/rep/H024.htm
^ Ernest Gellner, Plough, Sword and Book (1988), p. 239
^ * Egon Orowan. 1901–1989. A Biographical Memoir by F.R.N. Nabarro and A. S. Argon. 1996. National Academies Press. Washington, D.C.
^ Arthur Laffer (June 1, 2004). "The Laffer Cruve, Past, Present and Future". Heritage Foundation. Retrieved 2007-12-11.&#160;
^ Gates, Warren E. (1967). "The Spread of Ibn Khaldûn's Ideas on Climate and Culture". Journal of the History of Ideas (University of Pennsylvania Press) 28 (3): 415–422. doi:10.2307/2708627.&#160;
^ Dhaouadi, M. (1 September 1990). "IBN KHALDUN: THE FOUNDING FATHER OF EASTERN SOCIOLOGY". International Sociology 5 (3): 319–335. doi:10.1177/026858090005003007.&#160;
^ Haddad, L. (1 May 1977). "A FOURTEENTH-CENTURY THEORY OF ECONOMIC GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT". Kyklos 30 (2): 195–213. doi:10.1111/j.1467-6435.1977.tb02006.x.&#160;



Bibliography



Fuad Baali. 2005 The science of human social organization&#160;: Conflicting views on Ibn Khaldun's (1332–1406) Ilm al-umran. Mellen studies in sociology. Lewiston/NY: Edwin Mellen Press.
Walter Fischel. 1967 Ibn Khaldun in Egypt&#160;: His public functions and his historical research, 1382–1406; a study in Islamic historiography. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Ibn Khaldun. 1951 التعريف بإبن خلدون ورحلته غربا وشرقا Al-Taʻrīf bi Ibn-Khaldūn wa Riħlatuhu Għarbān wa Sharqān. Published by Muħammad ibn-Tāwīt at-Tanjī. Cairo (Autobiography in Arabic).
Ibn Khaldūn. 1958 The Muqaddimah&#160;: An introduction to history. Translated from the Arabic by Franz Rosenthal. 3 vols. New York: Princeton.
Ibn Khaldūn. 1967 The Muqaddimah&#160;: An introduction to history. Trans. Franz Rosenthal, ed. N.J. Dawood. (Abridged).
Mahmoud Rabi'. 1967 The political theory of Ibn Khaldun. Leiden: E.J. Brill.
Róbert Simon. 2002 Ibn Khaldūn&#160;: History as science and the patrimonial empire. Translated by Klára Pogátsa. Budapest: Akadémiai Kiadó. Original edition, 1999.
Allen Fromherz. 2010 "Ibn Khaldun&#160;: Life and Times". Edinburgh University Press, 2010.
Ana Maria C. Minecan, 2012 "El vínculo comunitario y el poder en Ibn Jaldún" in José-Miguel Marinas (Ed.), Pensar lo político: Ensayos sobre comunidad y conflicto, Biblioteca Nueva, Madrid, 2012.


External links[edit]



Wikiquote has quotations related to: Ibn Khaldun


English[edit]


Ibn Khaldun on In Our Time at the BBC. (listen now)
Rosenthal, Franz (2008) [1970–80]. "Ibn Khaldūn". Complete Dictionary of Scientific Biography. Encyclopedia.com.&#160;
Complete Muqaddimah/Kitab al-Ibar in English (without Chapter V, 13)
Ibn Khaldun on the Web
Ibn Khaldun: His Life and Work, by Muhammad Hozien
Muslim Scientists and Scholars – Ibn Khaldun
Ibn Khaldūn, from Arnold Toynbee, A Study of History vol. iii, III. C. II. (b), p. 321
Ibn Khaldun’s Philosophy of Management and Work
Ibn Khaldun (al-Muqaddimah): Methodology &amp; concepts of economic sociology
Ibn Khaldun. The Mediterranean in the 14th century: Rise and fall of Empires. Andalusian Legacy exhibition in the Alcazar of Seville
The Ibn Khaldoun Community Service Award
Ibn Khaldun meets Al Saud
The Ibn Khaldun Institute

Non-English[edit]



Arabic Wikisource has original text related to this article:
Ibn Khaldun




(French) Exposé simplifié sur la théologie scolastique
Chapters from the Muqaddimah and the History of Ibn Khaldun in Arabic
Ismail Küpeli: Ibn Khaldun und das politische System Syriens – Eine Gegenüberstellung, München, 2007, ISBN 978-3-638-75458-3 (German e-book about the politics of Syria with reference to the political theory of Ibn Khaldun)
Kuchinov A. M. Ibn Khaldun influence on social thought development // Lomonosov-2013. - Moscow, 2013. In Russian.









v
t
e


Muslim Scholars of the Maliki School






2nd Islamic Century (100 - 199 AH) (8th century AD)



Malik ibn Anas (founder of the school)
Ibn al-Qasim
Ibn Wahb
Ibn Bashir
Ali ibn Ziyad











3rd Islamic Century (200 - 299 AH) (9th century AD)



Ashhab
Ibn Nafi'
Ibn 'Abd al-Hakam
Asad ibn al-Furat
Ibn al-Majishun
Ibn Nafi' az-Zubayri
Ibn Maslama al-Makhzumi
Mutarrif
Ibn Maslama al-Qa'nabi
Yahya al-Laithi
Al-Asbagh
Ibn Habib
Sahnun
Al-'Utbi
Ibn Sahnun
Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-Hakam
Ibn al-Mawwaz
Qadi Isma'il








4th Islamic Century (300 - 399 AH) (10th century AD)



Ibn al-Jallab
Ibn Sha'ban
Ibn Shiblun
Al-Abhari
Ibn Abi Zayd








5th Islamic Century (400 - 499 AH) (11th century AD)



Al-Baqillani
Ibn 'Abd al-Barr
Al-Baji
Al-Lakhmi
Qadi 'Abd al-Wahhab








6th Islamic Century (500 - 599 AH) (12th century AD)



Ibn Rushd al-Jadd
At-Turtushi
Sanad ibn 'Inan
Al-Maziri
Qadi Ayyad
Averroes
Abu Bakr ibn al-Arabi








7th Islamic Century (600 - 699 AH) (13th century AD)



Ibn Shas
Ibn al-Hajib
Ibn Daqiq al-Eid
al-Qurtubi
al-Qarafi








8th Islamic Century (700 - 799 AH) (14th century AD)



Ibn al-Haj
Ibn Farhun
Ash-Shatibi
Ibn Juzayy
Khalil ibn-Ishaq
Al-Fakihani








9th Islamic Century (800 - 899 AH) (15th century AD)



Ibn Marzuq
Al-Mawwaq
Ibn 'Arafa
Ibn Khaldun
Ahmad Zarruq








10th Islamic Century (900 - 999 AH) (16th century AD)



Al-Akhdari
At-Tata'i
Al-Hattab
'Abd ar-Rahman al-Ujhuri
Nasir ud-Deen al-Laqqani
Ali ibn Qasim al-Zaqqaq
Al-Wansharisi








11th Islamic Century (1000 - 1099 AH) (17th century AD)



Al-Ujhuri
Al-Laqani
Az-Zurqani
Ibn Ashir
Mayyara








12th Islamic Century (1100 - 1199 AH) (18th century AD)



Al-Kharashi
Al-'Adawi
An-Nafrawi
Al-Bannani
Ad-Dardir








13th Islamic Century (1200 - 1299 AH) (19th century AD)



Ad-Desouki
As-Sawi
'Illish
Al-'Adawi








14th Islamic Century (1300 - 1399 AH) (20th century AD)



Abdallah Bin Bayyah
Muhammad Alawi al-Maliki
Mohamed Taher Ben Achour
Mohamed Fadhel Ben Achour
Al-Habib Bin Tahir
Hamza Yusuf
















v
t
e


Geography and cartography in medieval Islam






Geographers





9th century




Muḥammad ibn Mūsā al-Khwārizmī
Abū Ḥanīfa Dīnawarī
Ya'qubi
Sulaiman al-Tajir









10th century




Ibn Khordadbeh
Ahmad ibn Rustah
Ahmad ibn Fadlan
Abu Zayd al-Balkhi
Abū Muhammad al-Hasan al-Hamdānī
Al-Masudi
Istakhri
Khashkhash Ibn Saeed Ibn Aswad
Ibn Hawqal
Ibn al-Faqih
Al-Muqaddasi
Al-Ramhormuzi









11th century




Abū Rayḥān al-Bīrūnī
Abu Saʿīd Gardēzī
Al-Bakri
Mahmud al-Kashgari
Domiyat









12th century




Al-Zuhri
Muhammad al-Idrisi
Abu'l Abbas al-Hijazi









13th century




Ibn Jubayr
Saadi Shirazi
Yaqut al-Hamawi
Ibn Said al-Maghribi
Ibn al-Nafis









14th century




Al-Dimashqi
Abu'l-Fida
Ibn al-Wardi
Hamdollah Mostowfi
Ibn Battuta
Lin Nu









15th century




Abd-al-Razzāq Samarqandī
Ghiyāth al-dīn Naqqāsh
Ahmad ibn Mājid
Zheng He
Ma Huan
Fei Xin









16th century




Sulaiman Al Mahri
Piri Reis
Mir Ahmed Nasrallah Thattvi
Amīn Rāzī









17th century




Evliya Çelebi











Works



Book of Roads and Kingdoms (al-Bakrī)
Book of Roads and Kingdoms (ibn Khordadbeh)
Tabula Rogeriana
Kitab al-Rawd al-Mitar
Mu'jam Al-Buldan
Rihla
The Meadows of Gold
Piri Reis map








Influences



Geography (Ptolemy)
















v
t
e


Islamic philosophy










Fields



Alchemy
Aqidah (theology)
'Aql (intellect)
Cosmology

astrology
medieval astronomy


Eschatology
Ethics
Kalam (dialectic)
Fiqh (jurisprudence)
Logic
Metaphysics
Natural philosophy (physics)
Peace
Madrasah (education)
Medieval science
Medieval psychology
Sufism (mysticism)








Schools



Early
Farabism
Avicennism
Averroism
Illuminationism
Sufi

cosmology
metaphysics


Transcendent theosophy
Traditionalist
Contemporary








Concepts



ʻAṣabīya
Ḥāl
Iʻjaz
ʼIjtihād
ʻlm
ʻIrfān
Ijmāʿ
Maslaha
Nafs
Qadar
Qiyās
Shūrā
Tawḥīd
Ummah















&#160;
Philosophers by century (CE)










9th–10th



Al-Kindi
Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari
Abu al-Abbas Iranshahri
Zakariya Razi
Apharabius
Abu Hatim al-Razi
Al Amiri
Ikhwan al-Safa
Abu Sulayman Sijistani
Ibn Masarrah
Abu Yaqub al-Sijistani








11th



Al-Ghazali
Ibn Miskawayh
Avicenna
Ibn Hazm
Bahmanyār
Mu'ayyad fi'l-Din al-Shirazi
Nasir Khusraw








12th



Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī
Afdal al-Din Kashani
Ahi Evren
Ahmad Yasavi
Ayn-al-Quzat
Averroes
Ibn Tufail
Omar Khayyám
Suhrawardi
Shams Tabrizi








13th



Hajji Bektash Wali
Jalal ad-Din Muhammad Rumi
Ibn Sab’in
Ibn Arabi
al-Abharī
Nasir al-Din Tusi
Fakhr ad-Din ar-Razi
Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi
Sadr al-Din al-Qunawi








14th–16th



Ibn Khaldun
Yunus Emre
Hajji Bayram
Jalaladdin Davani
Sadr ad-Din Dashtaki
Aziz Mahmud Hudayi
Qadi Mir Husayn al-Maybudi
Mahmud Shabistari
Sayyid Haydar Amuli
Dawūd al-Qayṣarī
Jami








17th–19th



Mir Damad
Mir Fendereski
Mulla Sadra
Mohsen Fayz Kashani
Abd al-Razzaq Lahiji
Mujaddid Alf-i-Sani
Rajab Ali Tabrizi
Qazi Sa’id Qumi
Shah Waliullah
Hādī Sabzavārī








20th–present



Muhammad Husayn Tabatabaei
Muhammad Iqbal
Gohar Shahi
Mohammad Baqir al-Sadr
René Guénon
Frithjof Schuon
Martin Lings
Hossein Nasr
Naquib al-Attas
Abdolkarim Soroush
Gholamhossein Ebrahimi Dinani
Taha Abdurrahman
Mohammed Abed al-Jabri
Mohammed Arkoun
Fouad Zakariyya
Reza Davari Ardakani
Ahmad Fardid
Mostafa Malekian
Hasanzadeh Amoli
Javadi Amoli
Partawi Shah



















Authority control



WorldCat
VIAF: 41841661
LCCN: n50052785
ISNI: 0000 0001 2129 6275
GND: 118639773
SELIBR: 63193
SUDOC: 027317250
BNF: cb119081451 (data)
NLA: 35217597
NDL: 00444184
NKC: jn20011211046
RLS: 000003721
BNE: XX1059103















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ibn_Khaldun&amp;oldid=691106189"					
				Categories: 1332 births1406 deathsPeople of Al-Andalus14th-century historiansAutobiographersMuslim theologiansTheories of historySociocultural evolutionCross-cultural studiesMedieval Tunisian historiansScientists of medieval IslamPreclassical economistsWriters from TunisTunisian Maliki scholars14th-century Tunisian people15th-century Tunisian peopleAnthropologistsTunisian sociologistsMuslim historiansHistorians of IslamWriters about globalizationUniversity of al-Qarawiyyin alumniTunisian expatriates in MoroccoTunisian judgesTunisian emigrants to EgyptAsh'arisCritics of Shia IslamHidden categories: Articles with inconsistent citation formatsArticles with French-language external linksArticles containing Arabic-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from November 2013Articles with unsourced quotesAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from May 2011Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiersWorld Digital Library related				
							
		
		
			