


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Ibn Tufail
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				

Muslim scholar
Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Abd al-Malik ibn Muhammad ibn Tufail al-Qaisi al-Andalusi


Title
Ibn Tufayl
Abubacer Aben Tofail
Abu Jaafar Ebn Tophail


Born
1105
Guadix, Andalusia


Died
1185 (aged&#160;79–80)
Marrakesh


Era
Islamic Golden Age


Region
Al-Andalus


Religion
Islam


Jurisprudence
Sunni Islam


Main interest(s)
Early Islamic philosophy, Literature, Kalam, Islamic medicine


Notable idea(s)
Wrote the first philosophical novel, which was also the first novel to depict desert island, feral child and coming of age plots, and introduced the concepts of autodidacticism and tabula rasa


Notable work(s)
Hayy ibn Yaqdhan
(Philosophus Autodidactus)




Influenced&#160;by

Plato, Aristotle, Al-Farabi, Avicenna, Avicennism, Al-Ghazali, Ash'ari, Sufism, Ibn Tumart, Ibn Bajjah, Abu Yaqub Yusuf, Muhammad







Influenced

Averroes, Alpetragius, Ibn al-Nafis, Pococke, Boyle, Hobbes, Locke, Molyneux, Hume, Cotton Mather, Berkeley, Spinoza, Leibniz, Sorbonne, Ockley, Defoe, Thévenot, Wallis, Huygens, Keith, Barclay, Quakers, Hartlib, Newton, Kant, Rousseau, Voltaire, Marx, Kipling, Burroughs





Ibn Tufail (c. 1105 – 1185) (full Arabic name: أبو بكر محمد بن عبد الملك بن محمد بن طفيل القيسي الأندلسي Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Abd al-Malik ibn Muhammad ibn Tufail al-Qaisi al-Andalusi; Latinized form: Abubacer Aben Tofail; Anglicized form: Abubekar or Abu Jaafar Ebn Tophail) was an Andalusian Muslim polymath:[1] a writer, novelist, Islamic philosopher, Islamic theologian, physician, astronomer, vizier, and court official.
As a philosopher and novelist, he is most famous for writing the first philosophical novel, Hayy ibn Yaqdhan, also known as Philosophus Autodidactus in the Western world. As a physician, he was an early supporter of dissection and autopsy, which was expressed in his novel.[2]



Contents


1 Life
2 Hayy ibn Yaqzan
3 Works
4 See also
5 Notes
6 References
7 External links



Life[edit]
Born in Guadix, near Granada, and belonging to the Qays Arab tribe,[3][4] he was educated by Ibn Bajjah (Avempace). He served as a secretary for the ruler of Granada, and later as vizier and physician for Abu Yaqub Yusuf, the Almohad king, to whom he recommended Ibn Rushd (Averroës) as his own future successor in 1169.[5] Ibn Rushd later reports this event and describes how Ibn Tufayl then inspired him to write his famous Aristotelian commentaries:

Abu Bakr ibn Tufayl summoned me one day and told me that he had heard the Commander of the Faithful complaining about the disjointedness of Aristotle's mode of expression — or that of the translators — and the resultant obscurity of his intentions. He said that if someone took on these books who could summarize them and clarify their aims after first thoroughly understanding them himself, people would have an easier time comprehending them. “If you have the energy,” Ibn Tufayl told me, “you do it. I'm confident you can, because I know what a good mind and devoted character you have, and how dedicated you are to the art. You understand that only my great age, the cares of my office — and my commitment to another task that I think even more vital — keep me from doing it myself.”[6]

Ibn Rushd became Ibn Tufayl's successor after he retired in 1182; Ibn Tufayl died several years later in Morocco in 1185. The astronomer Nur Ed-Din Al-Bitruji was also a disciple of Ibn Tufayl.
Hayy ibn Yaqzan[edit]
Main article: Hayy ibn Yaqdhan
Ibn Tufail was the author of Ḥayy ibn Yaqẓān (حي بن يقظان Alive, son of Awake), also known as Philosophus Autodidactus in the West, a philosophical romance and allegorical novel inspired by Avicennism and Sufism, and which tells the story of an autodidactic feral child, raised by a gazelle and living alone on a desert island, who, without contact with other human beings, discovers ultimate truth through a systematic process of reasoned inquiry. Hayy ultimately comes into contact with civilization and religion when he meets a castaway named Absal. He determines that certain trappings of religion, namely imagery and dependence on material goods, are necessary for the multitude in order that they might have decent lives. However, imagery and material goods are distractions from the truth and ought to be abandoned by those whose reason recognizes that they are distractions.
Ibn Tufail's Philosophus Autodidactus was written as a response to al-Ghazali's The Incoherence of the Philosophers. In the 13th century, Ibn al-Nafis later wrote the Al-Risalah al-Kamiliyyah fil Siera al-Nabawiyyah (known as Theologus Autodidactus in the West) as a response to Ibn Tufail's Philosophus Autodidactus.
Hayy ibn Yaqdhan had a significant influence on both Arabic literature and European literature,[7] and it went on to become an influential best-seller throughout Western Europe in the 17th and 18th centuries.[8][9] The work also had a "profound influence" on both classical Islamic philosophy and modern Western philosophy.[10] It became "one of the most important books that heralded the Scientific Revolution" and European Enlightenment, and the thoughts expressed in the novel can be found "in different variations and to different degrees in the books of Thomas Hobbes, John Locke, Isaac Newton, and Immanuel Kant."[11]
A Latin translation of the work, entitled Philosophus Autodidactus, first appeared in 1671, prepared by Edward Pococke the Younger. The first English translation (by Simon Ockley) was published in 1708. These translations later may have inspired Daniel Defoe to write Robinson Crusoe, which also featured a desert island narrative and was the first novel in English.[12][13][14] The novel also inspired the concept of "tabula rasa" developed in An Essay Concerning Human Understanding (1690) by John Locke, who was a student of Pococke.[15] His Essay went on to become one of the principal sources of empiricism in modern Western philosophy, and influenced many enlightenment philosophers, such as David Hume and George Berkeley. Hayy's ideas on materialism in the novel also have some similarities to Karl Marx's historical materialism.[16] It also foreshadowed Molyneux's Problem, proposed by William Molyneux to Locke, who included it in the second book of An Essay Concerning Human Understanding.[17][18] Other European writers influenced by Philosophus Autodidactus included Gottfried Leibniz,[7] Melchisédech Thévenot, John Wallis, Christiaan Huygens,[19] George Keith, Robert Barclay, the Quakers,[20] Samuel Hartlib,[21] and Voltaire.[22]
Works[edit]

Arabic text of Hayy bin Yaqzan from Wikisource
Full pdf of French translation of Hayy bin Yaqzan from Google Books
English translations of Hayy bin Yaqzan (in chronological order)

*The improvement of human reason, exhibited in the life of Hai ebn Yokdhan, written in Arabic above 500 years ago, by Abu Jaafar ebn Tophail, newly translated from the original Arabic, by Simon Ockley. With an appendix, in which the possibility of man's attaining of the true knowledge of God, and things necessary to salvation, without instruction, is briefly considered. London: Printed and sold by E. Powell, 1708.
Abu Bakr Ibn Tufail, The history of Hayy Ibn Yaqzan, translated from the Arabic by Simon Ockley, revised, with an introduction by A.S. Fulton. London: Chapman and Hall, 1929. available online (omits the introductory section)
Ibn Tufayl's Hayy ibn Yaqzān: a philosophical tale, translated with introduction and notes by Lenn Evan Goodman. New York: Twayne, 1972.
The journey of the soul: the story of Hai bin Yaqzan, as told by Abu Bakr Muhammad bin Tufail, a new translation by Riad Kocache. London: Octagon, 1982.
Two Andalusian philosophers, translated from the Arabic with an introduction and notes by Jim Colville. London: Kegan Paul, 1999.
Medieval Islamic Philosophical Writings, ed. Muhammad Ali Khalidi. Cambridge University Press, 2005. (omits the introductory section; omits the conclusion beginning with the protagonist's acquaintance with Absal; includes §§1-98 of 121 as numbered in the Ockley-Fulton version)
Ben-Zaken, Avner, "Taming the Mystic", in Reading Hayy Ibn-Yaqzan: A Cross-Cultural History of Autodidacticism (Johns Hopkins University Press, 2011). ISBN 978-0801897399.



See also[edit]

List of Arab scientists and scholars
Early Islamic philosophy
Arabic literature
Autodidacticism

Notes[edit]


^ Avempace, Encyclopædia Britannica, 2007.
^ Jon Mcginnis, Classical Arabic Philosophy: An Anthology of Sources, p. 284, Hackett Publishing Company, ISBN 0-87220-871-0.
^ Syed Ameer Ali, The Spirit of Islam: A History of the Evolution and Ideals of Islam, Cosimo, Inc (2010), p. 495
^ Lawrence Conrad, The World of Ibn Ṭufayl: Interdisciplinary Perspectives on Ḥayy Ibn Yaqẓān, BRILL (1996), p. 20
^ Avner Ben-Zaken, "Taming the Mystic", in Reading Hayy Ibn-Yaqzan: A Cross-Cultural History of Autodidacticism (Johns Hopkins University Press, 2011). ISBN 978-0801897399.
^ Seyyed Hossein Nasr and Oliver Leaman (1996), History of Islamic Philosophy, p. 314, Routledge, ISBN 0-415-13159-6.
^ a b Martin Wainwright, Desert island scripts, The Guardian, 22 March 2003.
^ Avner Ben-Zaken, Reading Hayy Ibn-Yaqzan: A Cross-Cultural History of Autodidacticism (Johns Hopkins University Press, 2011). ISBN 978-0801897399.
^ G. A. Russell (1994), The 'Arabick' Interest of the Natural Philosophers in Seventeenth-Century England, p. 228, Brill Publishers, ISBN 978-90-04-09888-6.
^ G. J. Toomer (1996), Eastern Wisedome and Learning: The Study of Arabic in Seventeenth-Century England, p. 218, Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-19-820291-1.
^ Samar Attar, The Vital Roots of European Enlightenment: Ibn Tufayl's Influence on Modern Western Thought, Lexington Books, ISBN 0-7391-1989-3.
^ Nawal Muhammad Hassan (1980), Hayy bin Yaqzan and Robinson Crusoe: A study of an early Arabic impact on English literature, Al-Rashid House for Publication.
^ Cyril Glasse (2001), New Encyclopedia of Islam, p. 202, Rowman Altamira, ISBN 0-7591-0190-6.
^ Amber Haque (2004), "Psychology from Islamic Perspective: Contributions of Early Muslim Scholars and Challenges to Contemporary Muslim Psychologists", Journal of Religion and Health 43 (4): 357–377 [369].
^ G. A. Russell (1994), The 'Arabick' Interest of the Natural Philosophers in Seventeenth-Century England, pp. 224–239, Brill Publishers, ISBN 978-90-04-09888-6.
^ Dominique Urvoy, "The Rationality of Everyday Life: The Andalusian Tradition? (Aropos of Hayy's First Experiences)", in Lawrence I. Conrad (1996), The World of Ibn Tufayl: Interdisciplinary Perspectives on Ḥayy Ibn Yaqẓān, pp. 38–46, Brill Publishers, ISBN 90-04-09300-1.
^ Muhammad ibn Abd al-Malik Ibn Tufayl and Léon Gauthier (1981), Risalat Hayy ibn Yaqzan, p. 5, Editions de la Méditerranée:[1]

"If you want a comparison that will make you clearly grasp the difference between the perception, such as it is understood by that sect [the Sufis] and the perception as others understand it, imagine a person born blind, endowed however with a happy natural temperament, with a lively and firm intelligence, a sure memory, a straight sprite, who grew up from the time he was an infant in a city where he never stopped learning, by means of the senses he did dispose of, to know the inhabitants individually, the numerous species of beings, living as well as non-living, there, the streets and sidestreets, the houses, the steps, in such a manner as to be able to cross the city without a guide, and to recognize immediately those he met; the colors alone would not be known to him except by the names they bore, and by certain definitions that designated them. Suppose that he had arrived at this point and suddenly, his eyes were opened, he recovered his view, and he crosses the entire city, making a tour of it. He would find no object different from the idea he had made of it; he would encounter nothing he didn’t recognize, he would find the colors conformable to the descriptions of them that had been given to him; and in this there would only be two new important things for him, one the consequence of the other: a clarity, a greater brightness, and a great voluptuousness."


^ Diana Lobel (2006), A Sufi-Jewish Dialogue: Philosophy and Mysticism in Baḥya Ibn Paqūda's Duties of the Heart, p. 24, University of Pennsylvania Press, ISBN 0-8122-3953-9.
^ G. A. Russell (1994), The 'Arabick' Interest of the Natural Philosophers in Seventeenth-Century England, p. 227, Brill Publishers, ISBN 978-90-04-09888-6.
^ G. A. Russell (1994), The 'Arabick' Interest of the Natural Philosophers in Seventeenth-Century England, p. 247, Brill Publishers, ISBN 978-90-04-09888-6.
^ G. J. Toomer (1996), Eastern Wisedome and Learning: The Study of Arabic in Seventeenth-Century England, p. 222, Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-19-820291-1.
^ Tor Eigeland, The Ripening Years, Saudi Aramco World, September–October 1976.


References[edit]

P. Brönnle, The Awakening of the Soul (London, 1905)
Samar Attar, The Vital Roots of European Enlightenment: Ibn Tufayl's Influence on Modern Western Thought (Lanham, 2010)
Ben-Zaken, Avner, "Taming the Mystic", in Reading Hayy Ibn-Yaqzan: A Cross-Cultural History of Autodidacticism (Johns Hopkins University Press, 2011). ISBN 978-0801897399.
Mahmud Baroud, The Shipwrecked Sailor in Arabic and Western Literature: Ibn Tufayl and His Influence on European (London, 2012)


Attribution


&#160;This article&#160;incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:&#160;Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Tufail, Ibn". Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.&#160;

External links[edit]

Hayy ibn Yaqzan by Ibn Tufayl
Forcada, Miquel (2007). "Ibn Ṭufayl: Abū Bakr Muḥammad ibn ʿAbd al‐Malik ibn Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad ibn Ṭufayl al‐Qaysī". In Thomas Hockey; et al. The Biographical Encyclopedia of Astronomers. New York: Springer. p.&#160;572. ISBN&#160;978-0-387-31022-0.&#160; (PDF version)
Ibn Tofail in "History of Philosophy in Islam", by T.J. de Boer, 1904, at sacred-texts.com
About Ibn Tufail
Ibn Tufayl's view of education implicit in his work Hayy Ibn Yaqzan, by Silvio Sergio Scatolini Apostolo
Works by Ibn Tufail at Project Gutenberg









v
t
e


Medieval philosophers






Islamic




Early



Al-Jahiz
Alkindus
Ibn al-Rawandi
Al-Razi (Rhazes)
Al-Farabi (Alpharabius)
Ibn Masarra
Al Amiri
Ebn Meskavayh
Ibn al-Haytham (Alhazen)
Abu Rayhan Biruni
"Brethren of Purity"








High



Avicenna
Ibn Hazm
Al-Ghazali (Algazel)
Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī
Ibn Bajjah (Avempace)
Ayn al-Quzat Hamadani
Ibn Tufail
Averroes








Late



Ibn Sab'in
Shahab al-Din Suhrawardi
Fakhr ad-Din ar-Razi
Rashid al-Din
Ibn Arabi
Zachariah Kazwin
Abd-el-latif
Athīr al-Dīn al-Abharī
Nasir al-Din al-Tusi
Ibn al-Nafis
Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi
Ibn Taymiyyah
Ibn Khaldun











Jewish




Medieval



Saadia Gaon
Solomon ibn Gabirol
Judah Halevi
Abraham ibn Daud
Maimonides
Nahmanides
Gersonides
Hasdai Crescas
Joseph Albo











Christian




Early



"Church Fathers"
Augustine of Hippo
Boethius
Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite
Isidore of Seville
Johannes Scotus Eriugena
Alcuin








11–12th
century



"Scholasticism"
Anselm of Canterbury
Peter Abelard
Anselm of Laon
Hugh of Saint Victor
Richard of Saint Victor
Roscelin
Peter Lombard
Alexander of Hales
Bernard of Chartres
Dominicus Gundissalinus
Gilbert de la Porrée
Alain de Lille








13–14th
century



Robert Grosseteste
Albertus Magnus
Bonaventure
Thomas Aquinas
Boetius of Dacia
Henry of Ghent
Roger Bacon
John Peckham
Ramon Llull
Petrus Aureolus
Petrus Peregrinus de Maricourt
Durandus
Giles of Rome
Godfrey of Fontaines
Duns Scotus
William of Ockham








Late



Jean Buridan
Nicole Oresme
Albert of Saxony
Francesc Eiximenis
Vincent Ferrer
Paul of Venice
Lambertus de Monte
John Hennon












See also Renaissance philosophy














v
t
e


Medicine in the medieval Islamic world






Physicians





7th century




Al-Harith ibn Kalada and his son
Abu Hafsa Yazid
Bukhtishu
Masarjawaih
Ibn Abi Ramtha al-Tamimi
Rufaida Al-Aslamia
Ibn Uthal









8th century




Bukhtishu family
Ja'far al-Sadiq









9th century




Ali al-Ridha
Albubather
Bukhtishu family
Jabril ibn Bukhtishu
Jābir ibn Hayyān
Hunayn ibn Ishaq and his son
Yahya ibn Sarafyun
Al-Kindi
Masawaiyh
Shapur ibn Sahl
Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari
Al-Ruhawi
Yuhanna ibn Bukhtishu
Salmawaih ibn Bunan









10th century




Qusta ibn Luqa
Abu ul-Ala Shirazi
Abul Hasan al-Tabari
Al-Natili
Qumri
Abu Zayd al-Balkhi
Isaac Israeli ben Solomon
'Ali ibn al-'Abbas al-Majusi
Abu Sahl 'Isa ibn Yahya al-Masihi
Muvaffak
Muhammad ibn Zakariya al-Razi
Ibn Juljul
Abu al-Qasim al-Zahrawi
Ibn al-Jazzar
Al-Kaŝkarī
Ibn Abi al-Ashʿath
Ibn al-Batriq
Ibrahim ibn Baks









11th century




Abu 'Ubayd al-Juzjani
Alhazen
Ali ibn Ridwan
Avicenna
Ephraim ibn al-Za'faran
Ibn al-Wafid
Abdollah ibn Bukhtishu
Ibn Butlan
Ibn al-Kattani
Ibn Jazla
Masawaih al-Mardini
Ali ibn Yusuf al-Ilaqi
Ibn Al-Thahabi
Ibn Abi Sadiq
Ali ibn Isa al-Kahhal









12th century




Abu al-Bayan ibn al-Mudawwar
Ahmad ibn Farrokh
Ibn Hubal
Zayn al-Din Gorgani
Maimonides
Serapion the Younger
Ibn Zuhr
Ya'qub ibn Ishaq al-Israili
Abu Jafar ibn Harun al-Turjali
Averroes
Ibn Tufail
Al-Ghafiqi
Ibn Abi al-Hakam
Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī
Al-Samawal al-Maghribi
Ibn al-Tilmīdh
Ibn Jumay‘









13th century




Sa'ad al-Dawla
Al-Shahrazuri
Rashidun al-Suri
Amin al-Din Rashid al-Din Vatvat
Abraham ben Moses ben Maimon
Da'ud Abu al-Fadl
Al-Dakhwar
Ibn Abi Usaibia
Joseph ben Judah of Ceuta
Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi (medieval writer)
Ibn al-Nafis
Zakariya al-Qazwini
Najib ad-Din-e-Samarqandi
Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi
Ibn al-Quff









14th century




Muhammad ibn Mahmud Amuli
Al-Nagawri
Aqsara'i
Zayn-e-Attar
Mansur ibn Ilyas
Jaghmini
Mas‘ud ibn Muhammad Sijzi
Najm al-Din Mahmud ibn Ilyas al-Shirazi
Nakhshabi
Sadid al-Din al-Kazaruni
Yusuf ibn Ismail al-Kutubi
Ibn al-Khatib
Rashid-al-Din Hamadani









15th century




Abu Sa'id al-Afif
Muhammad Ali Astarabadi
Husayni Isfahani
Burhan-ud-din Kermani
Şerafeddin Sabuncuoğlu
Muhammad ibn Yusuf al-Harawi
Nurbakhshi
Shaykh Muhammad ibn Thaleb









16th century




Hakim-e-Gilani
Abul Qasim ibn Mohammed al-Ghassani
Taqi ad-Din Muhammad ibn Ma'ruf
Dawud al-Antaki











Concepts



Psychology
Ophthalmology








Works



Al-Risalah al-Dhahabiah
The Canon of Medicine
Anatomy Charts of the Arabs
The Book of Healing
Book of the Ten Treatises of the Eye
De Gradibus
Al-Tasrif
Zakhireye Khwarazmshahi
Adab al-Tabib
Kamel al-Sanaat al-Tibbyya
Al-Hawi








Centers



Bimaristan
Nur al-Din Bimaristan
Al-'Adudi








Influences



Ancient Greek medicine








Influenced



Medical Renaissance
Ibn Sina Academy of Medieval Medicine and Sciences













Authority control



WorldCat
VIAF: 100195377
LCCN: n82164728
ISNI: 0000 0001 1862 4821
GND: 118847147
SUDOC: 027616479
BNF: cb13162902n (data)















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ibn_Tufail&amp;oldid=680085497"					
				Categories: 1105 births1185 deathsMedieval Arab philosophersSunni Muslim scholarsMuslim philosophers12th-century philosophers12th-century novelistsMoorish writersAlmohad CaliphatePhysicians of medieval IslamHidden categories: Articles containing Arabic-language textWikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica without Wikisource referenceWikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia BritannicaWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWorld Digital Library related				
							
		
		
			