


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Indian philosophy
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				

Part of a series on


Philosophy



Plato&#160;– Kant&#160;– Nietzsche



Philosophers




Aestheticians
Epistemologists
Ethicists
Logicians
Metaphysicians
Social and political philosophers




Traditions




Analytic
Aristotelian
Continental
Existentialism
Pragmatism
Eastern
Islamic
Platonic
Scholastic
Western




Periods




Ancient
Medieval
Modern
Contemporary




Literature




Aesthetics
Epistemology
Ethics
Logic
Metaphysics
Political philosophy




Branches




Aesthetics
Epistemology
Ethics
Legal philosophy
Logic
Metaphysics
Political philosophy
Social philosophy




Lists




Index
Outline
Years
Problems
Publications
Theories
Glossary
Philosophers




 Philosophy portal





v
t
e





Indian philosophy (Sanskrit: darśhana) comprises the philosophical traditions of the Indian subcontinent. Since medieval India (ca.1000–1500), schools of Indian philosophical thought have been classified by the Brahmanical tradition[1][2] as either orthodox or non-orthodox – āstika or nāstika – depending on whether they regard the Vedas as an infallible source of knowledge.[3] There are six schools of orthodox Hindu philosophy—Nyaya, Vaisheshika, Samkhya, Yoga, Mīmāṃsā and Vedanta—and three heterodox schools—Jain, Buddhist and Cārvāka. However, there are other methods of classification; Vidyaranya for instance identifies sixteen schools of Indian philosophy by including those that belong to the Śaiva and Raseśvara traditions.[4]
The main schools of Indian philosophy were formalised chiefly between 1000 BCE to the early centuries of the Common Era. According to philosopher Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan, the earliest of these, which date back to the composition of the Upanishads in the later Vedic period (1000–500 BCE), constitute "the earliest philosophical compositions of the world."[5] Competition and integration between the various schools was intense during their formative years, especially between 800 BCE and 200 CE. Some schools like Jainism, Buddhism, Śaiva and Advaita Vedanta survived, but others, like Samkhya and Ājīvika, did not; they were either assimilated or went extinct. Subsequent centuries produced commentaries and reformulations continuing up to as late as the 20th century by Sri Aurobindo and Prabhupāda among others.
For Indian philosophers (dārśanika) of antiquity, philosophy was a practical necessity that needed to be cultivated to understand how life can best be led. It was thus customary for them to explain how their ideas and treatises served human ends (puruṣārtha). Indian philosophy is distinctive in its application of analytical rigour to metaphysical problems. It goes into very precise detail about the nature of reality, the structure and function of the human psyche, and how the relationship between the two have important implications for human salvation (moksha). Sages (rishis) centred philosophy on the assumption that there is a unitary underlying order (ṛta) in the universe and everything within it. The various schools concentrated on explaining this order and the metaphysical entity at its source (Brahman). The concept of natural law (dharma) was the basis for understanding how life on earth should be lived.



Contents


1 Common themes
2 Schools

2.1 Hindu philosophy
2.2 Jain philosophy
2.3 Buddhist philosophy
2.4 Cārvāka philosophy


3 Modern philosophy
4 Political philosophy
5 Influence
6 See also
7 References
8 Sources
9 Further reading
10 External links



Common themes[edit]
The Indian thinkers of antiquity (very much like those of the Hellenistic schools) viewed philosophy as a practical necessity that needed to be cultivated in order to understand how life can best be led. It became a custom for Indian writers to explain at the beginning of philosophical works how it serves human ends (puruṣārtha).[6] Recent scholarship has shown that there was a great deal of intercourse between Greek and Indian philosophy during the era of Hellenistic expansion.[7]
Indian philosophy is distinctive in its application of analytical rigour to metaphysical problems and goes into very precise detail about the nature of reality, the structure and function of the human psyche and how the relationship between the two have important implications for human salvation (moksha). Rishis centred philosophy on an assumption that there is a unitary underlying order (rta) in the universe[8] which is all pervasive and omniscient. The efforts by various schools were concentrated on explaining this order and the metaphysical entity at its source (Brahman). The concept of natural law (Dharma) provided a basis for understanding questions of how life on earth should be lived. The sages urged humans to discern this order and to live their lives in accordance with it.
Schools[edit]
Hindu philosophy[edit]
Main articles: Hindu philosophy and Hinduism
See also: Philosophy from Veda and Philosophy from Upanishada
Many Hindu intellectual traditions were classified during the medieval period of Brahmanic-Sanskritic scholasticism into a standard list of six orthodox (astika) schools (darshanas), the "Six Philosophies" (ṣad-darśana), all of which accept the testimony of the Vedas.[2][9][10][1]

Samkhya, the enumeration school
Yoga, the school of Patanjali (which provisionally asserts the metaphysics of Samkhya)
Nyaya, the school of logic
Vaisheshika, the atomist school
Purva Mimamsa (or simply Mimamsa), the tradition of Vedic exegesis, with emphasis on Vedic ritual, and
Vedanta (also called Uttara Mimamsa), the Upanishadic tradition, with emphasis on Vedic philosophy.

These are often coupled into three groups for both historical and conceptual reasons: Nyaya-Vaishesika, Samkhya-Yoga, and Mimamsa-Vedanta. The Vedanta school is further divided into six sub-schools: Advaita (monism/nondualism), also includes the concept of Ajativada, Visishtadvaita (monism of the qualified whole), Dvaita (dualism), Dvaitadvaita (dualism-nondualism), Suddhadvaita, and Achintya Bheda Abheda schools.
Besides these schools Mādhava Vidyāraṇya also includes the following of the aforementioned theistic philosophies based on the Agamas and Tantras:[4]

Pasupata, school of Shaivism by Nakulisa
Saiva, the theistic Sankhya school
Pratyabhijña, the recognitive school
Raseśvara, the mercurial school
Pāṇini Darśana, the grammarian school (which clarifies the theory of Sphoṭa)[2]

The systems mentioned here are not the only orthodox systems, they are the chief ones, and there are other orthodox schools. These systems, accept the authority of Vedas and are regarded as "orthodox" (astika) schools of Hindu philosophy; besides these, schools that do not accept the authority of the Vedas are categorised by Brahmins as unorthodox (nastika) systems.[2] Chief among the latter category are Buddhism, Jainism and Cārvāka.

Cārvāka is a materialistic and atheistic school of thought and, is noteworthy as evidence of a materialistic movement within Hinduism.[11]

Jain philosophy[edit]
Main articles: Jain philosophy and Jainism
Jainism came into formal being after Mahavira synthesised philosophies and promulgations of the ancient Sramana philosophy, during the period around 550 BC, in the region that is present day Bihar in northern India. This period marked an ideological renaissance, in which the Vedic dominance was challenged by various groups like Jainism and Buddhism.
A Jain is a follower of Jinas, spiritual 'victors' (Jina is Sanskrit for 'victor'), human beings who have rediscovered the dharma, become fully liberated and taught the spiritual path for the benefit of beings. Jains follow the teachings of 24 special Jinas who are known as Tirthankars ('ford-builders'). The 24th and most recent Tirthankar, Lord Mahavira, lived in c.6th century BC, in a period of cultural revolution all over the world. During this period, Socrates was born in Greece, Zoroaster in Iran, Lao‑Tse and Confucious in China and Mahavira and Buddha in India.[12] The 23rd Thirthankar of Jains, Lord Parsvanatha is recognised now as a historical person, lived during 872 to 772 BC...[13][14] Jaina tradition is unanimous in making Rishabha, as the First Tirthankar.[12]
Jainism is not considered as a part of the Vedic Religion (Hinduism),[15][16][17] even as there is constitutional ambiguity over its status. Jain tirthankars find exclusive mention in the Vedas and the Hindu epics. During the Vedantic age, India had two broad philosophical streams of thought: The Shramana philosophical schools, represented by Buddhism, Jainism, and the long defunct Ajivika on one hand, and the Brahmana/Vedantic/Puranic schools represented by Vedanta, Vaishnava and other movements on the other. Both streams are known to have mutually influenced each other.[18]
The Hindu scholar Lokmanya Tilak credited Jainism with influencing Hinduism in the area of the cessation of animal sacrifice in Vedic rituals. Bal Gangadhar Tilak has described Jainism as the originator of Ahimsa and wrote in a letter printed in Bombay Samachar, Mumbai:10 Dec 1904: "In ancient times, innumerable animals were butchered in sacrifices. Evidence in support of this is found in various poetic compositions such as the Meghaduta. But the credit for the disappearance of this terrible massacre from the Brahminical religion goes to Jainism." Swami Vivekananda also credited Jainism as one of the influencing forces behind Indian culture.[19]
One of the main characteristics of Jain belief is the emphasis on the immediate consequences of one's physical and mental behaviour.[20] Because Jains believe that everything is in some sense alive with many living beings possessing a soul, great care and awareness is required in going about one's business in the world. Jainism is a religious tradition in which all life is considered to be worthy of respect and Jain teaching emphasises this equality of all life advocating the non-harming of even the smallest creatures. Non-violence ( Ahimsa) is the basis of right View, the condition of right Knowledge and the kernel of right Conduct in Jainism.
Jainism encourages spiritual independence (in the sense of relying on and cultivating one's own personal wisdom) and self-control (व्रत, vratae) which is considered vital for one's spiritual development. The goal, as with other Indian religions, is moksha which in Jainism is realisation of the soul's true nature, a condition of omniscience (Kevala Jnana). Anekantavada is one of the principles of Jainism positing that reality is perceived differently from different points of view, and that no single point of view is completely true. Jain doctrine states that only Kevalis, those who have infinite knowledge, can know the true answer, and that all others would only know a part of the answer. Anekantavada is related to the Western philosophical doctrine of Subjectivism.
Buddhist philosophy[edit]
Main articles: Buddhist philosophy and Buddhism
Buddhist philosophy is a system of thought which started with the teachings of Siddhartha Gautama, the Buddha, or "awakened one". From its inception, Buddhism has had a strong philosophical component. Buddhism is founded on elements of the shramana movement which flowered around 500 BCE, and has had a very strong influence on Hinduism. The Buddha criticised all concepts of metaphysical being and non-being as misleading views caused by reification, and this critique is inextricable from the founding of Buddhism.
Buddhism shares many philosophical views with other Indian systems, such as belief in karma, a cause-and-effect relationship between all that has been done and all that will be done. Events that occur are held to be the direct result of previous events. A major departure from Hindu and Jain philosophy is the Buddhist rejection of a permanent, self-existent soul (atman) in favour of anatta (non-Self) and anicca (impermanence).
Jain thinkers rejected this view, opining that if no continuing soul could be accepted then even the effort to attain any worldly objective would be useless, as the individual acting and the one receiving the consequences would be different. Therefore, the conviction in individuals that the doer is also the reaper of consequences establishes the existence of a continuing soul.[21]
Cārvāka philosophy[edit]
Main article: Cārvāka
Cārvāka or Lokāyata was a philosophy of scepticism and materialism, founded in the Mauryan period. They were extremely critical of other schools of philosophy of the time. Cārvāka deemed Vedas to be tainted by the three faults of untruth, self-contradiction, and tautology.[22] And in contrast to Buddhists and Jains, they mocked the concept of liberation, reincarnation and accumulation of merit or demerit through the performance of certain actions.[23] They believed that, the viewpoint of relinquishing pleasure to avoid pain was the "reasoning of fools".[22] Cārvāka thought consciousness was an emanation from the body and it ended with the destruction of the body. They used quotes from Brihadaranyaka Upanishad to support this claim.[24] Cārvāka denied inference as a means of knowledge[24] and held sensory indulgence as the final objective of life.
Cārvāka held the view that Invariable Concomitance (vyapti), a theory of Indian logic which refers to the relation between middle term and major term freed from all conditions,[25] could not be ascertained. However, Buddhists refuted this view by proposing that Invariable Concomitance was easily cognizable from the relation between cause and effect or from the establishment of identity.[26]
Modern philosophy[edit]
Further information: Timeline of Eastern philosophers § Modern Indian philosophers
Modern Indian philosophy was developed during British occupation (1750–1947). The philosophers in this era gave contemporary meaning to traditional philosophy. Some of them were Swami Vivekananda, Swami Dayananda Saraswati, Bal Gangadhar Tilak, Bankim Chandra Chattopadhyay, Raja Ram Mohan Roy, Keshub Chandra Sen, Sri Aurobindo, Mahatma Gandhi, Kireet Joshi, Mahapandit Rahul Sankrityayan, M. N. Roy, Subhas Chandra Bose, Indra Sen, Swami Sahajanand Saraswati, Ananda Coomaraswamy, and Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan. Pandurang Shastri Athavale, U. G. Krishnamurti, Acharya Rajneesh (Osho) and Krishnananda are other prominent names in contemporary Indian philosophy.
Political philosophy[edit]
The Arthashastra, attributed to the Mauryan minister Chanakya, is one of the early Indian texts devoted to political philosophy. It is dated to 4th century BCE and discusses ideas of statecraft and economic policy.
The political philosophy most closely associated with India is the one of ahimsa (non-violence) and Satyagraha, popularised by Mahatma Gandhi during the Indian struggle for independence. It was influenced by the Indian Dharmic philosophy, particularly the Buddha, Bhagvata Gita, as well as secular writings of authors such as Leo Tolstoy, Henry David Thoreau and John Ruskin.[27] In turn it influenced the later movements for independence and civil rights, especially those led by Martin Luther King, Jr. and to a lesser extent Nelson Mandela.[28]
Influence[edit]
In appreciation of complexity of the Indian philosophy, T S Eliot wrote that the great philosophers of India "make most of the great European philosophers look like schoolboys".[29][30] Arthur Schopenhauer used Indian philosophy to improve upon Kantian thought. In the preface to his book The World As Will And Representation, Schopenhauer writes that one who "has also received and assimilated the sacred primitive Indian wisdom, then he is the best of all prepared to hear what I have to say to him".[31] The 19th century American philosophical movement Transcendentalism was also influenced by Indian thought.[32][33]
See also[edit]




Philosophy portal



Jainism portal



Buddhism portal




Advaita
Affectionism
Indian logic
Indian religions
M Hiriyanna
Svayam bhagavan

References[edit]


^ a b Nicholson 2010.
^ a b c d Chatterjee and Datta, p. 5.
^ Oxford Dictionary of World Religions, p. 259
^ a b Cowell and Gough, p. xii.
^ p 22, The Principal Upanisads, Harper Collins, 1994
^ Chatterjee and Datta, p.&#160;12.
^ See McEvilley (2002)
^ Flood, (1996) pp. 45, 47.
^ Flood, op. cit., p. 231–232.
^ Michaels, p. 264.
^ Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan and Charles A. Moore. A Sourcebook in Indian Philosophy'249. ISBN 0-691-01958-4.
^ a b Singh, Ramjee Dr. Jaina Perspective in Philosophy and Religion, Faridabad, Pujya Sohanalala Smaraka Parsvanatha Sodhapitha, 1993.
^ Jarl Charpentier: The History of the Jains, in: The Cambridge History of India, vol. 1, Cambridge 1922, p. 153; A.M. Ghatage: Jainism, in: The Age of Imperial Unity, ed. R. C. Majumdar/A.D. Pusalkar, Bombay 1951, pp. 411–412; Shantaram Bhalchandra Deo: History of Jaina Monachism, Poona 1956, pp. 59–60.
^ Mehta, T.U (1993). "Path of Arhat – A Religious Democracy" 63. Pujya Sohanalala Smaraka Parsvanatha Sodhapitha. Retrieved 2008-03-11.&#160;
^ J. L. Jaini, (1916) Jaina Law, Bhadrabahu Samhita, (Text with translation ) Arrah, Central jaina publishing House " As to Jainas being Hindu dissenters, and, therefore governable by Hindu law, we are not told this date of secession [...] Jainism certainly has a longer history than is consistent with its being a creed of dissenters from Hinduism." pp.&#160;12–13
^ P.S. Jaini, (1979), The Jaina Path to Purification, Motilal Banarsidass, Delhi, p. 169 "Jainas themselves have no memory of a time when they fell within the Vedic fold. Any theory that attempts to link the two traditions, moreover fails to appreciate rather distinctive and very non-vedic character of Jaina cosmology, soul theory, karmic doctrine and atheism"
^ Y. Masih (2000) In&#160;: A Comparative Study of Religions, Motilal Banarsidass Publ&#160;: Delhi, ISBN 81-208-0815-0 “There is no evidence to show that Jainism and Buddhism ever subscribed to vedic sacrifices, vedic deities or caste. They are parallel or native religions of India and have contributed much to the growth of even classical Hinduism of the present times.” Page 18
^ Harry Oldmeadow (2007) Light from the East: Eastern Wisdom for the Modern West, World Wisdom, Inc ISBN 1-933316-22-5 "What is historically known is that there was a tradition along with vedic Hinduism known as sramana dharma. Essentially, the sramana tradition included it its fold, the Jain and Buddhist traditions, which disagreed with the eternality of the Vedas, the needs for ritual sacrifices and the supremacy of the Brahmins". Page 141
^ Dulichand Jain (1998) Thus Spake Lord Mahavir, Sri Ramakrishna Math Chennai, ISBN 81-7120-825-8 Page 15
^ Tobias, Michael (1991). Life Force. The World of Jainism. Berkeley, California: Asian manush Press. pp.&#160;6–7, 15. ISBN&#160;0-89581-899-X.&#160;
^ Cowell and Gough, p. 36
^ a b Cowell and Gough, p. 4
^ Bhattacharya, Ramkrishna. Materialism in India: A Synoptic View. Retrieved 27 July 2012.
^ a b Cowell and Gough, p. 3
^ Satis Chandra Vidyābhūṣaṇa. A History of Indian Logic: Ancient, Mediaeval, and Modern Schools. Motilal Banarsidass. p. 140. ISBN 81-208-0565-8.
^ Cowell and Gough, pp. 12–13
^ Gandhi (1961) p. iii
^ Weber, Thomas (2004). Gandhi as Disciple and Mentor. Cambridge University Press. p.&#160;136. ISBN&#160;978-1-139-45657-9.&#160;
^ Jeffry M. Perl and Andrew P. Tuck (1985). "The Hidden Advantage of Tradition: On the Significance of T. S. Eliot's Indic Studies". Philosophy East &amp; West (University of Hawaii Press) 35. Retrieved 2012-08-13.&#160;
^ Eliot, Thomas Stearns (1933). After Strange Gods: A Primer of Modern Heresy. (London: Faber). p.&#160;40.&#160;
^ Barua, Arati (2008). Schopenhauer and Indian Philosophy: A Dialogue Between India and Germany. Northern Book Centre. p.&#160;3. ISBN&#160;978-81-7211-243-1.&#160;
^ "Transcendentalism".The Oxford Companion to American Literature. James D. Hart ed.Oxford University Press, 1995. Oxford Reference Online. Web. 24 Oct.2011
^ Werner, Karel (1998). Yoga And Indian Philosophy. Motilal Banarsidass Publ. p.&#160;170. ISBN&#160;978-81-208-1609-1.&#160;


Sources[edit]


Nicholson, Andrew J. (2010), Unifying Hinduism: Philosophy and Identity in Indian Intellectual History, Columbia University Press&#160;


Further reading[edit]

Apte, Vaman Shivram (1965). The Practical Sanskrit-English Dictionary (Fourth Revised and Enlarged ed.). Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass Publishers. ISBN&#160;81-208-0567-4.&#160;
Chatterjee, Satischandra; Datta, Dhirendramohan (1984). An Introduction to Indian Philosophy (Eighth Reprint ed.). Calcutta: University of Calcutta.&#160;
Cowell, E. B.; Gough, A. E. (2001). The Sarva-Darsana-Samgraha or Review of the Different Systems of Hindu Philosophy: Trubner's Oriental Series. Taylor &amp; Francis. ISBN&#160;978-0-415-24517-3.&#160;
Flood, Gavin (1996). An Introduction to Hinduism. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN&#160;0-521-43878-0.&#160;
Gandhi, M.K. (1961). Non-Violent Resistance (Satyagraha). New York: Schocken Books.&#160;
Jain, Dulichand (1998). Thus Spake Lord Mahavir. Chennai: Sri Ramakrishna Math. ISBN&#160;81-7120-825-8.&#160;
Michaels, Axel (2004). Hinduism: Past and Present. New York: Princeton University Press. ISBN&#160;0-691-08953-1.&#160;
Radhakrishnan, S (1929). Indian Philosophy, Volume 1. Muirhead library of philosophy (2nd ed.). London: George Allen and Unwin Ltd.&#160;
Radhakrishnan, S.; Moore, CA (1967). A Sourcebook in Indian Philosophy. Princeton. ISBN&#160;0-691-01958-4.&#160;
Stevenson, Leslie (2004). Ten theories of human nature. Oxford University Press.&#160; 4th edition.
Hiriyanna, M. (1995). Essentials of Indian Philosophy. Motilal Banarsidas. ISBN&#160;978-81-208-1304-5.&#160;

External links[edit]

A History of Indian Philosophy | HTML ebook (vol. 1) | (vol. 2) | (vol. 3) | (vol. 4) | (vol. 5)
A recommended reading guide from the philosophy department of University College, London: London Philosophy Study Guide — Indian Philosophy
Articles at the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy
Indian Psychology Institute The application of Indian Philosophy to contemporary issues in Psychology
A History of Indian Philosophy by Surendranath Dasgupta (5 Volumes) at archive.org
Indian Idealism by Surendranath Dasgupta at archive.org
The Essentials of Indian Philosophy by Prof. Mysore Hiriyanna at archive.org
Outlines of Indian Philosophy by Prof. Mysore Hiriyanna at archive.org
Indian Philosophy by Dr. Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan (2 Volumes) at archive.org
History of Philosophy – Eastern and Western Edited by Dr. Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan (2 Volumes) at archive.org
Indian Schools of Philosophy and Theology (Jiva Institute)









v
t
e


Indian philosophy






Topics



Atheism
Atomism
Idealism
Logic
Monotheism
Vedic philosophy








Āstika



Samkhya
Nyaya
Vaisheshika
Yoga
Mīmāṃsā
Vedanta

Acintya bheda abheda
Advaita
Bhedabheda
Dvaita
Dvaitadvaita
Shuddhadvaita
Vishishtadvaita


Shaiva

Pratyabhijña
Pashupata Shaivism
Shaiva Siddhanta










Nāstika



Cārvāka
Ājīvika
Jain

Anekantavada
Syādvāda


Buddhist

Śūnyatā
Madhyamaka
Yogacara
Sautrāntika
Svatantrika










Texts



Vedas
Vedangas
Vedantasara
Upanishads

primary
Whole list...


Bhagavad Gita
Buddhist texts
Jain Agamas
Yoga Sutras of Patanjali
Nyāya Sūtras
Vaiśeṣika Sūtra
Samkhyapravachana Sutra
Purva Mimamsa Sutras
Brahma Sutra
Panchadasi
Shiva Sutras
Arthashastra
Abhinavabharati
Yoga Vasistha
More...








Philosophers



Avatsara
Yajnavalkya
Gargi Vachaknavi
Patanjali
Kanada
Kapila
Brihadratha Ikshvaku
Jaimini
Vyasa
Chanakya
Akshapada Gotama
Nagarjuna
Padmasambhava
Vasubandhu
Gaudapada
Adi Shankara
Swami Vivekananda
Dayananda Saraswati
Ramanuja
Vedanta Desika
Raikva
Sadananda
Sakayanya
Satyakama Jabala
Madhvacharya
Vidyaranya
More...








Concepts



Abhava
Abhasavada
Abheda
Adarsana
Advaita
Aham
Aishvarya
Akrodha
Aksara
Anatta
Ananta
Anavastha
Anupalabdhi
Apauruṣheyā
Asiddhatva
Asatkalpa
Ātman
Avyakta
Brahman
Brahmi sthiti
Bhuman
Bhumika
Chaitanya
Chidabhasa
Cittabhumi
Devatas
Dharma
Dhi
Dravya
Dhrti
Ekagrata
Guṇa
Hitā
Idam
Ikshana
Ishvaratva
Jivatva
Karma
Kasaya
Kshetrajna
Lakshana
Mithyatva
Mokṣa
Nididhyasana
Nirvāṇa
Padārtha
Paramatman
Paramananda
Parameshashakti
Parinama-vada
Pradhana
Prajna
Prakṛti
Pratibimbavada
Pratītyasamutpāda
Puruṣa
Rājamaṇḍala
Ṛta
Sakshi
Samadhi
Saṃsāra
Sankalpa
Satya
Satkaryavada
Shabda Brahman
Sphoṭa
Sthiti
Śūnyatā
Sutram
Svātantrya
Iccha-mrityu
Syādvāda
Taijasa
Tajjalan
Tanmatra
Tyāga
Uparati
Upekkhā
Utsaha
Vivartavada
Viraj
Yoga
More...













Authority control



NDL: 00564106















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Indian_philosophy&amp;oldid=690787456"					
				Categories: Indian philosophyIndian cultureHistory of IndiaIndian literatureHidden categories: Use British English from March 2013Use dmy dates from March 2013				
							
		
		
			