


		
		
		
			

							
						

			J. L. Austin
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								  (Redirected from J.L. Austin)
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				

J. L. Austin


Born
26 March 1911
Lancaster


Died
8 February 1960(1960-02-08) (aged&#160;48)
Oxford





Era
20th-century philosophy


Region
Western Philosophy


School
Ordinary language philosophy/linguistic philosophy, Analytic



Main interests

Philosophy of language, philosophy of mind, ethics, philosophy of perception



Notable ideas

Speech acts, performative utterance




Influences


Gilbert Ryle








Influenced


John Searle, Stanley Cavell






John Langshaw "J. L." Austin (26 March 1911 – 8 February 1960) was a British philosopher of language and leading proponent of ordinary language philosophy, perhaps best-known for developing the theory of speech acts.[1]
Prior to Austin, the attention of linguistic and analytic philosophers had been directed almost exclusively to statements, assertions, and propositions — to linguistic acts that (at least in theory) have truth-value. This led to problems when analyzing certain types of statements, for example in determining the truth conditions for such statements as "I promise to do so-and-so."
Austin pointed out that we use language to do things as well as to assert things, and that the utterance of a statement like "I promise to do so-and-so" is best understood as doing something — making a promise — rather than making an assertion about anything. Hence the name of one of his best-known works How to do Things with Words.



Contents


1 Life
2 Work

2.1 How to Do Things With Words
2.2 Performative utterance
2.3 Sense and Sensibilia
2.4 Philosophical Papers
2.5 "Are there A Priori Concepts?"
2.6 "The Meaning of a Word"
2.7 "Other Minds"
2.8 "A Plea for Excuses"


3 Austin and Wittgenstein
4 Quotes
5 See also
6 Publications

6.1 Books
6.2 Papers and articles


7 References
8 Further reading
9 External links



Life[edit]
Austin was born in Lancaster, England, the second son of Geoffrey Langshaw Austin (1884–1971), an architect, and his wife Mary Bowes-Wilson (1883–1948). In 1922 the family moved to Scotland, where Austin's father became the secretary of St Leonard's School, St Andrews. Austin was educated at Shrewsbury School in 1924, earning a scholarship in Classics, and went on to study Classics at Balliol College, Oxford in 1929.
In 1933, he received a First in Literae Humaniores (Classics and Philosophy) as well as the Gaisford Prize for Greek prose and first class honours in his finals. Literae Humaniores introduced him to serious philosophy and gave him a lifelong interest in Aristotle.[2] He undertook his first teaching position in 1935, as fellow and tutor at Magdalen College, Oxford.
Austin's early interests included Aristotle, Kant, Leibniz, and Plato (especially the Theaetetus). His more contemporary influences included especially G. E. Moore, John Cook Wilson and H. A. Prichard. The contemporary influences shaped their views about general philosophical questions on the basis of careful attention to the more specific judgements we make. They took our specific judgements to be more secure than more general judgements. It's plausible that some aspects of Austin's distinctive approach to philosophical questions derived from his engagement with the last three. [3]
During World War II Austin served in the British Intelligence Corps, MI6. It has been said of him that, "he more than anybody was responsible for the life-saving accuracy of the D-Day intelligence" (reported in Warnock 1963: 9). Austin left the army with the rank of lieutenant colonel and was honored for his intelligence work with an OBE (Officer of the Order of the British Empire), the French Croix de guerre, and the U.S. Officer of the Legion of Merit.[2][4]
After the war Austin became White's Professor of Moral Philosophy at Oxford. He began holding his famous "Austin's Saturday Mornings" where students and colleagues would discuss language usages (and sometimes books on language) over tea and crumpets, but published little.[5]
Austin visited Harvard and Berkeley in the mid-fifties, in 1955 delivering the William James Lectures at Harvard that would become How to Do Things With Words, and offering a seminar on excuses whose material would find its way into "A Plea for Excuses".[6] It was at this time that he met and befriended Noam Chomsky. He was president of the Aristotelian Society from 1956 to 1957.
Austin died at the age of 48 of lung cancer. At the time, he was developing a semantic theory based on sound symbolism, using the English gl-words as data.[citation needed]
Work[edit]
How to Do Things With Words[edit]
How to Do Things With Words is perhaps Austin's most influential work. In contrast to the positivist view, he argues, sentences with truth-values form only a small part of the range of utterances.
After introducing several kinds of sentences which he asserts are neither true nor false, he turns in particular to one of these kinds of sentences, which he calls performative utterances or just "performatives". These he characterises by two features:

Again, though they may take the form of a typical indicative sentence, performative sentences are not used to describe (or "constate") and are thus not true or false; they have no truth-value.
Second, to utter one of these sentences in appropriate circumstances is not just to "say" something, but rather to perform a certain kind of action.[7]

He goes on to say that when something goes wrong in connection with a performative utterance it is, as he puts it, "infelicitous", or "unhappy" rather than false.[8][9]
The action which is performed when a 'performative utterance' is issued belongs to what Austin later calls a speech-act [10] (more particularly, the kind of action Austin has in mind is what he subsequently terms the illocutionary act). For example, if you say "I name this ship the Queen Elizabeth," and the circumstances are appropriate in certain ways, then you will have done something special, namely, you will have performed the act of naming the ship. Other examples include: "I take this man as my lawfully wedded husband," used in the course of a marriage ceremony, or "I bequeath this watch to my brother," as occurring in a will. In all three cases the sentence is not being used to describe or state what one is 'doing', but being used to actually 'do' it.
After numerous attempts to find more characteristics of performatives, and after having met with many difficulties, Austin makes what he calls a "fresh start", in which he considers "more generally the senses in which to say something may be to do something, or in saying something we do something".
For example: John Smith turns to Sue Snub and says ‘Is Jeff’s shirt red?’, to which Sue replies ‘Yes’. John has produced a series of bodily movements which result in the production of a certain sound. Austin called such a performance a phonetic act, and called the act a phone. John’s utterance also conforms to the lexical and grammatical conventions of English—that is, John has produced an English sentence. Austin called this a phatic act, and labels such utterances phemes. John also referred to Jeff’s shirt, and to the colour red. To use a pheme with a more or less definite sense and reference is to utter a rheme, and to perform a rhetic act. Note that rhemes are a sub-class of phemes, which in turn are a sub-class of phones. One cannot perform a rheme without also performing a pheme and a phone. The performance of these three acts is the performance of a locution—it is the act of saying something.
John has therefore performed a locutionary act. He has also done at least two other things. He has asked a question, and he has elicited an answer from Sue.
Asking a question is an example of what Austin called an illocutionary act. Other examples would be making an assertion, giving an order, and promising to do something. To perform an illocutionary act is to use a locution with a certain force. It is an act performed in saying something, in contrast with a locution, the act of saying something.
Eliciting an answer is an example of what Austin calls a perlocutionary act, an act performed by saying something. Notice that if one successfully performs a perlocution, one also succeeds in performing both an illocution and a locution.
In the theory of speech acts, attention has especially focused on the illocutionary act, much less on the locutionary and perlocutionary act, and only rarely on the subdivision of the locution into phone, pheme and rheme.
How to Do Things With Words is based on lectures given at Oxford between 1951 and 1954, and then at Harvard in 1955.[11]
Performative utterance[edit]
According to J. L. Austin, "performative utterance" refers to a not truth-evaluable action of "performing", or "doing" a certain action. For example, when people say "I promise to do so and so", they are generating the action of making a promise. In this case, without any flaw (the promise is flawlessly fulfilled), the "performative utterance" is "happy", or to use J. L. Austin’s word, "felicitous"; if on the other hand, one fails to do what he or she promised, it can be "unhappy", or "infelicitous". Notice that performative utterance is not truth-evaluable, which means nothing said can be judged based on truth or falsity.
There are four types of performatives according to Austin: explicit, implicit, primitive, and inexplicit. "How to do things with words" edited by J. O. Urmson and Marina Sbisa records Austin's lectures on this topic. In this book, Austin offers examples for each type of performative mentioned above. For explicit performatives, he mentioned "I apologize", "I criticize" (Page 83), which are so explicit to receivers that it would not make sense for someone to ask "Does he really mean that?". Inexplicit performatives are opposite, so the receiver will have understandable doubts. For primary performatives, the example Austin gave is "I shall be there". Compared with explicit performatives, there is uncertainty in implicit performatives. People might ask if he or she is promising to be there with primary performatives, however, this uncertainty is not strong enough as in inexplicit performatives. Most examples given are explicit because it is easy to identify and observe, and identifying other performatives requires comparison and contrast with explicit performatives.[12]
Sense and Sensibilia[edit]
In the posthumously published Sense and Sensibilia,[13] Austin criticizes the claims put forward by A. J. Ayer's The Foundations of Empirical Knowledge (1940), and to a lesser extent, H.H. Price’s Perception (1932) and G.J. Warnock’s Berkley (1953), concerning the sense-data theory. He states that perceptual variation, which can be attributed to physical causes, does not involve a figurative disconnect between sense and reference, due to an unreasonable separation of parts from the perceived object. Central to his argument, he shows that "there is no one kind of thing that we ‘perceive’ but many different kinds, the number being reducible if at all by scientific investigation and not by philosophy" (Austin 1962a, 4).
Austin argues that Ayer fails to understand the proper function of such words as "illusion", "delusion", "hallucination", "looks", "appears" and "seems", and uses them instead in a "special way...invented by philosophers."[14] According to Austin, normally these words allow us to express reservations about our commitment to the truth of what we are saying, and that the introduction of sense-data adds nothing to our understanding of or ability to talk about what we see.
As an example, Austin examines the word ‘real’ and contrasts the ordinary meanings of that word based on everyday language and the ways it is used by sense-data theorists. In order to determine the meaning of ‘real’ we have to consider, case by case, the ways and contexts in which it is used. By observing that it is (i) a substantive-hungry word that is sometimes a (ii) adjuster-word,[15] as well as a (iii) dimension-word [16] and (iv) a word whose negative use "wears the trousers,"[17] Austin highlights it’s complexities. Only by doing so, according to Austin, can we avoid introducing false dichotomies.
Philosophical Papers[edit]
Austin's papers were collected and published posthumously as Philosophical Papers by J. O. Urmson and Geoffrey Warnock. The book originally contained ten papers, two more being added in the second edition and one in the third. His paper Excuses has had a massive impact on criminal law theory.
Chapters 1 and 3 study how a word may have different, but related, senses. Chapters 2 and 4 discuss the nature of knowledge, focusing on performative utterance. Chapters 5 and 6 study the correspondence theory, where a statement is true when it corresponds to a fact. Chapters 6 and 10 concern the doctrine of speech acts. Chapters 8, 9, and 12 reflect on the problems that language encounters in discussing actions and considering the cases of excuses, accusations, and freedom.
"Are there A Priori Concepts?"[edit]
This early paper contains a broad criticism of Idealism. The question set dealing with the existence of a priori concepts is treated only indirectly, by dismissing the concept of concept that underpins it.
The first part of this paper takes the form of a reply to an argument for the existence of Universals: from observing that we do use words such as "grey" or "circular" and that we use a single term in each case, it follows that there must be a something that is named by such terms—a universal. Furthermore, since each case of "grey" or "circular" is different, it follows that universals themselves cannot be sensed.
Austin carefully dismantles this argument, and in the process other transcendental arguments. He points out first that universals are not "something we stumble across", and that they are defined by their relation to particulars. He continues by pointing out that, from the observation that we use "grey" and "circular" as if they were the names of things, it simply does not follow that there is something that is named. In the process he dismisses the notion that "words are essentially proper names", asking "...why, if 'one identical' word is used, must there be 'one identical object' present which it denotes".
In the second part of the article, he generalizes this argument against universals to address concepts as a whole. He points out that it is "facile" to treat concepts as if they were "an article of property". Such questions as "Do we possess such-and-such a concept" and "how do we come to possess such-and-such a concept" are meaningless, because concepts are not the sort of thing that one possesses.
In the final part of the paper, Austin further extends the discussion to relations, presenting a series of arguments to reject the idea that there is some thing that is a relation. His argument likely follows from the conjecture of his colleague, S. V. Tezlaf, who questioned what makes "this" "that".
"The Meaning of a Word"[edit]
The Meaning of a Word is a polemic against doing philosophy by attempting to pin down the meaning of the words used, arguing that 'there is no simple and handy appendage of a word called "the meaning of the word (x)"'.
Austin warns us to take care when removing words from their ordinary usage, giving numerous examples of how this can lead to error.
"Other Minds"[edit]
In Other Minds, one of his most highly acclaimed pieces,[18] Austin criticizes the method that philosophers have used since Descartes to analyze and verify statements of the form "That person S feels X." This method works from the following three assumptions:

(1) We can know only if we intuit and directly feel what he feels.
(2) It is impossible to do so.
(3) It may be possible to find strong evidence for belief in our impressions.

Although Austin agrees with (2), quipping that "we should be in a pretty predicament if I did", he found (1) to be false and (3) to be therefore unnecessary. The background assumption to (1), Austin claims, is that if I say that I know X and later find out that X is false, I did not know it. Austin believes that this is not consistent with the way we actually use language. He claims that if I was in a position where I would normally say that I know X, if X should turn out to be false, I would be speechless rather than self-corrective. He gives an argument that this is so by suggesting that believing is to knowing as intending is to promising— knowing and promising are the speech-act versions of believing and intending respectively.
"A Plea for Excuses"[edit]
A Plea for Excuses is both a demonstration by example, and a defense of the methods of ordinary language philosophy, which proceeds on the conviction that: "...our common stock of words embodies all the distinctions men have found worth drawing, and the connections they have found worth marking, in the lifetime of many generations: these surely are likely to be more numerous, more sound, since they have stood up to the long test of survival of the fittest, and more subtle, at least in all ordinary and reasonable practical matters, than any that you or I are likely to think up in our armchair of an afternoon—the most favourite alternative method."[19]
An example of such a distinction Austin describes in a footnote is that between the phrases "by mistake" and "by accident". Although their uses are similar, Austin argues that with the right examples we can see that a distinction exists in when one or the other phrase is appropriate.
Austin proposes some curious philosophical tools. For instance, he uses a sort of word game for developing an understanding of a key concept. This involves taking up a dictionary and finding a selection of terms relating to the key concept, then looking up each of the words in the explanation of their meaning. This process is iterated until the list of words begins to repeat, closing in a "family circle" of words relating to the key concept.
Austin and Wittgenstein[edit]
Austin occupies a place in philosophy of language alongside Wittgenstein and his fellow Oxonian, Gilbert Ryle, in staunchly advocating the examination of the way words are ordinarily used in order to elucidate meaning and by this means avoid philosophical confusions. Unlike many ordinary language philosophers, however, Austin disavowed any overt indebtedness to Wittgenstein's later philosophy.[2]
Quotes[edit]

"The theory of truth is a series of truisms" - Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, vol. xxiv (1950). Philosophical Papers, p.&#160;121, Oxford University Press, second edition (1970)


"Sentences are not as such either true or false" - Sense and Sensibilia (1962), p.&#160;111


"Going back into the history of a word, very often into Latin, we come back pretty commonly to pictures or models of how things happen or are done. These models may be fairly sophisticated and recent, as is perhaps the case with 'motive' or 'impulse', but one of the commonest and most primitive types of model is one which is apt to baffle us through its very naturalness and simplicity." - A Plea for Excuses (1956) Published in Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 1956-7. Transcribed into hypertext by Andrew Chrucky, 23 August 2004.


"A sentence is made up of words, a statement is made in words.... Statements are made, words or sentences are used." Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, vol. xxiv (1950) - Philosophical Papers, p.&#160;120, Oxford University Press, second edition (1970)


"We walk along the cliff, and I feel a sudden impulse to push you over, which I promptly do: I acted on impulse, yet I certainly in tended to push you over, and may even have devised a little ruse to achieve it; yet even then I did not act deliberately, for I did not (stop to) ask myself whether to do it or not." - Philosophical Papers, "The Meaning of a Word," p.&#160;195, Oxford University Press, second edition (1970).


"You are more than entitled not to know what the word 'performative' means. It is a new word and an ugly word, and perhaps it does not mean anything very much. But at any rate there is one thing in its favor, it is not a profound word." - "Performative Utterances." Philosophical Papers, p.&#160;233, Oxford University Press, second edition (1970).


"Let us distinguish between acting intentionally and acting deliberately or on purpose, as far as this can be done by attending to what language can teach us." - Philosophical Papers, "Three Ways of Spilling Ink," p.&#160;273, Oxford University Press, second edition (1970).


"Usually it is uses of words, not words in themselves, that are properly called 'vague.'" - Sense and Sensibilia, p.&#160;126, Oxford University Press (1962).


"But then we have to ask, of course, what this class comprises. We are given, as examples, 'familiar objects'--chairs, tables, pictures, books, flowers, pens, cigarettes; the expression 'material thing' is not here (or anywhere else in Ayer's text) further defined. But does the ordinary man believe that what he perceives is (always) something like furniture, or like these other 'familiar objects'—moderate-sized specimens of dry goods?" - Sense and Sensibilia, p.&#160;8, Oxford University Press (1962).


During a lecture at Columbia University attended by American philosopher Sidney Morgenbesser, Austin made the claim that although a double negative in English implies a positive meaning, there is no language in which a double positive implies a negative. To which Morgenbesser responded in a dismissive tone, "Yeah, yeah."[20][21] (Some have quoted it as "Yeah, right.")

See also[edit]

Linguistics
Pragmatics
Semantics
Adolf Reinach
Word

Publications[edit]
Books[edit]

Sense and Sensibilia, 1962, (ed. G. J. Warnock), Oxford: Clarendon Press. ISBN 0-19-824579-3
How to do Things with Words: The William James Lectures delivered at Harvard University in 1955, 1962 (eds. J. O. Urmson and Marina Sbisà), Oxford: Clarendon Press. ISBN 0-674-41152-8
Philosophical Papers, 1961, 1970, 1979, (eds. J. O. Urmson and G. J. Warnock), Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-824627-7 (= Austin 1979)
The Foundation of Arithmetic: A Logico-Mathematical Enquiry into the Concept of Number (1980) by Gottlob Frege (author) and J. L. Austin (translator) ISBN 978-081010-605-5
Philosophy of Language: The Central Topics by Susana Nuccetelli, Gary Seay, J. L. Austin and Anthony Brueckner

Papers and articles[edit]

1930s–1940s, "The Line and the Cave in Plato's Republic," reconstructed from notes by J. O. Urmson, in Austin 1979.
1939ms/1967, "Agathon and Eudaimonia in the Ethics of Aristotle," in J. M. E. Moravcsik (ed.), Aristotle, New York: Doubleday. Reprinted in Austin 1979.
1939, "Are There A Priori Concepts," Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Supplementary Volume 18: 83–105. Reprinted in Austin 1979.
ms1940, "The Meaning of Words," in Austin 1979.
1946, "Other Minds," Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Supplementary Volume 20: 148–187. Reprinted in Austin 1979.
1950, "Truth," Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Supplementary Volume 24: 111–128. Reprinted in Austin 1979.
1953, "How to Talk—some simple ways," Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 53: 227–246. Reprinted in Austin 1979.
1954ms, "Unfair to Facts," in Austin 1979.
1956a, "Ifs and Cans," Proceedings of the British Academy. Reprinted in Austin 1979.
1956b, "Performative Utterances," corrected transcript of an unscripted radio talk delivered in the Third Programme of the BBC. In Austin 1979.
1957, "A Plea for Excuses: The Presidential Address", Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 57: 1–30. Reprinted in Austin 1979.
1958, "Pretending," Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Supplementary Volume 32: 261–278. Reprinted in Austin 1979.
1962, "Performatif-Constatif," in Cahiers de Royaumont, Philosophie No. IV, La Philosophie Analytique, Les Editions de Minuit. Translated in 1963, "Performative-Constative" by G. J. Warnock, in C. E. Caton ed., Philosophy and Ordinary Language, University of Illinois Press.
1966, "Three Ways of Spilling Ink", L. W. Forguson (ed.), The Philosophical Review, 75 (4): 427–440. Reprinted in Austin 1979.


In translation


Otras mentes. In Austin, Ensayos filosóficos. Madrid: Revista de Occidente, 1975. 87-117.
Un alegato en pro de las excusas. In Austin, Ensayos filosóficos. Madrid: Revista de Occidente, 1975. 169-92.
Quand dire c'est faire Éditions du Seuil, Paris. Traduction française de "How to do things with words" par Gilles Lane, 1970.
Palabras y acciones: Cómo hacer cosas con palabras. Buenos Aires: Paidós, 1971.
Cómo hacer cosas con palabras.: Palabras y acciones. Barcelona: Paidós, 1982.
Performativo-Constativo. In Gli atti linguistici. Aspetti e problemi di filosofia del linguagio. Milano: Feltrinelli, 1978. 49-60.
Ensayos filosóficos. Madrid: Revista de Occidente, 1975.
Quando dire è fare (ed. Antonio Pieretti).Marietti, 1974.
Come fare cose con le parole (eds. Carlo Penco &amp; Marina Sbisà). Genova, Marietti, 1987.
Kako delovati rečima. Novi Sad, Matica Srpska, 1994.
Tetten ért szavak. Budapest, Akadémiai, 1990.
Saggi filosofici (ed. Paolo Leonardi). Milano, Guerini, 1990.
Ako niečo robiť slovami. Bratislava, Kalligram, 2004.

References[edit]


^ Warnock, G. J. "John Langshaw Austin, a biographical sketch". Symposium on J. L. Austin, ed. K.T. Fann. New York: Humanities Press, 1969. p. 3.
^ a b c Hacker, P. M. S. 'Austin, John Langshaw (1911–1960)', in Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, Oxford University Press, 2004 online (subscription site), accessed 16 Aug 2008
^ Longworth, Guy. "John Langshaw Austin." Stanford University. Stanford University, 11 Dec. 2012. Web. 30 Oct. 2014.
^ "John Langshaw Austin". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Retrieved 26 July 2014.&#160;
^ See John Passmore, A Hundred Years of Philosophy (New York: Basic Books, 1967) 459, n. 2.
^ Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 1956-57. See Stanley Cavell, The Claim of Reason: Wittegenstein, Skepticism, Morality and Tragedy (New York: Oxford, 1979) xv.
^ J.L. Austin, How to do Things with Words, Second Edition (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1975) 5.
^ How to do Things with Words, 14.
^ Austin seems to have thought, controversially, that a performative utterance must be infelicitous if it occurs in a poem. Robert Maximilian de Gaynesford has argued that what Austin intends by his comments on poetry is better than is usually thought, but what he offers poets is considerably worse; see his 'The Seriousness of Poetry' Essays in Criticism 59, 2009, 1-21.
^ J.L. Austin, How To Do Things With Words, Second Edition (1976, Oxford University Press). pp40
^ "Notes by J.L. Austin". Bodleian Library at Oxford University.&#160;
^ Urmson, J.O, and Marina Sbisa. How to do things with words J.L. Austin, 2nd. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1975. Print.
^ Austin had lectured on the material of this book many times in Oxford from about 1947 to 1959, and once at the University of California at Berkeley. See Warnock's Foreword. The title is an allusion to the novel Sense and Sensibility by Jane Austen.
^ Sense and Sensibilia, 102.
^ Sense and Sensibilia, 73.
^ Sense and Sensibilia, 71.
^ Sense and Sensibilia, 70.
^ Passmore, ibid., 463
^ A Plea for excuses, in Austin, J. L., Philosophical Papers, p. 182
^ The Independent, The Independent, Professor Sidney Morgenbesser: Philosopher celebrated for his withering New York Jewish humour, 6 August 2004
^ The Times, Sidney Morgenbesser: Erudite and influential American linguistic philosopher with the analytical acuity of Spinoza and the blunt wit of Groucho Marx, 8 September 2004


Further reading[edit]

Berlin, I. et al., (ed.) (1973) Essays on J.L. Austin, Oxford: The Clarendon Press.
Cavell, S. (1990), The Claim of Reason: Wittgenstein, Skepticism, Morality, and Tragedy, New York: Oxford University Press. (The major work by one of Austin's most prominent heirs. Takes ordinary language approaches to issues of skepticism, but also makes those approaches a subject of scrutiny).
Fann, K.T., ed. (1969), Symposium on J.L. Austin, New York: Humanities Press.
Friggieri, Joe (1993), " Linguaggio e azione. Saggio su J. L. Austin", Milano: Vita e Pensiero
Friggieri, Joe (1991), "Actions and Speech Actions: In the Philosophy of J. L. Austin", Msida: Mireva Publications
Garvey, Brian, ed. (2004), J. L. Austin on Language, Palgrave, Houndmills (UK). (Includes Remembering J. L. Austin by Austin's younger sister, Ann Lendrum, and Recollections of J. L. Austin by John Searle).
Gustafsson, M. and Sørli, R. (2011), "The Philosophy of J. L. Austin".Oxford: Oxford University Press. (New anthology of philosophical essays on Austin's work).
Kirkham, R. (1992, reprinted 1995), Theories of Truth: A Critical Introduction. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. ISBN 0-262-61108-2. (Chapter 4 contains a detailed discussion of Austin's theory of truth).
Passmore, J. (1966), A Hundred Years of Philosophy, rev. ed. New York: Basic Books. (Chapter 18 includes a perceptive exposition of Austin's philosophical project).
Pitcher, G. (1973), "Austin: a personal memoir" in Essays on J.L. Austin, ed. Berlin, I. et al. Oxford: The Clarendon Press.
Putnam, H. (1999), "The Importance of Being Austin: The Need of a 'Second Näivetē'" Lecture Two in The Threefold Cord: Mind, Body, and World New York: Columbia University Press. (In arguing for "naive realism", Putnam invokes Austin's handling of sense-data theories and their reliance on arguments from perceptual illusion in Sense and Sensibilia, which Putnam calls "one of the most unjustly neglected classics of analytics philosophy").
Searle, J. (1969), Speech Acts: An Essay in the Philosophy of Language, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. (Searle's has been the most notable of attempts to extend and adjust Austin's conception of speech acts).
Searle, J. (1979), Expression and Meaning: Studies in the Theory of Speech Acts, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1979.
Soames, S. (2005), Philosophical Analysis in the Twentieth Century: Volume II: The Age of Meaning. Princeton: Princeton UP. (Contains a large section on ordinary language philosophy, and a chapter on Austin's treatment of skepticism and perception in Sense and Sensibilia).
Warnock, G. J. (1969) "John Langshaw Austin, a biographical sketch", in Symposium on J. L. Austin, K.T. Fann (ed), New York: Humanities Press.
Warnock, G. J. (1979), Philosophical Papers, Oxford: OUP (Clarendon Paperbacks), ISBN 019283021X
Warnock, G. J. (1973), "Saturday Mornings" in Essays on J.L. Austin I. Berlin et al. (ed) Oxford: The Clarendon Press.
Warnock, G. J. (1992), J. L. Austin, London: Routledge.

External links[edit]



Wikiquote has quotations related to: J. L. Austin



J. L. Austin The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
John Langshaw Austin entry in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy









v
t
e


Analytic philosophy






Philosophers



Robert Merrihew Adams
William P. Alston
J. L. Austin
A. J. Ayer
G. E. M. Anscombe
David Malet Armstrong
Robert Audi
Robert Brandom
C. D. Broad
Tyler Burge
John P. Burgess
Rudolf Carnap
Roderick Chisholm
Patricia Churchland
Paul Churchland
David Chalmers
Noam Chomsky
Donald Davidson
Daniel Dennett
Michael Dummett
Bas van Fraassen
Gottlob Frege
Jerry Fodor
Philippa Foot
Peter Geach
A. C. Grayling
Paul Grice
Alvin Goldman
R. M. Hare
Peter Hacker
John Hawthorne
Ian Hacking
Carl Hempel
Jaakko Hintikka
Peter van Inwagen
Frank Cameron Jackson
Christine Korsgaard
Saul Kripke
David Lewis
J. L. Mackie
Norman Malcolm
John McDowell
G. E. Moore
Thomas Nagel
Robert Nozick
Derek Parfit
D. Z. Phillips
Alvin Plantinga
A. N. Prior
Hilary Putnam
W. V. O. Quine
John Rawls
Hans Reichenbach
Bertrand Russell
Gilbert Ryle
John Searle
Moritz Schlick
Wilfrid Sellars
Peter Singer
Peter Strawson
Richard Swinburne
Peter Unger
Bernard Williams
Timothy Williamson
John Wisdom
Ludwig Wittgenstein
Stephen Yablo
more&#160;...








Theories



Deflationism
Direct reference theory
Empiricism
Holism
Logical atomism
Logical positivism
Naturalism
Naturalized epistemology
Neopragmatism
Neutral monism
Particularism
Reductionism
Scientism
Skepticism
Verificationism
more&#160;...








Concepts



Analysis
Analytic–synthetic distinction
Causal&#160;/ Deductive&#160;/ Epistemic closure
Concept
Counterfactual
Denotation&#160;/ reference
Definite description
Factive
Family resemblance
Intuition
Meaning&#160;(Proposition)
Modality
Natural kind&#160;/ projectability
Necessary–sufficient conditions
Paradox of analysis
Possible world
Reduction
Reflective equilibrium
Rigid-flaccid designators
Sense data
Supervenience
Thought experiment
Truth function
Truthmaker
Truth-bearer
Type–token distinction








Related articles



Australian realism
Ordinary language philosophy
Philosophical logic
Philosophy of language
Philosophy of science
Postanalytic philosophy
more&#160;...











Category
Task force&#160;(discussion)
Philosophy stubs
















v
t
e


Philosophy of language






Philosophers



Plato (Cratylus)
Gorgias
Confucius
Xunzi
Aristotle
Stoics
Pyrrhonists
Scholasticism
Ibn Rushd
Ibn Khaldun
Thomas Hobbes
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz
Johann Herder
Ludwig Noire
Wilhelm von Humboldt
Fritz Mauthner
Paul Ricœur
Ferdinand de Saussure
Gottlob Frege
Franz Boas
Paul Tillich
Edward Sapir
Leonard Bloomfield
Zhuangzi
Henri Bergson
Lev Vygotsky
Ludwig Wittgenstein

Philosophical Investigations
Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus


Bertrand Russell
Rudolf Carnap
Jacques Derrida

Of Grammatology
Limited Inc


Benjamin Lee Whorf
Gustav Bergmann
J. L. Austin
Noam Chomsky
Hans-Georg Gadamer
Saul Kripke
A. J. Ayer
G. E. M. Anscombe
Jaakko Hintikka
Michael Dummett
Donald Davidson
Paul Grice
Gilbert Ryle
P. F. Strawson
Willard Van Orman Quine
Hilary Putnam
David Lewis
John Searle
Joxe Azurmendi
Scott Soames
Stephen Yablo
John Hawthorne
Stephen Neale








Theories



Causal theory of reference
Contrast theory of meaning
Contrastivism
Conventionalism
Cratylism
Deconstruction
Descriptivist theory of names
Direct reference theory
Dramatism
Expressivism
Linguistic determinism
Logical atomism
Logical positivism
Mediated reference theory
Nominalism
Non-cognitivism
Phallogocentrism
Quietism
Relevance theory
Semantic externalism
Semantic holism
Structuralism
Supposition theory
Symbiosism
Theological noncognitivism
Theory of descriptions
Verification theory








Concepts



Ambiguity
Linguistic relativity
Meaning
Language
Truth-bearer
Proposition
Use–mention distinction
Concept
Categories
Set
Class
Intension
Logical form
Metalanguage
Mental representation
Principle of compositionality
Property
Sign
Sense and reference
Speech act
Symbol
Entity
Sentence
Statement
more...








Related articles



Analytic philosophy
Philosophy of information
Philosophical logic
Linguistics
Pragmatics
Rhetoric
Semantics
Formal semantics
Semiotics











Category
Task Force
Discussion
















v
t
e


Philosophy of mind






Philosophers



Anscombe
Austin
Aquinas
Bain
Bergson
Bhattacharya
Block
Brentano
Broad
Burge
Chalmers
Churchland
Dennett
Dharmakirti
Davidson
Descartes
Goldman
Heidegger
Husserl
Fodor
James
Kierkegaard
Leibniz
Lewis
McDowell
Merleau-Ponty
Minsky
Moore
Nagel
Parfit
Putnam
Popper
Rorty
Ryle
Searle
Spinoza
Turing
Vasubandhu
Wittgenstein
Zhuangzi
more...








Theories



Behaviorism
Biological naturalism
Dualism
Eliminative materialism
Emergent materialism
Epiphenomenalism
Functionalism
Idealism
Interactionism
Materialism
Monism
Naïve realism
Neutral monism
Phenomenalism
Phenomenology

existential
neurophenomenology


Physicalism

identity theory


Pragmatism
Property dualism
Representational
Solipsism
Subjectivism
Substance dualism








Concepts



Abstract object
Artificial intelligence
Chinese room
Cognition
Cognitive closure
Concept
Concept and object
Consciousness
Hard problem of consciousness
Hypostatic abstraction
Idea
Identity
Ingenuity
Intelligence
Intentionality
Introspection
Intuition
Language of thought
Materialism
Mental event
Mental image
Mental process
Mental property
Mental representation
Mind
Mind–body problem
New mysterianism
Pain
Problem of other minds
Propositional attitude
Qualia
Tabula rasa
Understanding
Zombie
more...








Related topics



Metaphysics
Philosophy of artificial intelligence&#160;/ information&#160;/ perception&#160;/ self











Portal
Category
Task Force
Discussion














Authority control



WorldCat
VIAF: 49253679
LCCN: n79003370
ISNI: 0000 0001 2025 3687
GND: 11850519X
SUDOC: 029321115
BNF: cb12097213w (data)
NDL: 00431926
NKC: jn19990000323















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=J._L._Austin&amp;oldid=689165157"					
				Categories: People from Lancaster, Lancashire1911 births1960 deathsPeople educated at Shrewsbury SchoolAlumni of Balliol College, Oxford20th-century philosophersAnalytic philosophersBritish philosophersPhilosophers of languageAction theoristsWhite's Professors of Moral PhilosophyOrdinary language philosophyPresidents of the Aristotelian SocietyHidden categories: Use dmy dates from March 2012Use British English from March 2012Articles with hCardsAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from May 2015Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers				
							
		
		
			