


		
		
		
			

							
						

			John Searle
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				

John Rogers Searle



Searle in 2005.



Born
(1932-07-31) July 31, 1932 (age&#160;83)
Denver, Colorado, USA


Alma&#160;mater
University of Wisconsin
University of Oxford


Spouse(s)
Dagmar Searle[1]


Website
Homepage at UC Berkeley





Era
Contemporary philosophy


Region
Western philosophy


School
Analytic



Main interests




Philosophy of language
Philosophy of mind
Intentionality&#160;· Social reality






Notable ideas

Indirect speech acts
Chinese room
Biological naturalism




Influences





Anscombe
Austin
Chomsky
Dreyfus
Frege
Grice
Hume
Russell
Strawson
Wittgenstein









Signature





John Rogers Searle (/sɜrl/; born July 31, 1932) is an American philosopher and currently the Slusser Professor of Philosophy at the University of California, Berkeley. Widely noted for his contributions to the philosophy of language, philosophy of mind and social philosophy, he began teaching at Berkeley in 1959. He received the Jean Nicod Prize in 2000;[2] the National Humanities Medal in 2004;[3] and the Mind &amp; Brain Prize in 2006. Among his notable concepts is the "Chinese room" argument against "strong" artificial intelligence.



Contents


1 Biography

1.1 Politics


2 Philosophy

2.1 Speech acts

2.1.1 Searle–Derrida debate


2.2 Intentionality and the background
2.3 Consciousness

2.3.1 Ontological subjectivity
2.3.2 Artificial intelligence


2.4 Social reality
2.5 Rationality


3 Bibliography
4 See also
5 References
6 Further reading
7 External links



Biography[edit]
Searle's father, G. W. Searle, an electrical engineer, was employed by AT&amp;T Corporation, while his mother, Hester Beck Searle, was a physician. Searle began his college education at the University of Wisconsin-Madison and subsequently became a Rhodes Scholar at Oxford University, where he obtained a doctorate in philosophy.
Politics[edit]
While an undergraduate at the University of Wisconsin, Searle was the secretary of "Students against Joseph McCarthy".[4] McCarthy was then the junior senator from Wisconsin. In 1959, Searle began to teach at Berkeley and was the first tenured professor to join the 1964–5 Free Speech Movement.[5] In 1969, while serving as chairman of the Academic Freedom Committee of the Academic Senate of the University of California,[6] he supported the university in its dispute with students over the People's Park.
In The Campus War: A Sympathetic Look at the University in Agony (1971),[7] Searle investigates the causes behind the campus protests of the era. In it he declares that: "I have been attacked by both the House Un-American Activities Committee and ... several radical polemicists ... Stylistically, the attacks are interestingly similar. Both rely heavily on insinuation and innuendo, and both display a hatred&#160;– one might almost say terror&#160;– of close analysis and dissection of argument." He asserts that "My wife was threatened that I (and other members of the administration) would be assassinated or violently attacked."[4]
Shortly after 9/11, Searle wrote an article claiming that 9/11 was a particular event in a long-term struggle against forces that are intractably opposed to the United States, and signalled support for a more aggressive neoconservative interventionist foreign policy. He called for the realization that the US is in a more-or-less permanent state of war with these forces. Moreover, a probable course of action would be to deny terrorists the use of foreign territory from which to stage their attacks. Finally, he alluded to the long-term nature of the conflict and blamed the attacks on the lack of American resolve to deal forcefully with America's enemies over the past several decades.[8]
Philosophy[edit]
Speech acts[edit]
Searle's early work, which did a great deal to establish his reputation, was on speech acts. He attempted to synthesize ideas from many colleagues&#160;– including J. L. Austin (the "illocutionary act", from How To Do Things with Words), Ludwig Wittgenstein and G. C. J. Midgley (the distinction between regulative and constitutive rules)&#160;– with his own thesis that such acts are constituted by the rules of language. He also drew on the work of H. Paul Grice (the analysis of meaning as an attempt at being understood), Hare and Stenius (the distinction, concerning meaning, between illocutionary force and propositional content), P. F. Strawson, John Rawls and William P. Alston, who maintained that sentence meaning consists in sets of regulative rules requiring the speaker to perform the illocutionary act indicated by the sentence and that such acts involve the utterance of a sentence which (a) indicates that one performs the act; (b) means what one says; and (c) addresses an audience in the vicinity. In his 1969 book Speech Acts, Searle sets out to combine all these elements to give his account of illocutionary acts.
Despite his announced intention[9] to present a "full dress analysis of the illocutionary act", Searle ultimately does not give one.[citation needed] Instead, he provides an analysis of what he considers the prototypical illocutionary act of promising and offers sets of semantical rules intended to represent the linguistic meaning of devices indicating further illocutionary act types (Speech Acts, p.&#160;57-71).
Among the concepts presented in the book is the distinction between the "illocutionary force" and the "propositional content" of an utterance. Searle does not precisely define the former as such, but rather introduces several possible illocutionary forces by example. According to Searle, the sentences...

Sam smokes habitually.
Does Sam smoke habitually?
Sam, smoke habitually!
Would that Sam smoked habitually!

...each indicate the same propositional content (Sam smoking habitually) but differ in the illocutionary force indicated (respectively, a statement, a question, a command and an expression of desire; Speech Acts p.&#160;22).
According to a later account, which Searle presents in Intentionality (1983) and which differs in important ways from the one suggested in Speech Acts, illocutionary acts are characterised by their having "conditions of satisfaction" (an idea adopted from Strawson's 1971 paper "Meaning and Truth") and a "direction of fit" (an idea adopted from Elizabeth Anscombe). For example, the statement "John bought two candy bars" is satisfied if and only if it is true, i.e. John did buy two candy bars. By contrast, the command "John, buy two candy bars!" is satisfied if and only if John carries out the action of purchasing two candy bars. Searle refers to the first as having the "word-to-world" direction of fit, since the words are supposed to change to accurately represent the world, and the second as having the "world-to-word" direction of fit, since the world is supposed to change to match the words. (There is also the double direction of fit, in which the relationship goes both ways, and the null or zero direction of fit, in which it goes neither way because the propositional content is presupposed, as in "I'm sorry I ate John's candy bars.")
In Foundations of Illocutionary Logic[10] (1985, with Daniel Vanderveken), Searle prominently uses the notion of the "illocutionary point".[11]
Searle's speech-act theory has been challenged by several thinkers in a variety of ways. Collections of articles referring to Searle's account are found in Burkhardt 1990[12] and Lepore / van Gulick 1991.[13]
Searle–Derrida debate[edit]
See also: Limited Inc
In the early 1970s, Searle had a brief exchange with Jacques Derrida regarding speech-act theory. The exchange was characterized by a degree of mutual hostility between the philosophers, each of whom accused the other of having misunderstood his basic points.[14][citation needed] Searle was particularly hostile to Derrida's deconstructionist framework and much later refused to let his response to Derrida be printed along with Derrida's papers in the 1988 collection Limited Inc. Searle did not consider Derrida's approach to be legitimate philosophy or even intelligible writing and argued that he did not want to legitimize the deconstructionist point of view by dedicating any attention to it. Consequently, some critics[15] have considered the exchange to be a series of elaborate misunderstandings rather than a debate, while others[16] have seen either Derrida or Searle gaining the upper hand. The level of hostility can be seen from Searle's statement that "It would be a mistake to regard Derrida's discussion of Austin as a confrontation between two prominent philosophical traditions", to which Derrida replied that that sentence was "the only sentence of the "reply" to which I can subscribe".[17] Commentators have frequently interpreted the exchange as a prominent example of a confrontation between analytical and continental philosophy.
The debate began in 1972, when, in his paper "Signature Event Context", Derrida analyzed J. L. Austin's theory of the illocutionary act. While sympathetic to Austin's departure from a purely denotational account of language to one that includes "force", Derrida was sceptical of the framework of normativity employed by Austin. He argued that Austin had missed the fact that any speech event is framed by a "structure of absence" (the words that are left unsaid due to contextual constraints) and by "iterability" (the constraints on what can be said, given by what has been said in the past). Derrida argued that the focus on intentionality in speech-act theory was misguided because intentionality is restricted to that which is already established as a possible intention. He also took issue with the way Austin had excluded the study of fiction, non-serious or "parasitic" speech, wondering whether this exclusion was because Austin had considered these speech genres governed by different structures of meaning, or simply due to a lack of interest. In his brief reply to Derrida, "Reiterating the Differences: A Reply to Derrida", Searle argued that Derrida's critique was unwarranted because it assumed that Austin's theory attempted to give a full account of language and meaning when its aim was much narrower. Searle considered the omission of parasitic discourse forms to be justified by the narrow scope of Austin's inquiry.[18][19] Searle agreed with Derrida's proposal that intentionality presupposes iterability, but did not apply the same concept of intentionality used by Derrida, being unable or unwilling to engage with the continental conceptual apparatus.[16] This, in turn, caused Derrida to criticize Searle for not being sufficiently familiar with phenomenological perspectives on intentionality.[20] Searle also argued that Derrida's disagreement with Austin turned on his having misunderstood Austin's type–token distinction and his failure to understand Austin's concept of failure in relation to performativity. Some critics[20] have suggested that Searle, by being so grounded in the analytical tradition that he was unable to engage with Derrida's continental phenomenological tradition, was at fault for the unsuccessful nature of the exchange.
Derrida, in his response to Searle ("a b c ..." in Limited Inc), ridiculed Searle's positions. Claiming that a clear sender of Searle's message could not be established, he suggested that Searle had formed with Austin a société à responsabilité limitée (a "limited liability company") due to the ways in which the ambiguities of authorship within Searle's reply circumvented the very speech act of his reply. Searle did not reply. Later in 1988, Derrida tried to review his position and his critiques of Austin and Searle, reiterating that he found the constant appeal to "normality" in the analytical tradition to be problematic.[16][21][22][23][24][25][26][27]
In the debate, Derrida praises Austin's work, but argues that he is wrong to banish what Austin calls "infelicities" from the "normal" operation of language. One "infelicity," for instance, occurs when it cannot be known whether a given speech act is "sincere" or "merely citational" (and therefore possibly ironic, etc.). Derrida argues that every iteration is necessarily "citational," due to the graphematic nature of speech and writing, and that language could not work at all without the ever-present and ineradicable possibility of such alternate readings. Derrida takes Searle to task for his attempt to get around this issue by grounding final authority in the speaker's inaccessible "intention". Derrida argues that intention cannot possibly govern how an iteration signifies, once it becomes hearable or readable. All speech acts borrow a language whose significance is determined by historical-linguistic context, and by the alternate possibilities that this context makes possible. This significance, Derrida argues, cannot be altered or governed by the whims of intention.
In 1995, Searle gave a brief reply to Derrida in The Construction of Social Reality. He called Derrida's conclusion "preposterous" and stated that "Derrida, as far as I can tell, does not have an argument. He simply declares that there is nothing outside of texts..."[28] Searle's reference here is not to anything forwarded in the debate, but to a mistranslation of the phrase "il n'y a pas dehors du texte," ("There is no outside-text") which appears in Derrida's Of Grammatology.[29]
Intentionality and the background[edit]
Searle defines intentionality as the power of minds to be about, to represent (see Correspondence theory of truth), or to stand for, things, properties and states of affairs in the world.[30] The nature of intentionality is an important part of discussions of Searle's "Philosophy of Mind". Searle emphasizes that the word ‘intentionality, (the part of the mind directed to/from/about objects and relations in the world independent of mind) should not be confused with the word ‘intensionality’ (the logical property of some sentences that do not pass the test of 'extensinalidade').[31] In Intentionality: An Essay in the Philosophy of Mind (1983), Searle applies certain elements of his account(s) of "illocutionary acts" to the investigation of intentionality. Searle also introduces a technical term the Background,[32] which, according to him, has been the source of much philosophical discussion ("though I have been arguing for this thesis for almost twenty years," Searle writes,[33] "many people whose opinions I respect still disagree with me about it.") Background he calls the set of abilities, capacities, tendencies, and dispositions that humans have and that are not themselves intentional states. Thus, when someone asks us to "cut the cake" we know to use a knife and when someone asks us to "cut the grass" we know to use a lawnmower (and not vice versa), even though the actual request did not include this detail. Searle sometimes supplements his reference to the Background with the concept of the Network, one's network of other beliefs, desires, and other intentional states necessary for any particular intentional state to make sense. Searle argues that the concept of a Background is similar to the concepts provided by several other thinkers, including Wittgenstein's private language argument ("the work of the later Wittgenstein is in large part about the Background"[34]) and Bourdieu's habitus.
To give an example, two chess players might be engaged in a bitter struggle at the board, but they share all sorts of Background presuppositions: that they will take turns to move, that no one else will intervene, that they are both playing to the same rules, that the fire alarm won't go off, that the board won't suddenly disintegrate, that their opponent won't magically turn into a grapefruit, and so on indefinitely. As most of these possibilities won't have occurred to either player,[35] Searle thinks the Background must be unconscious, though elements of it can be called to consciousness (if the fire alarm does go off, say).
In his debate with Derrida, Searle argued against Derrida's notion that a statement can be disjoined from the original intentionality of its author, for example when no longer connected to the original author, while still being able to produce meaning. Searle maintained that even if one was to see a written statement with no knowledge of authorship it would still be impossible to escape the question of intentionality, because "a meaningful sentence is just a standing possibility of the (intentional) speech act". For Searle ascribing intentionality to a statement was a basic requirement for attributing it any meaning at all.[36][37]
Consciousness[edit]
Building upon his views about Intentionality, Searle presents a view concerning consciousness in his book The Rediscovery of the Mind (1992). He argues that, starting with behaviorism (an early but influential scientific view, succeeded by many later accounts that Searle also dismisses), much of modern philosophy has tried to deny the existence of consciousness, with little success. In Intentionality, he parodies several alternative theories of consciousness by replacing their accounts of intentionality with comparable accounts of the hand:

No one would think of saying, for example, "Having a hand is just being disposed to certain sorts of behavior such as grasping" (manual behaviorism), or "Hands can be defined entirely in terms of their causes and effects" (manual functionalism), or "For a system to have a hand is just for it to be in a certain computer state with the right sorts of inputs and outputs" (manual Turing machine functionalism), or "Saying that a system has hands is just adopting a certain stance toward it" (the manual stance). (p. 263)

Searle argues that philosophy has been trapped by a false dichotomy: that, on the one hand, the world consists of nothing but objective particles in fields of force, but that yet, on the other hand, consciousness is clearly a subjective first-person experience.
Searle says simply that both are true: consciousness is a real subjective experience, caused by the physical processes of the brain. (A view which he suggests might be called biological naturalism.)
Ontological subjectivity[edit]
Searle has argued[38] that critics like Daniel Dennett, who (he claims) insist that discussing subjectivity is unscientific because science presupposes objectivity, are making a category error. Perhaps the goal of science is to establish and validate statements which are epistemically objective, (i.e., whose truth can be discovered and evaluated by any interested party), but are not necessarily ontologically objective.
Searle calls any value judgment epistemically subjective. Thus, "McKinley is prettier than Everest" is "epistemically subjective", whereas "McKinley is higher than Everest" is "epistemically objective." In other words, the latter statement is evaluable (in fact, falsifiable) by an understood ('background') criterion for mountain height, like 'the summit is so many meters above sea level'. No such criteria exist for prettiness.
Beyond this distinction, Searle thinks there are certain phenomena (including all conscious experiences) that are ontologically subjective, i.e. can only exist as subjective experience. For example, although it might be subjective or objective in the epistemic sense, a doctor's note that a patient suffers from back pain is an ontologically objective claim: it counts as a medical diagnosis only because the existence of back pain is "an objective fact of medical science".[39] But the pain itself is ontologically subjective: it is only experienced by the person having it.
Searle goes on to affirm that "where consciousness is concerned, the existence of the appearance is the reality".[40] His view that the epistemic and ontological senses of objective/subjective are cleanly separable is crucial to his self-proclaimed biological naturalism.
Artificial intelligence[edit]
See also: Chinese room and philosophy of artificial intelligence
A consequence of biological naturalism is that if we want to create a conscious being, we will have to duplicate whatever physical processes the brain goes through to cause consciousness. Searle thereby means to contradict what he calls "Strong AI", defined by the assumption that as soon as a certain kind of software is running on a computer, a conscious being is thereby created.[41]
In 1980, Searle presented the "Chinese room" argument, which purports to prove the falsity of strong AI.[42] (Familiarity with the Turing test is useful for understanding the issue.) Assume you do not speak Chinese and imagine yourself in a room with two slits, a book, and some scratch paper. Someone slides you some Chinese characters through the first slit, you follow the instructions in the book, transcribing characters as instructed onto the scratch paper, and slide the resulting sheet out the second slit. To people on the outside world, it appears the room speaks Chinese—they slide Chinese statements in one slit and get valid responses in return—yet you do not understand a word of Chinese. This suggests, according to Searle, that no computer can ever understand Chinese or English, because, as the thought experiment suggests, being able to 'translate' Chinese into English does not entail 'understanding' either Chinese or English: all which the person in the thought experiment, and hence a computer, is able to do is to execute certain syntactic manipulations.[43]
Stevan Harnad argues that Searle's "Strong AI" is really just another name for functionalism and computationalism, and that these positions are the real targets of his critique.[44] Functionalists claim that consciousness can be defined as a set of informational processes inside the brain. It follows that anything that carries out the same informational processes as a human is also conscious. Thus, if we wrote a computer program that was conscious, we could run that computer program on, say, a system of ping-pong balls and beer cups and the system would be equally conscious, because it was running the same information processes.
Searle argues that this is impossible, since consciousness is a physical property, like digestion or fire. No matter how good a simulation of digestion you build on the computer, it will not digest anything; no matter how well you simulate fire, nothing will get burnt. By contrast, informational processes are observer-relative: observers pick out certain patterns in the world and consider them information processes, but information processes are not things-in-the-world themselves. Since they do not exist at a physical level, Searle argues, they cannot have causal efficacy and thus cannot cause consciousness. There is no physical law, Searle insists, that can see the equivalence between a personal computer, a series of ping-pong balls and beer cans, and a pipe-and-water system all implementing the same program.[45]
Social reality[edit]
Searle extended his inquiries into observer-relative phenomena by trying to understand social reality. Searle begins by arguing collective intentionality (e.g. "we're going for a walk") is a distinct form of intentionality, not simply reducible to individual intentionality (e.g. "I'm going for a walk with him and I think he thinks he's going for a walk with me and he thinks I think I'm going for a walk with him and ...").
Searle's The Construction of Social Reality (1995) addresses the mystery of how social constructs like "baseball" or "money" can exist in a world consisting only of physical particles in fields of force. Adapting an idea by Elizabeth Anscombe in "On Brute Facts," Searle distinguishes between brute facts, like the height of a mountain, and institutional facts, like the score of a baseball game. Aiming at an explanation of social phenomena in terms of Anscombe's notion, he argues that society can be explained in terms of institutional facts, and institutional facts arise out of collective intentionality through constitutive rules with the logical form "X counts as Y in C". Thus, for instance, filling out a ballot counts as a vote in a polling place, getting so many votes counts as a victory in an election, getting a victory counts as being elected president in the presidential race, etc.
Many sociologists, however, do not see Searle's contributions to social theory as very significant. Neil Gross for example argues that Searle's views on society are more or less a reconstitution of Emile Durkheim's theories of social facts, social institutions, collective representations and the like. Searle's ideas are thus open to the same criticisms as Durkheim's.[46] Searle responded by saying that Durkheim's work was worse than he had originally believed, and, admitting that he had not read much of Durkheim's work, said that, "Because Durkheim’s account seemed so impoverished I did not read any further in his work." [47] Stephen Lukes, however, responded to Searle's response to Gross and argues point by point against the allegations that Searle makes against Durkheim, essentially upholding the argument of Gross, that Searle's work bears great resemblance to that of Durkheim's. Lukes attributes Searle's miscomprehension of Durkheim's work to the fact that Searle, quite simply, never read Durkheim.[48]
Rationality[edit]
In Rationality in Action (2001), Searle argues that standard notions of rationality are badly flawed. According to what he calls the Classical Model, rationality is seen as something like a train track: you get on at one point with your beliefs and desires and the rules of rationality compel you all the way to a conclusion. Searle doubts this picture of rationality holds generally.
Searle briefly critiques one particular set of these rules: those of mathematical decision theory. He points out that its axioms require that anyone who valued a quarter and their life would, at some odds, bet their life for a quarter. Searle insists he would never take such a bet and believes that this stance is perfectly rational.
Most of his attack is directed against the common conception of rationality, which he believes is badly flawed. First, he argues that reasons don't cause you to do anything, because having sufficient reason wills (but doesn't force) you to do that thing. So in any decision situation we experience a gap between our reasons and our actions. For example, when we decide to vote, we do not simply determine that we care most about economic policy and that we prefer candidate Jones's economic policy. We also have to make an effort to cast our vote. Similarly, every time a guilty smoker lights a cigarette they are aware of succumbing to their craving, not merely of acting automatically as they do when they exhale. It is this gap that makes us think we have freedom of the will. Searle thinks whether we really have free will or not is an open question, but considers its absence highly unappealing because it makes the feeling of freedom of will an epiphenomenon, which is highly unlikely from the evolutionary point of view given its biological cost. He also says: " All rational activity presupposes free will ".[49]
Second, Searle believes we can rationally do things that don't result from our own desires. It is widely believed that one cannot derive an "ought" from an "is", i.e. that facts about how the world is can never tell you what you should do ('Hume's Law'). By contrast, in so far as a fact is understood as relating to an institution (marriage, promises, commitments, etc.), which is to be understood as a system of constitutive rules, then what one should do can be understood as following from the institutional fact of what one has done; institutional fact, then, can be understood as opposed to the "brute facts" related to Hume's Law. For example, Searle believes the fact that you promised to do something means you should do it, because by making the promise you are participating in the constitutive rules that arrange the system of promise making itself, and therefore understand a "shouldness" as implicit in the mere factual action of promising. Furthermore, he believes that this provides a desire-independent reason for an action—if you order a drink at a bar, you should pay for it even if you have no desire to. This argument, which he first made in his paper, "How to Derive 'Ought' from 'Is'" (1964),[50] remains highly controversial, but even three decades later Searle continued to defend his view that "..the traditional metaphysical distinction between fact and value cannot be captured by the linguistic distinction between 'evaluative' and 'descriptive' because all such speech act notions are already normative."[51]
Third, Searle argues that much of rational deliberation involves adjusting our (often inconsistent) patterns of desires to decide between outcomes, not the other way around. While in the Classical Model, one would start from a desire to go to Paris greater than that of saving money and calculate the cheapest way to get there, in reality people balance the niceness of Paris against the costs of travel to decide which desire (visiting Paris or saving money) they value more. Hence, he believes rationality is not a system of rules, but more of an adverb. We see certain behavior as rational, no matter what its source, and our system of rules derives from finding patterns in what we see as rational.
Bibliography[edit]

Speech Acts: An Essay in the Philosophy of Language (1969)
The Campus War: A Sympathetic Look at the University in Agony (political commentary; 1971)
Expression and Meaning: Studies in the Theory of Speech Acts (essay collection; 1979)
Intentionality: An Essay in the Philosophy of Mind (1983)
Minds, Brains and Science: The 1984 Reith Lectures (lecture collection; 1984)
Foundations of Illocutionary Logic (John Searle &amp; Daniel Vanderveken 1985)
John Searle and His Critics (Ernest Lepore and Robert Van Gulick, eds.; 1991)
The Rediscovery of the Mind (1992)
The Construction of Social Reality (1995)
The Mystery of Consciousness (review collection; 1997)
Mind, Language and Society: Philosophy in the Real World (summary of earlier work; 1998)
Rationality in Action (2001)
Consciousness and Language (essay collection; 2002)
Freedom and Neurobiology (lecture collection; 2004)
Mind: A Brief Introduction (summary of work in philosophy of mind; 2004)
Intentional Acts and Institutional Facts (essay collection; 2007)
Philosophy in a New Century: Selected Essays (2008)
Making the Social World: The Structure of Human Civilization (2010)
Seeing Things As They Are: A Theory of Perception (2015)

See also[edit]


American philosophy
Collective Intentionality
Consciousness
Language/action perspective
List of American philosophers
List of Jean Nicod Prize laureates
Practical reason
Pragmatics
Unconscious mind


References[edit]


^ Introduction: John Searle in Czech Context
^ http://www.cnrs.fr/cw/en/nomi/prix/nicod2000.html
^ http://www.neh.gov/news/press-release/2004-11-17
^ a b http://www.ditext.com/searle/campus/1.html
^ http://socrates.berkeley.edu/~jsearle/Free%20Speech%20Movement-1.htm
^ http://www.ditext.com/searle/campus/4.html
^ "The Campus War". Retrieved 2012-03-24.&#160;
^ http://ist-socrates.berkeley.edu/~jsearle/pdf/terrorism.pdf
^ "Language Arts &amp; Disciplines" (1969) by John R. Searle- Chapter 3 - "THE STRUCTURE OF ILLOCUTIONARY ACTS", p. 54
^ John R. Searle, Daniel Vanderveken (1985). Foundations of Illocutionary Logic. Cambridge University Press. ISBN&#160;0-521-26324-7.&#160;
^ Although Searle does not mention earlier uses of the concept, it originates from Alexander Sesonske's article "Performatives".
^ Burkhardt, Armin (ed.), Speech Acts, Meaning and Intentions: Critical Approaches to the Philosophy of John R. Searle. Berlin / New York 1990.
^ Lepore, Ernest / van Gulick, Robert (eds): John Searle and his Critics. Oxford: Basil Blackwell 1991.
^ Derrida, Jacques. Limited, Inc. Northwestern University Press, 1988. p. 29: "...I have read some of his [Searle's] work (more, in any case, than he seems to have read of mine)"
^ Maclean, Ian. 2004. "un dialogue de sourds? Some implications of the Austin–Searle–Derrida debate", in Jacques Derrida: critical thought. Ian Maclachlan (ed.) Ashgate Publishing, 2004
^ a b c "Another Look at the Derrida-Searle Debate". Mark Alfino. Philosophy &amp; Rhetoric , Vol. 24, No. 2 (1991), pp. 143-152 [1]
^ Simon Glendinning. 2001. Arguing with Derrida. Wiley-Blackwell. p. 18
^ Gregor Campbell. 1993. "John R. Searle" in Irene Rima Makaryk (ed). Encyclopedia of contemporary literary theory: approaches, scholars, terms. University of Toronto Press, 1993
^ John Searle, "Reiterating the Différences: A Reply to Derrida", Glyph 2 (Baltimore MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1977).
^ a b Marian Hobson. 1998. Jacques Derrida: opening lines. Psychology Press. pp. 95-97
^ Jacques Derrida, "Afterwords" in Limited, Inc. (Northwestern University Press, 1988), p. 133
^ Farrell, F. B. (1988). "Iterability and meaning: the Searle–Derrida debate". Metaphilosophy 19: 53–64. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9973.1988.tb00701.&#160;
^ "With the Compliments of the Author: Reflections on Austin and Derrida". Stanley E. Fish. Critical Inquiry, Vol. 8, No. 4 (Summer 1982), pp. 693-721.
^ "Derrida, Searle, Contexts, Games, Riddles". Edmond Wright. New Literary History, Vol. 13, No. 3 ("Theory: Parodies, Puzzles, Paradigms"), Spring 1982, pp. 463-477.
^ "Convention and Meaning: Derrida and Austin". Jonathan Culler. New Literary History, Vol. 13, No. 1 ("On Convention: I"), Autumn 1981, pp. 15-30.
^ Kenaan, Hagi. "Language, philosophy and the risk of failure: rereading the debate between Searle and Derrida". Continental Philosophy Review 35 (2): 117–133. doi:10.1023/A:1016583115826.&#160;
^ Raffel, Stanley. "Understanding Each Other: The Case of the Derrida-Searle Debate" (PDF). Human Studies 34 (3): 277–292. doi:10.1007/s10746-011-9189-6.&#160;
^ Searle The Construction of Social Reality (1995) p.157-160.
^ Tr. by Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak. Johns Hopkins University Press. Baltimore, 1976, 158-59
^ Searle, Intentionality (1983)
^ Searle "Making the Social World: The Structure of Human Civilization" (2010) p. 48-62
^ Searle, Intentionality (1983); The Rediscovery of the Mind (1992) ch. 8
^ "Literary Theory and Its Discontents", New Literary History, 640
^ Searle, The Rediscovery of the Mind (1992), p.177
^ Searle, The Rediscovery of the Mind (1992), p.185
^ John Searle, "Reiterating the Différences: A Reply to Derrida'"', Glyph 2 (Baltimore MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1977 p. 202
^ Gerald Graff. 1988. Summary of Reiterating the differences. in Derrida, JAcques. Limited Inc. p. 26.
^ Searle, J R: The Mystery of Consciousness (1997) p.95-131
^ Searle, J R: The Mystery of Consciousness (1997) p.122
^ Searle, J R: The Mystery of Consciousness (1997) p.112
^ ". . . I call the view that all there is to having a mind is having a program, Strong AI, . . . " The Rediscovery of the Mind, p.201
^ "Minds, Brains and Programs", The Behavioral and Brain Sciences.3, pp.&#160;417-424. (1980)
^ Interview with John R. Searle | http://globetrotter.berkeley.edu/people/Searle/searle-con4.html
^ Harnad, Stevan (2001), "What's Wrong and Right About Searle's Chinese Room Argument", in M.; Preston, J., Essays on Searle's Chinese Room Argument, Oxford University Press.
^ Searle 1980
^ Gross, Neil. "Comment on Searle", in Anthropological Theory, vol. 6 (1): 45-56. 2006. http://www.scribd.com/doc/22379828/Gross-Comment-on-Searle
^ Searle, John. "Durkheim versus Searle and the waves of thought", in Anthropological Theory, vol. 6 (1): 57-69. http://www.scribd.com/doc/22379838/Searle-Reply-to-Gross
^ Lukes, Steven. "Durkheim versus Searle", in Intentional Acts and Institutional Facts: Essays on John Searle's Social Ontology Theory, ed. Savas Tsohatzidis, Springer: Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 2007. http://www.scribd.com/doc/17634357/Intentional-Acts-and-Institutional-Facts-Essays-on-John-Searles-Social-Ontology-Theory-and-Decision-Library-a
^ Rationality in Action by John R. Searle (2003)
^ John Searle, "How to Derive 'Ought' from 'Is'", The Philosophical Review, 73:1 (January 1964), 43-58
^ John Searle in Thomas Mautner, "Dictionary of Philosophy" (Penguin 1996). ISBN 0-14-051250-0


Further reading[edit]

Papers on the History of Speech Act Theory by Barry Smith
"Minds, Brains and Programs", The Behavioral and Brain Sciences.3, pp.&#160;417–424. (1980)
"Is the Brain a Digital Computer?" (1990) Presidential Address to the American Philosophical Association
"Collective Intentions and Actions" (1990) in Intentions in Communication J. M. P. R. Cohen, &amp; M. and E. Pollack. Cambridge, Mass.: . MIT Press: 401-416.
The Problem of Consciousness, Social Research, Vol. 60, No.1, Spring 1993.
Consciousness Ann. Rev. Neurosci. (2000) 23:557-78. Review.
D. Koepsell (ed.) and L. Moss (ed.) "Searle and Smith: A Dialogue" in John Searle's Ideas About Social Reality: Extensions, Criticisms, and Reconstructions (2003), Blackwell, ISBN 978-1-4051-1258-1
Dualism revisited J Physiol Paris. 2007 Jul-Nov;101(4-6):169-78. Epub 2008 Jan 19.
M. Bennett, D. Dennett, P. Hacker, J. Searle, Neuroscience and Philosophy: Brain, Mind and Language (2007), Columbia University Press, ISBN 0-231-14044-4
The Storm Over the University
Doerge (2006), Friedrich Christoph: Illocutionary Acts&#160;– Austin's Account and What Searle Made Out of It. Tuebingen: Tuebingen University. http://tobias-lib.ub.uni-tuebingen.de/volltexte/2006/2273/pdf/Dissertation_Doerge.pdf
Koblizek (2012), Tomas: How to Make the Concepts Clear: Searle's Discussion with Derrida. Organon F, Suppl. Issue 2, pp.&#160;157–165. (Searle's reply to Koblizek: ibid., pp.&#160;217–220.). http://www.klemens.sav.sk/fiusav/doc/organon/prilohy/2012/2/161-169.pdf

External links[edit]



Wikiquote has quotations related to: John Searle



John Searle on mind, matter, consciousness and his theory of perception - Interview on the 7th Avenue Project radio show
John Searle's Machines Like Us interview
Conversations with Searle.
Interview in Conversations with History series. Available in webcast and podcast.
Coversations Conversations with History:John R. Searle on YouTube
Video or transcript of an interview with John Searle on language, writing, mind, and consciousness
John Searle at the Internet Movie Database
Webcast of Philosophy of Society lectures
Philosophy of Language: an interview with John Searle ReVEL, vol. 5, n. 8, 2007.
The Moscow Center for Consciousness Studies video interview with John Searle 2011-06-13
BBC Reith Audio Lectures - John Searle: Minds, Brain &amp; Science (1984)[dead link]
Searle's May 2013 TED talk, "Our shared condition -- consciousness"









v
t
e


Analytic philosophy






Philosophers



Robert Merrihew Adams
William P. Alston
J. L. Austin
A. J. Ayer
G. E. M. Anscombe
David Malet Armstrong
Robert Audi
Robert Brandom
C. D. Broad
Tyler Burge
John P. Burgess
Rudolf Carnap
Roderick Chisholm
Patricia Churchland
Paul Churchland
David Chalmers
Noam Chomsky
Donald Davidson
Daniel Dennett
Michael Dummett
Bas van Fraassen
Gottlob Frege
Jerry Fodor
Philippa Foot
Peter Geach
A. C. Grayling
Paul Grice
Alvin Goldman
R. M. Hare
Peter Hacker
John Hawthorne
Ian Hacking
Carl Hempel
Jaakko Hintikka
Peter van Inwagen
Frank Cameron Jackson
Christine Korsgaard
Saul Kripke
David Lewis
J. L. Mackie
Norman Malcolm
John McDowell
G. E. Moore
Thomas Nagel
Robert Nozick
Derek Parfit
D. Z. Phillips
Alvin Plantinga
A. N. Prior
Hilary Putnam
W. V. O. Quine
John Rawls
Hans Reichenbach
Bertrand Russell
Gilbert Ryle
John Searle
Moritz Schlick
Wilfrid Sellars
Peter Singer
Peter Strawson
Richard Swinburne
Peter Unger
Bernard Williams
Timothy Williamson
John Wisdom
Ludwig Wittgenstein
Stephen Yablo
more&#160;...








Theories



Deflationism
Direct reference theory
Empiricism
Holism
Logical atomism
Logical positivism
Naturalism
Naturalized epistemology
Neopragmatism
Neutral monism
Particularism
Reductionism
Scientism
Skepticism
Verificationism
more&#160;...








Concepts



Analysis
Analytic–synthetic distinction
Causal&#160;/ Deductive&#160;/ Epistemic closure
Concept
Counterfactual
Denotation&#160;/ reference
Definite description
Factive
Family resemblance
Intuition
Meaning&#160;(Proposition)
Modality
Natural kind&#160;/ projectability
Necessary–sufficient conditions
Paradox of analysis
Possible world
Reduction
Reflective equilibrium
Rigid-flaccid designators
Sense data
Supervenience
Thought experiment
Truth function
Truthmaker
Truth-bearer
Type–token distinction








Related articles



Australian realism
Ordinary language philosophy
Philosophical logic
Philosophy of language
Philosophy of science
Postanalytic philosophy
more&#160;...











Category
Task force&#160;(discussion)
Philosophy stubs
















v
t
e


Philosophy of language






Philosophers



Plato (Cratylus)
Gorgias
Confucius
Xunzi
Aristotle
Stoics
Pyrrhonists
Scholasticism
Ibn Rushd
Ibn Khaldun
Thomas Hobbes
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz
Johann Herder
Ludwig Noire
Wilhelm von Humboldt
Fritz Mauthner
Paul Ricœur
Ferdinand de Saussure
Gottlob Frege
Franz Boas
Paul Tillich
Edward Sapir
Leonard Bloomfield
Zhuangzi
Henri Bergson
Lev Vygotsky
Ludwig Wittgenstein

Philosophical Investigations
Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus


Bertrand Russell
Rudolf Carnap
Jacques Derrida

Of Grammatology
Limited Inc


Benjamin Lee Whorf
Gustav Bergmann
J. L. Austin
Noam Chomsky
Hans-Georg Gadamer
Saul Kripke
A. J. Ayer
G. E. M. Anscombe
Jaakko Hintikka
Michael Dummett
Donald Davidson
Paul Grice
Gilbert Ryle
P. F. Strawson
Willard Van Orman Quine
Hilary Putnam
David Lewis
John Searle
Joxe Azurmendi
Scott Soames
Stephen Yablo
John Hawthorne
Stephen Neale








Theories



Causal theory of reference
Contrast theory of meaning
Contrastivism
Conventionalism
Cratylism
Deconstruction
Descriptivist theory of names
Direct reference theory
Dramatism
Expressivism
Linguistic determinism
Logical atomism
Logical positivism
Mediated reference theory
Nominalism
Non-cognitivism
Phallogocentrism
Quietism
Relevance theory
Semantic externalism
Semantic holism
Structuralism
Supposition theory
Symbiosism
Theological noncognitivism
Theory of descriptions
Verification theory








Concepts



Ambiguity
Linguistic relativity
Meaning
Language
Truth-bearer
Proposition
Use–mention distinction
Concept
Categories
Set
Class
Intension
Logical form
Metalanguage
Mental representation
Principle of compositionality
Property
Sign
Sense and reference
Speech act
Symbol
Entity
Sentence
Statement
more...








Related articles



Analytic philosophy
Philosophy of information
Philosophical logic
Linguistics
Pragmatics
Rhetoric
Semantics
Formal semantics
Semiotics











Category
Task Force
Discussion
















v
t
e


Philosophy of mind






Philosophers



Anscombe
Austin
Aquinas
Bain
Bergson
Bhattacharya
Block
Brentano
Broad
Burge
Chalmers
Churchland
Dennett
Dharmakirti
Davidson
Descartes
Goldman
Heidegger
Husserl
Fodor
James
Kierkegaard
Leibniz
Lewis
McDowell
Merleau-Ponty
Minsky
Moore
Nagel
Parfit
Putnam
Popper
Rorty
Ryle
Searle
Spinoza
Turing
Vasubandhu
Wittgenstein
Zhuangzi
more...








Theories



Behaviorism
Biological naturalism
Dualism
Eliminative materialism
Emergent materialism
Epiphenomenalism
Functionalism
Idealism
Interactionism
Materialism
Monism
Naïve realism
Neutral monism
Phenomenalism
Phenomenology

existential
neurophenomenology


Physicalism

identity theory


Pragmatism
Property dualism
Representational
Solipsism
Subjectivism
Substance dualism








Concepts



Abstract object
Artificial intelligence
Chinese room
Cognition
Cognitive closure
Concept
Concept and object
Consciousness
Hard problem of consciousness
Hypostatic abstraction
Idea
Identity
Ingenuity
Intelligence
Intentionality
Introspection
Intuition
Language of thought
Materialism
Mental event
Mental image
Mental process
Mental property
Mental representation
Mind
Mind–body problem
New mysterianism
Pain
Problem of other minds
Propositional attitude
Qualia
Tabula rasa
Understanding
Zombie
more...








Related topics



Metaphysics
Philosophy of artificial intelligence&#160;/ information&#160;/ perception&#160;/ self











Portal
Category
Task Force
Discussion
















v
t
e


Social and political philosophy






Philosophers



Alinsky
Aristotle
Augustine
Aurobindo
Aquinas
Averroes
Azurmendi
Badiou
Bakunin
Baudrillard
Benoist
Bentham
Berlin
Bonald
Bosanquet
Burke
Camus
Chanakya
Chomsky
Cicero
Comte
Confucius
Debord
Đilas
Durkheim
Engels
Foucault
Fourier
Gandhi
Gehlen
Gentile
Al-Ghazali
Gramsci
Grotius
Habermas
Han Fei
Hobbes
Hume
Kant
Kirk
Kropotkin
Le Bon
Le Play
Leibniz
Locke
Luxemburg
Machiavelli
Maistre
Malebranche
Marcuse
Maritain
Marsilius
Marx
Mencius
Michels
Mill
Montesquieu
Möser
Mozi
Muhammad
Negri
Nietzsche
Nozick
Oakeshott
Ortega
Pareto
Plamenatz
Plato
Popper
Rand
Rawls
Renan
Rousseau
Royce
Russell
Santayana
Sarkar
Sartre
Schmitt
Searle
Shang
Smith
Sombart
Spann
Spencer
Spirito
Stirner
Strauss
Taine
Taylor
Thoreau
Vivekananda
Walzer
Žižek








Social theories



Vaisheshika
Anarchism
Authoritarianism
Collectivism
Communism
Communitarianism
Conflict theories
Confucianism
Consensus theory
Conservatism
Contractualism
Culturalism
Gandhism
Individualism
Legalism
Liberalism
Libertarianism
Mohism
National liberalism
Social constructionism
Social constructivism
Social Darwinism
Social determinism
Socialism
Utilitarianism








Social concepts



Civil disobedience
Democracy
Four occupations
Justice
Law
Mandate of Heaven
Peace
Property
Revolution
Rights
Social contract
Society
War
more...








Related articles



Jurisprudence
Philosophy and economics
Philosophy of education
Philosophy of history
Philosophy of love
Philosophy of sex
Philosophy of social science
Social epistemology











Category
Portal
Task Force













Authority control



WorldCat
VIAF: 108187093
LCCN: n79055656
ISNI: 0000 0001 2283 9219
GND: 118612484
SUDOC: 027129748
BNF: cb11924241c (data)
NDL: 00455970
NKC: jn20000703277















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=John_Searle&amp;oldid=690170064"					
				Categories: 20th-century philosophers21st-century philosophersAmerican philosophersAnalytic philosophersCounterculture of the 1960sEpistemologistsConsciousness researchers and theoristsPhilosophers of languageUniversity of Wisconsin–Madison alumniAmerican Rhodes ScholarsAlumni of Christ Church, OxfordUniversity of California, Berkeley facultyPhilosophers of mindArtificial intelligence researchersCognitive scientistsGuggenheim FellowsFellows of the American Academy of Arts and SciencesJean Nicod Prize laureatesCommunication theoristsRationality theorists1932 birthsLiving peopleNational Humanities Medal recipientsOrdinary language philosophyMembers of the European Academy of Sciences and ArtsHidden categories: Biography with signatureArticles with hCardsAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from July 2010Articles with unsourced statements from September 2012All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from December 2012Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers				
							
		
		
			