


		
		
		
			

							
						



			John Locke
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				For other people named John Locke, see John Locke (disambiguation).


John Locke





Born
29 August 1632
Wrington, Somerset, England


Died
28 October 1704 (aged 72)
High Laver, Essex, England


Nationality
English





Era
17th-century philosophy
(Modern philosophy)


Region
Western Philosophy


School
British Empiricism, Social Contract, Natural Law



Main interests

Metaphysics, epistemology, political philosophy, philosophy of mind, education, economics



Notable ideas

Tabula rasa, "government with the consent of the governed", state of nature; rights of life, liberty and property




Influences


Cicero, Plato, Aristotle, Aquinas, Avicenna, Grotius, Rutherford, Descartes, Hooker, Filmer, Pufendorf, Hobbes, Polish Brethren (religious group whose ideas were incorporated into Locke's theories)








Influenced


Hume, Kant, Schopenhauer, Berkeley, Burke, Paine, Smith, Voltaire, Condillac, Rousseau, La Mettrie, Toland, Carmichael, Hutcheson, Shaftesbury, Edwards, Collins, Astell, A. Tucker, many subsequent political philosophers (including the Founding Fathers of the United States)






Signature










Part of a series on


John Locke




Social contract
Limited government
Tabula rasa
State of nature
Right to property
Labor theory of property
Lockean proviso





Works
(listed chronologically)






Fundamental Constitutions
of Carolina

A Letter Concerning Toleration
Two Treatises of Government

An Essay Concerning
Human Understanding


Some Thoughts
Concerning Education


Of the Conduct of
the Understanding





People




Robert Filmer
Thomas Hobbes
1st Earl of Shaftesbury
David Hume
Jean-Jacques Rousseau
Adam Smith
Immanuel Kant
Thomas Jefferson




Related topics




Empiricism
Classical liberalism
Polish Brethren







v
t
e









John Locke by Richard Westmacott, University College, London






John Locke's Kit-cat portrait by Godfrey Kneller, National Portrait Gallery, London


John Locke FRS (/ˈlɒk/; 29 August 1632&#160;– 28 October 1704) was an English philosopher and physician regarded as one of the most influential of Enlightenment thinkers and known as the "Father of Classical Liberalism".[1][2][3] Considered one of the first of the British empiricists, following the tradition of Sir Francis Bacon, he is equally important to social contract theory. His work greatly affected the development of epistemology and political philosophy. His writings influenced Voltaire and Rousseau, many Scottish Enlightenment thinkers, as well as the American revolutionaries. His contributions to classical republicanism and liberal theory are reflected in the United States Declaration of Independence.[4]
Locke's theory of mind is often cited as the origin of modern conceptions of identity and the self, figuring prominently in the work of later philosophers such as Hume, Rousseau, and Kant. Locke was the first to define the self through a continuity of consciousness. He postulated that, at birth, the mind was a blank slate or tabula rasa. Contrary to Cartesian philosophy based on pre-existing concepts, he maintained that we are born without innate ideas, and that knowledge is instead determined only by experience derived from sense perception.[5]



Contents


1 Life and work
2 Influence

2.1 Theories of religious tolerance
2.2 Constitution of Carolina
2.3 Theory of value and property
2.4 Political theory

2.4.1 Limits to accumulation


2.5 On price theory

2.5.1 Monetary thoughts


2.6 The self


3 Religious beliefs
4 List of major works

4.1 Major posthumous manuscripts


5 See also
6 References

6.1 Notes
6.2 Citations
6.3 Sources


7 External links

7.1 Works
7.2 Resources





Life and work
Locke's father, also called John, was a country lawyer and clerk to the Justices of the Peace in Chew Magna,[6] who had served as a captain of cavalry for the Parliamentarian forces during the early part of the English Civil War. His mother was Agnes Keene. Both parents were Puritans. Locke was born on 29 August 1632, in a small thatched cottage by the church in Wrington, Somerset, about twelve miles from Bristol. He was baptised the same day. Soon after Locke's birth, the family moved to the market town of Pensford, about seven miles south of Bristol, where Locke grew up in a rural Tudor house in Belluton.
In 1647, Locke was sent to the prestigious Westminster School in London under the sponsorship of Alexander Popham, a member of Parliament and his father's former commander. After completing his studies there, he was admitted to Christ Church, Oxford. The dean of the college at the time was John Owen, vice-chancellor of the university. Although a capable student, Locke was irritated by the undergraduate curriculum of the time. He found the works of modern philosophers, such as René Descartes, more interesting than the classical material taught at the university. Through his friend Richard Lower, whom he knew from the Westminster School, Locke was introduced to medicine and the experimental philosophy being pursued at other universities and in the Royal Society, of which he eventually became a member.
Locke was awarded a bachelor's degree in 1656 and a master's degree in 1658. He obtained a bachelor of medicine in 1674, having studied medicine extensively during his time at Oxford and worked with such noted scientists and thinkers as Robert Boyle, Thomas Willis, Robert Hooke and Richard Lower. In 1666, he met Lord Anthony Ashley Cooper, 1st Earl of Shaftesbury, who had come to Oxford seeking treatment for a liver infection. Cooper was impressed with Locke and persuaded him to become part of his retinue.
Locke had been looking for a career and in 1667 moved into Shaftesbury's home at Exeter House in London, to serve as Lord Ashley's personal physician. In London, Locke resumed his medical studies under the tutelage of Thomas Sydenham. Sydenham had a major effect on Locke's natural philosophical thinking&#160;– an effect that would become evident in An Essay Concerning Human Understanding.
Locke's medical knowledge was put to the test when Shaftesbury's liver infection became life-threatening. Locke coordinated the advice of several physicians and was probably instrumental in persuading Shaftesbury to undergo an operation (then life-threatening itself) to remove the cyst. Shaftesbury survived and prospered, crediting Locke with saving his life.
During this time, Locke served as Secretary of the Board of Trade and Plantations and Secretary to the Lords Proprietor of Carolina, which helped to shape his ideas on international trade and economics.




John Locke


Shaftesbury, as a founder of the Whig movement, exerted great influence on Locke's political ideas. Locke became involved in politics when Shaftesbury became Lord Chancellor in 1672. Following Shaftesbury's fall from favour in 1675, Locke spent some time travelling across France as tutor and medical attendant to Caleb Banks.[7] He returned to England in 1679 when Shaftesbury's political fortunes took a brief positive turn. Around this time, most likely at Shaftesbury's prompting, Locke composed the bulk of the Two Treatises of Government. While it was once thought that Locke wrote the Treatises to defend the Glorious Revolution of 1688, recent scholarship has shown that the work was composed well before this date.[8] The work is now viewed as a more general argument against absolute monarchy (particularly as espoused by Robert Filmer and Thomas Hobbes) and for individual consent as the basis of political legitimacy. Though Locke was associated with the influential Whigs, his ideas about natural rights and government are today considered quite revolutionary for that period in English history.
Locke fled to the Netherlands in 1683, under strong suspicion of involvement in the Rye House Plot, although there is little evidence to suggest that he was directly involved in the scheme. The philosopher and novelist Rebecca Newberger Goldstein argues that during his five years in Holland, Locke chose his friends "from among the same freethinking members of dissenting Protestant groups as Spinoza's small group of loyal confidants. [Baruch Spinoza had died in 1677.] Locke almost certainly met men in Amsterdam who spoke of the ideas of that renegade Jew who... insisted on identifying himself through his religion of reason alone." While she says that "Locke's strong empiricist tendencies" would have "disinclined him to read a grandly metaphysical work such as Spinoza's Ethics, in other ways he was deeply receptive to Spinoza's ideas, most particularly to the rationalist's well thought out argument for political and religious tolerance and the necessity of the separation of church and state."[9]
In the Netherlands, Locke had time to return to his writing, spending a great deal of time re-working the Essay and composing the Letter on Toleration. Locke did not return home until after the Glorious Revolution. Locke accompanied William of Orange's wife back to England in 1688. The bulk of Locke's publishing took place upon his return from exile&#160;– his aforementioned Essay Concerning Human Understanding, the Two Treatises of Civil Government and A Letter Concerning Toleration all appearing in quick succession.
Locke's close friend Lady Masham invited him to join her at the Mashams' country house in Essex. Although his time there was marked by variable health from asthma attacks, he nevertheless became an intellectual hero of the Whigs. During this period he discussed matters with such figures as John Dryden and Isaac Newton.
He died on 28 October 1704, and is buried in the churchyard of the village of High Laver,[10] east of Harlow in Essex, where he had lived in the household of Sir Francis Masham since 1691. Locke never married nor had children.
Events that happened during Locke's lifetime include the English Restoration, the Great Plague of London and the Great Fire of London. He did not quite see the Act of Union of 1707, though the thrones of England and Scotland were held in personal union throughout his lifetime. Constitutional monarchy and parliamentary democracy were in their infancy during Locke's time.
Influence
In the late seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries, Locke's Two Treatises were not frequently cited. The historian Julian Hoppit said of the book, "except among some Whigs, even as a contribution to the intense debate of the 1690s it made little impression and was generally ignored until 1703 (though in Oxford in 1695 it was reported to have made 'a great noise')".[11] John Kenyon in his study of British political debate from 1689 to 1720, has remarked that Locke's theories were "mentioned so rarely in the early stages of the [Glorious] Revolution, up to 1692, and even less thereafter, unless it was to heap abuse on them" and that "no one, including most Whigs, [were] ready for the idea of a notional or abstract contract of the kind adumbrated by Locke".[12] In contrast, Kenyon adds that Algernon Sidney's Discourses Concerning Government were "certainly much more influential than Locke's Two Treatises".[13]
In the fifty years after Queen Anne's death in 1714, the Two Treatises were reprinted only once (apart from in the collected works of Locke). However, with the rise of American resistance to British taxation, the Second Treatise gained a new readership; it was frequently cited in the debates in both America and Britain. The first American printing occurred in 1773 in Boston.[14]
Locke exercised a profound influence on political philosophy, in particular on modern liberalism. Michael Zuckert has argued that Locke launched liberalism by tempering Hobbesian absolutism and clearly separating the realms of Church and State. He had a strong influence on Voltaire who called him "le sage Locke". His arguments concerning liberty and the social contract later influenced the written works of Alexander Hamilton, James Madison, Thomas Jefferson, and other Founding Fathers of the United States. In fact, one passage from the Second Treatise is reproduced verbatim in the Declaration of Independence, the reference to a "long train of abuses." Such was Locke's influence that Thomas Jefferson wrote: "Bacon, Locke and Newton... I consider them as the three greatest men that have ever lived, without any exception, and as having laid the foundation of those superstructures which have been raised in the Physical and Moral sciences".[15][16][17]
But Locke's influence may have been even more profound in the realm of epistemology. Locke redefined subjectivity, or self, and intellectual historians such as Charles Taylor and Jerrold Seigel argue that Locke's An Essay Concerning Human Understanding (1690) marks the beginning of the modern Western conception of the self.[18][19]
Theories of religious tolerance
Locke, writing his Letters Concerning Toleration (1689–92) in the aftermath of the European wars of religion, formulated a classic reasoning for religious tolerance. Three arguments are central: (1) Earthly judges, the state in particular, and human beings generally, cannot dependably evaluate the truth-claims of competing religious standpoints; (2) Even if they could, enforcing a single "true religion" would not have the desired effect, because belief cannot be compelled by violence; (3) Coercing religious uniformity would lead to more social disorder than allowing diversity.[20]
With regard to his position on religious tolerance, Locke was influenced by Baptist theologians like John Smyth and Thomas Helwys, who had published tracts demanding freedom of conscience in the early seventeenth century.[21][22][23] Baptist theologian Roger Williams founded the colony Rhode Island in 1636, where he combined a democratic constitution with unlimited religious freedom. His tract The Bloody Tenent of Persecution for Cause of Conscience (1644), which was widely read in the mother country, was a passionate plea for absolute religious freedom and the total separation of church and state.[24] Freedom of conscience had had high priority on the theological, philosophical and political agenda, since Martin Luther refused to recant his beliefs before the Diet of the Holy Roman Empire at Worms in 1521, unless he would be proved false by the Bible.[25]
Constitution of Carolina
Appraisals of Locke have often been tied to appraisals of liberalism in general, and also to appraisals of the United States. Detractors note that (in 1671) he was a major investor in the English slave-trade through the Royal African Company. In addition, he participated in drafting the Fundamental Constitutions of Carolina while Shaftesbury's secretary, which established a feudal aristocracy and gave a master absolute power over his slaves. For example, Martin Cohen notes that Locke, as a secretary to the Council of Trade and Plantations (1673–4) and a member of the Board of Trade (1696–1700), was in fact, "one of just half a dozen men who created and supervised both the colonies and their iniquitous systems of servitude".[26] Some see his statements on unenclosed property as having been intended to justify the displacement of the Native Americans.[27][28] Because of his opposition to aristocracy and slavery in his major writings, he is accused of hypocrisy and racism, or of caring only for the liberty of English capitalists.[29] Locke also drafted implementing instructions for the Carolina colonists designed to ensure that settlement and development was consistent with the Fundamental Constitutions. Collectively, these documents are known as the Grand Model for the Province of Carolina.
Theory of value and property
Locke uses the word property in both broad and narrow senses. In a broad sense, it covers a wide range of human interests and aspirations; more narrowly, it refers to material goods. He argues that property is a natural right and it is derived from labour.
In Chapter V of his Second Treatise, Locke argues that the individual ownership of goods and property is justified by the labour exerted to produce those goods or utilise property to produce goods beneficial to human society.[30]
Locke stated his belief, in his Second Treatise, that nature on its own provides little of value to society, implying that the labour expended in the creation of goods gives them their value. This position can be seen as a labour theory of value.[30]
From this premise, Locke developed a labour theory of property, namely that ownership of property is created by the application of labour. In addition, he believed that property precedes government and government cannot "dispose of the estates of the subjects arbitrarily." Karl Marx later critiqued Locke's theory of property in his own social theory.
Political theory
See also: Two Treatises of Government
Locke's political theory was founded on social contract theory. Unlike Thomas Hobbes, Locke believed that human nature is characterised by reason and tolerance. Like Hobbes, Locke believed that human nature allowed people to be selfish. This is apparent with the introduction of currency. In a natural state all people were equal and independent, and everyone had a natural right to defend his "Life, health, Liberty, or Possessions".[31] Most scholars trace the phrase "life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness," in the American Declaration of Independence, to Locke's theory of rights,[32] though other origins have been suggested.[33]
Like Hobbes, Locke assumed that the sole right to defend in the state of nature was not enough, so people established a civil society to resolve conflicts in a civil way with help from government in a state of society. However, Locke never refers to Hobbes by name and may instead have been responding to other writers of the day.[34] Locke also advocated governmental separation of powers and believed that revolution is not only a right but an obligation in some circumstances. These ideas would come to have profound influence on the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution of the United States.
Limits to accumulation
See also: Lockean proviso
According to Locke, unused property is waste and an offence against nature,[35] but, with the introduction of "durable" goods, men could exchange their excessive perishable goods for goods that would last longer and thus not offend the natural law. In his view, the introduction of money marks the culmination of this process, making possible the unlimited accumulation of property without causing waste through spoilage.[36] He also includes gold or silver as money because they may be "hoarded up without injury to anyone,"[37] since they do not spoil or decay in the hands of the possessor. In his view, the introduction of money eliminates the limits of accumulation. Locke stresses that inequality has come about by tacit agreement on the use of money, not by the social contract establishing civil society or the law of land regulating property. Locke is aware of a problem posed by unlimited accumulation but does not consider it his task. He just implies that government would function to moderate the conflict between the unlimited accumulation of property and a more nearly equal distribution of wealth; he does not identify which principles that government should apply to solve this problem. However, not all elements of his thought form a consistent whole. For example, labour theory of value of the Two Treatises of Government stands side by side with the demand-and-supply theory developed in a letter he wrote titled Some Considerations on the Consequences of the Lowering of Interest and the Raising of the Value of Money. Moreover, Locke anchors property in labour but in the end upholds the unlimited accumulation of wealth.[38]
On price theory
Locke's general theory of value and price is a supply and demand theory, which was set out in a letter to a Member of Parliament in 1691, titled Some Considerations on the Consequences of the Lowering of Interest and the Raising of the Value of Money.[39] He refers to supply as "quantity" and demand as "rent". "The price of any commodity rises or falls by the proportion of the number of buyer and sellers," and "that which regulates the price... [of goods] is nothing else but their quantity in proportion to their rent." The quantity theory of money forms a special case of this general theory. His idea is based on "money answers all things" (Ecclesiastes) or "rent of money is always sufficient, or more than enough," and "varies very little..." Locke concludes that as far as money is concerned, the demand is exclusively regulated by its quantity, regardless of whether the demand for money is unlimited or constant. He also investigates the determinants of demand and supply. For supply, he explains the value of goods as based on their scarcity and ability to be exchanged and consumed. He explains demand for goods as based on their ability to yield a flow of income. Locke develops an early theory of capitalisation, such as land, which has value because "by its constant production of saleable commodities it brings in a certain yearly income." He considers the demand for money as almost the same as demand for goods or land; it depends on whether money is wanted as medium of exchange. As a medium of exchange, he states that "money is capable by exchange to procure us the necessaries or conveniences of life," and for loanable funds, "it comes to be of the same nature with land by yielding a certain yearly income... or interest."
Monetary thoughts
Locke distinguishes two functions of money, as a "counter" to measure value, and as a "pledge" to lay claim to goods. He believes that silver and gold, as opposed to paper money, are the appropriate currency for international transactions. Silver and gold, he says, are treated to have equal value by all of humanity and can thus be treated as a pledge by anyone, while the value of paper money is only valid under the government which issues it.
Locke argues that a country should seek a favourable balance of trade, lest it fall behind other countries and suffer a loss in its trade. Since the world money stock grows constantly, a country must constantly seek to enlarge its own stock. Locke develops his theory of foreign exchanges, in addition to commodity movements, there are also movements in country stock of money, and movements of capital determine exchange rates. He considers the latter less significant and less volatile than commodity movements. As for a country's money stock, if it is large relative to that of other countries, he says it will cause the country's exchange to rise above par, as an export balance would do.
He also prepares estimates of the cash requirements for different economic groups (landholders, labourers and brokers). In each group he posits that the cash requirements are closely related to the length of the pay period. He argues the brokers&#160;– middlemen&#160;– whose activities enlarge the monetary circuit and whose profits eat into the earnings of labourers and landholders, have a negative influence on both personal and the public economy to which they supposedly contribute.
The self
Locke defines the self as "that conscious thinking thing, (whatever substance, made up of whether spiritual, or material, simple, or compounded, it matters not) which is sensible, or conscious of pleasure and pain, capable of happiness or misery, and so is concerned for itself, as far as that consciousness extends".[40] He does not, however, ignore "substance", writing that "the body too goes to the making the man."[41]
In his Essay, Locke explains the gradual unfolding of this conscious mind. Arguing against both the Augustinian view of man as originally sinful and the Cartesian position, which holds that man innately knows basic logical propositions, Locke posits an "empty" mind, a tabula rasa, which is shaped by experience; sensations and reflections being the two sources of all our ideas.[42]
Locke's Some Thoughts Concerning Education is an outline on how to educate this mind: he expresses the belief that education maketh the man, or, more fundamentally, that the mind is an "empty cabinet", with the statement, "I think I may say that of all the men we meet with, nine parts of ten are what they are, good or evil, useful or not, by their education."[43]
Locke also wrote that "the little and almost insensible impressions on our tender infancies have very important and lasting consequences."[43] He argued that the "associations of ideas" that one makes when young are more important than those made later because they are the foundation of the self: they are, put differently, what first mark the tabula rasa. In his Essay, in which both these concepts are introduced, Locke warns against, for example, letting "a foolish maid" convince a child that "goblins and sprites" are associated with the night for "darkness shall ever afterwards bring with it those frightful ideas, and they shall be so joined, that he can no more bear the one than the other."[44]
"Associationism", as this theory would come to be called, exerted a powerful influence over eighteenth-century thought, particularly educational theory, as nearly every educational writer warned parents not to allow their children to develop negative associations. It also led to the development of psychology and other new disciplines with David Hartley's attempt to discover a biological mechanism for associationism in his Observations on Man (1749).
Religious beliefs
Some scholars have seen Locke's political convictions as deriving from his religious beliefs.[45][46][47] Locke's religious trajectory began in Calvinist trinitarianism, but by the time of the Reflections (1695) Locke was advocating not just Socinian views on tolerance but also Socinian Christology.[48] However Wainwright (1987) notes that in the posthumously published Paraphrase (1707) Locke's interpretation of one verse, Ephesians 1:10, is markedly different from that of Socinians like Biddle, and may indicate that near the end of his life Locke returned nearer to an Arian position, thereby accepting Christ's pre-existence.[49] In fact, historian John Marshall suggests that Locke's view of Christ ended, "somewhere between Socianism and Arianism."[48] Locke was at times not sure about the subject of original sin, so he was accused of Socianism, Arianism, or Deism.[50] But he did not deny the reality of evil. Man was capable of waging unjust wars and committing crimes. Criminals had to be punished, even with the death penalty.[51] With regard to the Bible Locke was very conservative. He retained the doctrine of the verbal inspiration of the Scriptures.[21] The miracles were proofs of the divine nature of the biblical message. Locke was convinced that the entire content of the Bible was in agreement with human reason (The reasonableness of Christianity, 1695).[52][21] Although Locke was an advocate of tolerance, he urged the authorities not to tolerate atheism, because he thought the denial of God's existence would undermine the social order and lead to chaos.[53] That excluded all atheistic varieties of philosophy and all attempts to deduce ethics and natural law from purely secular premises, for example, man's "autonomy or dignity or human flourishing".[54] In Locke's opinion the cosmological argument was valid and proved God's existence. His political thought was based on "a particular set of Protestant Christian assumptions."[54][55] Locke's concept of man started with the belief in creation. We have been "sent into the World by [God's] order, and about his business, [we] are his Property, whose Workmanship [we] are, made to last during his, not one anothers Pleasure."[56] Like the two other very influential natural-law philosophers, Hugo Grotius and Samuel Pufendorf, Locke equated natural law with the biblical revelation, since in their view both had originated in God and could therefore not contradict each other.[57][58] "As a philosopher, Locke was intensely interested in Christian doctrine, and in the Reasonableness he insisted that most men could not hope to understand the detailed requirements of the law of nature without the assistance of the teachings and example of Jesus."[59] Locke derived the fundamental concepts of his political theory from biblical texts, in particular from Genesis 1 and 2 (creation), the Decalogue (Exodus 20), the Golden Rule (Matthew 7:12), the teachings of Jesus (e.g. his doctrine of charity, Matthew 19:19), and the letters of Paul the Apostle.[60] The Decalogue (Ten Commandments) puts a person's life, his or her honourable reputation (i.e. honour and dignity), and property under God's protection. Freedom is another major theme in the Old Testament. For instance, God's actions in liberating the Israelites from Egyptian slavery in the Decalogue's prologue (Exodus 20:2) were the precondition for the following commandments. Moreover, Locke derived basic human equality, including the equality of the sexes ("Adam and Eve") from Genesis 1:26–28, the starting point of the theological doctrine of Imago Dei.[61] To Locke, one of the consequences of the principle of equality was that all humans were created equally free and therefore governments needed the consent of the governed.[62] Only when Locke had derived the fundamental aspects of his concept of man and ethics from the biblical texts – life, equality, private property, etc. –, did he examine as a philosopher which consequences they had in the abovementioned way. Following Locke, the American Declaration of Independence founded human rights on the biblical belief in creation: "All men are created equal, (...) they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights, (...) life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness." Locke's doctrine that governments need the consent of the governed is also central to the Declaration of Independence[citation needed].
List of major works

A Letter Concerning Toleration, 1689&#160;.

(1690) A Second Letter Concerning Toleration
(1692) A Third Letter for Toleration


(1689) Two Treatises of Government
(1690) An Essay Concerning Human Understanding
(1691) Some Considerations on the consequences of the Lowering of Interest and the Raising of the Value of Money
(1693) Some Thoughts Concerning Education
(1695) The Reasonableness of Christianity, as Delivered in the Scriptures

(1695) A Vindication of the Reasonableness of Christianity



Major posthumous manuscripts

(1660) First Tract of Government (or the English Tract)
(c.1662) Second Tract of Government (or the Latin Tract)
(1664) Questions Concerning the Law of Nature (definitive Latin text, with facing accurate English trans. in Robert Horwitz et al., eds., John Locke, Questions Concerning the Law of Nature, Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1990).
(1667) Essay Concerning Toleration
(1706) Of the Conduct of the Understanding
(1707) A paraphrase and notes on the Epistles of St. Paul to the Galatians, 1 and 2 Corinthians, Romans, Ephesians

See also




Liberalism portal




Grand Model for the Province of Carolina
Libertarianism
List of liberal theorists
U.S. Constitution, influences

References
Notes


^ Locke, John. A Letter Concerning Toleration Routledge, New York, 1991. p. 5 (Introduction)
^ Delaney, Tim. The march of unreason: science, democracy, and the new fundamentalism Oxford University Press, New York, 2005. p. 18
^ Godwin, Kenneth et al. School choice tradeoffs: liberty, equity, and diversity University of Texas Press, Austin, 2002. p. 12
^ Becker, Carl Lotus. The Declaration of Independence: A Study in the History of Political Ideas Harcourt, Brace, 1922. p. 27
^ Baird, Forrest E; Kaufmann, Walter (2008), From Plato to Derrida, Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall, pp.&#160;527–29, ISBN&#160;0-13-158591-6&#160;
^ Broad, CD (2000), Ethics And the History of Philosophy, UK: Routledge, ISBN&#160;0-415-22530-2&#160;
^ Henning, Basil Duke (1983-01-01), The House of Commons, 1660–1690 1, Google, ISBN&#160;9780436192746, retrieved 28 August 2012&#160;
^ Laslett 1988, III. Two Treatises of Government and the Revolution of 1688.
^ Rebecca Newberger Goldstein, Betraying Spinoza: The Renegade Jew Who Gave Us Modernity, New York: Schocken Books (2006), pp. 260–61
^ "John Locke", Britannica Online&#160;.
^ Julian Hoppit, A Land of Liberty? England. 1689–1727 (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2000), p. 195.
^ John Kenyon, Revolution Principles. The Politics of Party. 1689–1720 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1977), p. 200.
^ Kenyon, p. 51. Kenyon adds: "Any unbiassed study of the position shows in fact that it was Filmer, not Hobbes, Locke or Sidney, who was the most influential thinker of the age". Kenyon, p. 63.
^ J. R. Milton, 'Locke, John (1632–1704)', Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, Oxford University Press, 2004; online edn, May 2008, accessed 12 Sept 2013.
^ "The Three Greatest Men". Retrieved 13 June 2009. Jefferson identified Bacon, Locke, and Newton as "the three greatest men that have ever lived, without any exception". Their works in the physical and moral sciences were instrumental in Jefferson's education and world view.&#160;
^ Jefferson, Thomas. "The Letters: 1743–1826 Bacon, Locke, and Newton". Retrieved 13 June 2009. Bacon, Locke and Newton, whose pictures I will trouble you to have copied for me: and as I consider them as the three greatest men that have ever lived, without any exception, and as having laid the foundation of those superstructures which have been raised in the Physical &amp; Moral sciences.&#160;
^ "Jefferson called Bacon, Newton, and Locke, who had so indelibly shaped his ideas, "my trinity of the three greatest men the world had ever produced"". Explorer. Monticello. Retrieved 28 August 2012.&#160;
^ Seigel, Jerrold. The Idea of the Self: Thought and Experience in Western Europe since the Seventeenth Century. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press (2005).
^ Taylor, Charles (1989), Sources of the Self: The Making of Modern Identity, Cambridge: Harvard University Press&#160;.
^ McGrath, Alister. 1998. Historical Theology, An Introduction to the History of Christian Thought. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers. p. 214–5.
^ a b c Heussi 1956.
^ Olmstead 1960, p.&#160;18.
^ Stahl, H (1957), "Baptisten", Die Religion in Geschichte und Gegenwart (in German)&#160;, 3. Auflage, Band I, col. 863
^ Olmstead 1960, pp.&#160;102–5.
^ Olmstead 1960, p.&#160;5.
^ Cohen, Martin (2008), Philosophical Tales, Blackwell, p.&#160;101&#160;.
^ Tully, James (2007), An Approach to Political Philosophy: Locke in Contexts, New York: Cambridge University Press, p.&#160;128, ISBN&#160;978-0521436380&#160;
^ Farr, J (1986), "I. 'So Vile and Miserable an Estate': The Problem of Slavery in Locke's Political Thought", Political Theory 14 (2): 263–89, doi:10.1177/0090591786014002005, JSTOR&#160;191463&#160;
^ Farr, J. (2008), "Locke, Natural Law, and New World Slavery", Political Theory 36 (4): 495–522, doi:10.1177/0090591708317899&#160;
^ a b Vaughn, Karen (1978), "John Locke and the Labor Theory of Value" (PDF), Journal of Libertarian Studies 2 (4): 311–326, retrieved 13 August 2011&#160;
^ Locke, John (1690), Second Treatise of Government (10th ed.), Project Gutenberg, retrieved 25 March 2012&#160;
^ Zuckert, Michael (1996), The Natural Rights Republic, Notre Dame University Press, pp.&#160;73–85&#160;
^ Wills, Garry (2002), Inventing America: Jefferson's Declaration of Independence, Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co&#160;
^ Skinner, Quentin, Visions of Politics, Cambridge&#160;.
^ Locke, John (2009), Two Treatises on Government: A Translation Into Modern English, Industrial Systems Research, p.&#160;81, ISBN&#160;978-0-906321-47-8&#160;
^ "John Locke: Inequality is inevitable and necessary" (MS PowerPoint). Department of Philosophy The University of Hong Kong. Retrieved 1 September 2011.&#160;
^ Locke, John. "Second Treatise". The Founders Constitution. §§ 25–51, 123–26. Retrieved 1 September 2011.&#160;
^ Cliff, Cobb; Foldvary, Fred. "John Locke on Property". The School of Cooperative Individualism. Retrieved 14 October 2012.&#160;
^ Locke, John (1691), Some Considerations on the consequences of the Lowering of Interest and the Raising of the Value of Money, Marxists&#160;.
^ Locke 1997, p.&#160;307.
^ Locke 1997, p.&#160;306.
^ The American International Encyclopedia 9, New York: JJ Little Co, 1954&#160;.
^ a b Locke 1996, p.&#160;10.
^ Locke 1997, p.&#160;357.
^ Forster, Greg (2005), John Locke's politics of moral consensus&#160;.
^ Parker, Kim Ian (2004), The biblical politics of John Locke, Canadian Corporation for Studies in Religion&#160;.
^ Locke, John (2002), Nuovo, Victor, ed., Writings on religion, Oxford&#160;.
^ a b Marshall, John (1994), John Locke: resistance, religion and responsibility, Cambridge, p.&#160;426&#160;.
^ Locke 1987, p.&#160;806.
^ Waldron 2002, pp.&#160;27, 223.
^ Waldron 2002, p.&#160;145.
^ Henrich, D (1960), "Locke, John", Die Religion in Geschichte und Gegenwart (in German)&#160;, 3. Auflage, Band IV, Spalte 426
^ Waldron 2002, pp.&#160;217 ff.
^ a b Waldron 2002, p.&#160;13.
^ Dunn, John (1969), The Political Thought of John Locke: A Historical Account of the Argument of the 'Two Treatises of Government', Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, p.&#160;99, [The Two Treatises of Government are] saturated with Christian assumptions.&#160;.
^ Waldron 2002, pp.&#160;142.
^ Elze, M (1958), "Grotius, Hugo", Die Religion in Geschichte und Gegenwart (in German)&#160;, 3. Auflage, Band II, col. 1885–1886
^ Hohlwein, H (1961), "Pufendorf, Samuel Freiherr von", Die Religion in Geschichte und Gegenwart (in German)&#160;, 3. Auflage, Band V, col. 721
^ Waldron 2002, p.&#160;12.
^ Waldron 2002, pp.&#160;22–43, 45–46, 101, 153–58, 195, 197.
^ Waldron 2002, pp.&#160;21–43.
^ Waldron 2002, p.&#160;136.


Citations

Heussi, Karl (1956), Kompendium der Kirchengeschichte (in German), Tübingen, DE&#160;, 11. Auflage, Seite 398.
Laslett, Peter (1988), Introduction, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press&#160; to Locke, John, Two Treatises of Government&#160;.
Locke, John (1996), Grant, Ruth W; Tarcov, Nathan, eds., Some Thoughts Concerning Education and of the Conduct of the Understanding, Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Co, p.&#160;10&#160;.
Locke, John (1997), Woolhouse, Roger, ed., An Essay Concerning Human Understanding, New York: Penguin Books&#160;.
Olmstead, Clifton E (1960), History of Religion in the United States, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall&#160;.
Waldron, Jeremy (2002), God, Locke, and Equality: Christian Foundations in Locke's Political Thought, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, ISBN&#160;978-0-521-89057-1&#160;.

Sources


Ashcraft, Richard, 1986. Revolutionary Politics &amp; Locke's Two Treatises of Government. Princeton: Princeton University Press. Discusses the relationship between Locke's philosophy and his political activities.
Ayers, Michael, 1991. Locke. Epistemology &amp; Ontology Routledge (the standard work on Locke's Essay Concerning Human Understanding.)
Bailyn, Bernard, 1992 (1967). The Ideological Origins of the American Revolution. Harvard Uni. Press. Discusses the influence of Locke and other thinkers upon the American Revolution and on subsequent American political thought.
Cohen, Gerald, 1995. 'Marx and Locke on Land and Labour', in his Self-Ownership, Freedom and Equality, Oxford University Press.
Cox, Richard, Locke on War and Peace, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1960. A discussion of Locke's theory of international relations.
Chappell, Vere, ed., 1994. The Cambridge Companion to Locke. Cambridge U.P. excerpt and text search
Dunn, John, 1984. Locke. Oxford Uni. Press. A succinct introduction.
———, 1969. The Political Thought of John Locke: An Historical Account of the Argument of the "Two Treatises of Government". Cambridge Uni. Press. Introduced the interpretation which emphasises the theological element in Locke's political thought.
Hudson, Nicholas, "John Locke and the Tradition of Nominalism," in: Nominalism and Literary Discourse, ed. Hugo Keiper, Christoph Bode, and Richard Utz (Amsterdam: Rodopi, 1997), pp.&#160;283–99.
Mack, Eric (2008). "Locke, John (1632–1704)". In Hamowy, Ronald. The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE; Cato Institute. pp.&#160;305–7. ISBN&#160;978-1-4129-6580-4. LCCN&#160;2008009151. OCLC&#160;750831024.&#160;
Macpherson. CB The Political Theory of Possessive Individualism: Hobbes to Locke (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1962). Establishes the deep affinity from Hobbes to Harrington, the Levellers, and Locke through to nineteenth-century utilitarianism.
Moseley, Alexander (2007), John Locke: Continuum Library of Educational Thought, Continuum, ISBN&#160;0-8264-8405-0&#160;
Pangle, Thomas, The Spirit of Modern Republicanism: The Moral Vision of the American Founders and the Philosophy of Locke (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1988; paperback ed., 1990), 334 pages. Challenges Dunn's, Tully's, Yolton's, and other conventional readings.
Robinson, Dave; Groves, Judy (2003), Introducing Political Philosophy, Icon Books, ISBN&#160;1-84046-450-X&#160;
Rousseau, George S. (2004), Nervous Acts: Essays on Literature, Culture and Sensibility, Palgrave Macmillan, ISBN&#160;1-4039-3453-3&#160;
Strauss, Leo. Natural Right and History, chap. 5B (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1953). Argues from a non-Marxist point of view for a deep affinity between Hobbes and Locke.
Strauss, Leo (1958), "Critical Note: Locke's Doctrine of Natural Law", The American Political Science Review 52 (2): 490–501, doi:10.2307/1952329, JSTOR&#160;1952329&#160; A critique of W. von Leyden's edition of Locke's unpublished writings on natural law.
Tully, James, 1980. A Discourse on Property&#160;: John Locke and his Adversaries. Cambridge Uni. Press
Waldron, Jeremy, 2002. God, Locke and Equality. Cambridge Uni. Press.
Yolton, John W., ed., 1969. John Locke: Problems and Perspectives. Cambridge Uni. Press.
Yolton, John W., ed., 1993. A Locke Dictionary. Oxford: Blackwell.
Zuckert, Michael, Launching Liberalism: On Lockean Political Philosophy. Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas.
Locke Studies, appearing annually from 2001, formerly The Locke Newsletter (1970–2000), publishes scholarly work on John Locke.


External links

Listen to this article (info/dl)


Sorry, your browser either has JavaScript disabled or does not have any supported player.
You can download the clip or download a player to play the clip in your browser.







This audio file was created from a revision of the "John Locke" article dated 2012-09-16, and does not reflect subsequent edits to the article. (Audio help)
More spoken articles




Wikisource has original works written by or about:
John Locke





Wikiquote has quotations related to: John Locke


Works

The Clarendon Edition of the Works of John Locke
Of the Conduct of the Understanding
John Locke eText Archive
Locke's works from Online Library of Liberty
Works by John Locke at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about John Locke at Internet Archive
Works by John Locke at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
Work by John Locke at Online Books
The Works of John Locke

1823 Edition, 10 Volumes on PDF files, and additional resources
1824 Edition, 9 volumes in multiple formats


John Locke Manuscripts
Updated versions of Essay Concerning Human Understanding, Second Treatise of Government, Letter on Toleration and Conduct of the Understanding, edited by Jonathan Bennett
The Online Library of Liberty Two Treatises of Government, ed. Thomas Hollis (A. Millar et al., 1764)

Resources

John Locke entry by William Uzgalis in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
Locke on Freedom entry by Samuel Rickless in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
John Locke entry in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy
John Locke: Political Philosophy entry in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy
John Locke Bibliography
Locke Studies An Annual Journal of Locke Research
Hewett, Caspar, John Locke's Theory of Knowledge, UK: The great debate&#160;.
The Digital Locke Project, NL&#160;.
Portraits of Locke, UK: NPG&#160;.
Huyler, Jerome, Was Locke a Liberal? (PDF), Independent&#160;, a complex and positive answer.
Timeline of the Life and Work of John Locke at The Online Library of Liberty
Vaughn, Karen, Locke on Property (bibliographical essay), The Online Library of Liberty, Liberty fund&#160;.
Constitutional Government: Locke's Second Treatise (1–5) on YouTube Transcript by Professor Steven Smith
"John Locke (1632–1704)", The Concise Encyclopedia of Economics, Library of Economics and Liberty (2nd ed.) (Liberty Fund), 2008&#160;






&#160;
Articles and topics related to John Locke
















v
t
e


The Age of Enlightenment










&#160;
Topics













Atheism
Capitalism
Civil liberties
Counter-Enlightenment
Critical thinking
Deism
Democracy
Empiricism
Encyclopédistes
Enlightened absolutism
Free markets
Haskalah
Humanism
Liberalism
Natural philosophy
Rationality
Reason
Sapere aude
Science
Socialism
Weimar Classicism


















&#160;
Thinkers










America



Benjamin Franklin
Thomas Jefferson
James Madison
George Mason
Thomas Paine








England



Edward Gibbon
Francis Bacon
John Locke
Isaac Newton
Mary Wollstonecraft
Robert Hooke
Samuel Johnson








France



Georges-Louis Leclerc, Comte de Buffon
Étienne Bonnot de Condillac
Marquis de Condorcet
Jean le Rond d'Alembert
Baron d'Holbach
Denis Diderot
Claude Adrien Helvétius
Montesquieu
François Quesnay
Jean-Jacques Rousseau
Marquis de Sade
Voltaire








Germany



Johann Wolfgang von Goethe
Johann Gottfried von Herder
Immanuel Kant
Gotthold Ephraim Lessing
Moses Mendelssohn
Friedrich Schiller








Ireland



Edmund Burke
Robert Boyle








Italy



Cesare Beccaria
Gaetano Filangieri
Antonio Genovesi
Pietro Verri








Poland



Tadeusz Czacki
Hugo Kołłątaj
Stanisław Konarski
Ignacy Krasicki
Julian Ursyn Niemcewicz
Stanisław August Poniatowski
Stanisław Staszic
Jędrzej Śniadecki
Józef Wybicki
Andrzej Stanisław Załuski
Józef Andrzej Załuski








Scotland



Joseph Black
James Boswell
Adam Ferguson
David Hume
Francis Hutcheson
Thomas Reid
Adam Smith






















v
t
e


Metaphysics






Metaphysicians



Parmenides
Plato
Aristotle
Plotinus
Duns Scotus
Thomas Aquinas
Francisco Suárez
Nicolas Malebranche
René Descartes
John Locke
David Hume
Thomas Reid
Immanuel Kant
Isaac Newton
Arthur Schopenhauer
Baruch Spinoza
Georg W. F. Hegel
George Berkeley
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz
Henri Bergson
Friedrich Nietzsche
Charles Sanders Peirce
Joseph Maréchal
Ludwig Wittgenstein
Martin Heidegger
Alfred N. Whitehead
Bertrand Russell
Dorothy Emmet
G. E. Moore
Jean-Paul Sartre
Gilbert Ryle
Hilary Putnam
P. F. Strawson
R. G. Collingwood
Adolph Stöhr
Rudolf Carnap
Saul Kripke
Willard V. O. Quine
G. E. M. Anscombe
Donald Davidson
Michael Dummett
David Malet Armstrong
David Lewis
Alvin Plantinga
Peter van Inwagen
Derek Parfit
more ...








Theories



Abstract object theory
Action theory
Anti-realism
Determinism
Dualism
Enactivism
Essentialism
Existentialism
Free will
Idealism
Libertarianism
Liberty
Materialism
Meaning of life
Monism
Naturalism
Nihilism
Phenomenalism
Realism
Physicalism
Pirsig's metaphysics of Quality
Platonic idealism
Relativism
Scientific realism
Solipsism
Subjectivism
Substance theory
Type theory








Concepts



Abstract object
Anima mundi
Being
Category of being
Causality
Choice
Cogito ergo sum
Concept
Embodied cognition
Entity
Essence
Existence
Experience
Hypostatic abstraction
Idea
Identity
Identity and change
Information
Insight
Intelligence
Intention
Linguistic modality
Matter
Meaning
Memetics
Mental representation
Mind
Motion
Necessity
Notion
Object
Pattern
Perception
Physical body
Principle
Property
Qualia
Quality
Reality
Soul
Subject
Substantial form
Thought
Time
Truth
Type–token distinction
Universal
Unobservable
Value
more ...








Related topics



Axiology
Cosmology
Epistemology
Interpretations of quantum mechanics
Meta-
Ontology
Philosophy of mind
Philosophy of psychology
Philosophy of self
Philosophy of space and time
Teleology
Theoretical physics











 Category
 Portal
 WikiProject
















v
t
e


Epistemology






Epistemologists



Thomas Aquinas
Augustine of Hippo
William Alston
Robert Audi
A. J. Ayer
George Berkeley
Laurence BonJour
René Descartes
Edmund Gettier
Alvin Goldman
Nelson Goodman
Paul Grice
David Hume
Immanuel Kant
Søren Kierkegaard
Saul Kripke
David Lewis
John Locke
G. E. Moore
Robert Nozick
Alvin Plantinga
Plato
Hilary Putnam
Thomas Reid
Gilbert Ryle
P. F. Strawson
W.V.O. Quine
Bertrand Russell
Timothy Williamson
Ludwig Wittgenstein
Nicholas Wolterstorff
Vienna Circle








Theories



Coherentism
Constructivist epistemology
Contextualism
Determinism
Empiricism
Evolutionary epistemology
Fallibilism
Feminist epistemology
Fideism
Foundationalism
Genetic epistemology
Holism
Infinitism
Innatism
Internalism and externalism
Naïve realism
Naturalized epistemology
Phenomenalism
Positivism
Reductionism
Reliabilism
Representative realism
Rationalism
Skepticism
Theory of Forms
Transcendental idealism
Uniformitarianism








Concepts



A priori knowledge
Analysis
Analytic–synthetic distinction
Belief
Causality
Common sense
Descriptive knowledge
Exploratory thought
Gettier problem
Justification
Knowledge
Induction
Objectivity
Problem of induction
Problem of other minds
Perception
Proposition
Regress argument
Simplicity
Speculative reason
Truth
more...








Related articles



Outline of epistemology
Alethiology
Faith and rationality
Formal epistemology
Meta-epistemology
Philosophy of perception
Philosophy of science
Social epistemology











Portal
Category
Task Force
Stubs
Discussion
















v
t
e


Property






Types



Common property
Common land
Community
Croft
Intangible
Intellectual

indigenous


Personal
Private
Public
State

Crown property
Crown land


Tangible

immovable
real










Commons



Common-pool resource
Digital
Global
Information
Knowledge
Communal land








Theory



Bundle of rights
Comedy of the commons
Commodity

fictitious commodities


Common good

economics term


Excludability
First possession

appropriation
homestead principle


Free rider problem
Game theory
Georgism
Gift economy
Labor theory of property
Law of rent

rent-seeking


Legal plunder
Natural rights
Ownership

common
customary
self
state


Property rights

primogeniture
usufruct
women's


Right to property
Rivalry
Tragedy of the commons

anticommons










Applications







Acequia (watercourse)
Ejido (agrarian land)
Forest types
Inheritance
Land tenure
Property law

alienation
easement
restraint on alienation
real estate
title










Rights



Air
Fishing
Forest-dwelling (India)
Freedom to roam
Grazing

pannage


Hunting
Land

aboriginal
indigenous
squatting


Littoral
Mineral

Bergregal


Right of way
Water

prior-appropriation
riparian













Disposession/
redistribution



Bioprospecting
Collectivization
Eminent domain
Enclosure
Eviction
Expropriation
Farhud
Forced migration

population transfer


Illegal fishing
Illegal logging
Land reform
Legal plunder
Piracy
Poaching
Primitive accumulation
Privatization
Regulatory taking
Slavery

bride-buying
human trafficking
wage
wife selling


Tax

inheritance
poll
progressive
property


Theft








Scholars
(key work)



Frédéric Bastiat
Ronald Coase
Henry George
Garrett Hardin
David Harvey
John Locke

Two Treatises of Government


Karl Marx
Marcel Mauss

The Gift


John Stuart Mill
Elinor Ostrom
Karl Polanyi

The Great Transformation


Pierre-Joseph Proudhon

What Is Property?


David Ricardo
Jean-Jacques Rousseau

The Social Contract


Adam Smith

The Wealth of Nations













 Categories: Property
Property law

by country


















v
t
e


Social and political philosophy






Philosophers



Alinsky
Aristotle
Augustine
Aurobindo
Aquinas
Averroes
Azurmendi
Badiou
Bakunin
Baudrillard
Benoist
Bentham
Berlin
Bonald
Bosanquet
Burke
Camus
Chanakya
Chomsky
Cicero
Comte
Confucius
Debord
Đilas
Durkheim
Engels
Foucault
Fourier
Gandhi
Gehlen
Gentile
Al-Ghazali
Gramsci
Grotius
Habermas
Han Fei
Hobbes
Hume
Kant
Kirk
Kropotkin
Le Bon
Le Play
Leibniz
Locke
Luxemburg
Machiavelli
Maistre
Malebranche
Marcuse
Maritain
Marsilius
Marx
Mencius
Michels
Mill
Montesquieu
Möser
Mozi
Muhammad
Negri
Nietzsche
Nozick
Oakeshott
Ortega
Pareto
Plamenatz
Plato
Popper
Rand
Rawls
Renan
Rousseau
Royce
Russell
Santayana
Sarkar
Sartre
Schmitt
Searle
Shang
Smith
Sombart
Spann
Spencer
Spirito
Stirner
Strauss
Taine
Taylor
Thoreau
Vivekananda
Walzer
Žižek








Social theories



Vaisheshika
Anarchism
Authoritarianism
Collectivism
Communism
Communitarianism
Conflict theories
Confucianism
Consensus theory
Conservatism
Contractualism
Culturalism
Gandhism
Individualism
Legalism
Liberalism
Libertarianism
Mohism
National liberalism
Social constructionism
Social constructivism
Social Darwinism
Social determinism
Socialism
Utilitarianism








Social concepts



Civil disobedience
Democracy
Four occupations
Justice
Law
Mandate of Heaven
Peace
Property
Revolution
Rights
Social contract
Society
War
more...








Related articles



Jurisprudence
Philosophy and economics
Philosophy of education
Philosophy of history
Philosophy of love
Philosophy of sex
Philosophy of social science
Social epistemology











Category
Portal
Task Force




















Authority control



WorldCat
VIAF: 34459614
LCCN: n79090225
ISNI: 0000 0001 2127 2329
GND: 118573748
SELIBR: 239482
SUDOC: 027272494
BNF: cb11913201p (data)
BIBSYS: x90100571
ULAN: 500222209
NLA: 35309954
NDL: 00447915
NKC: jn19990005145
ICCU: IT\ICCU\CFIV\017247
BNE: XX981831















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=John_Locke&amp;oldid=691047942"					
				Categories: John LockeAlumni of Christ Church, OxfordChristian philosophersBritish classical liberalsEarly modern philosophersEmpiricistsEnglish AnglicansEnglish Christian theologiansEnglish political philosophersEnglish political theoristsEnlightenment philosophersEpistemologistsFellows of Christ Church, OxfordFellows of the Royal SocietyMetaphysiciansPeople educated at Westminster School, LondonPeople from WringtonPeople of the Rye House PlotPhilosophers of languagePhilosophers of law1632 births1704 deaths17th-century English medical doctors17th-century English writers17th-century philosophersHidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de)Wikipedia semi-protected pagesUse British English from August 2011Use dmy dates from August 2011Biography with signatureArticles with hCardsAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from November 2015Spoken articlesArticles with hAudio microformatsAC with 14 elementsWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with BIBSYS identifiersWikipedia articles with ULAN identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiersWikipedia articles with SBN identifiers				
							
		
		
			