


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Library of Congress Control Number
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				For information on using this system on Wikipedia, see Wikipedia:Authority control#LCCN.
The Library of Congress Control Number (LCCN) is a serially based system of numbering cataloging records in the Library of Congress in the United States. It has nothing to do with the contents of any book, and should not be confused with Library of Congress Classification.



Contents


1 History
2 Format
3 See also
4 References
5 External links



History[edit]
The LCCN numbering system has been in use since 1898, at which time the acronym LCCN originally stood for Library of Congress Card Number. It has also been called the Library of Congress Catalog Card Number, among other names. The Library of Congress prepared cards of bibliographic information for their library catalog and would sell duplicate sets of the cards to other libraries for use in their catalogs. This is known as centralized cataloging. Each set of cards was given a serial number to help identify it.
Although most of the bibliographic information is now electronically created, stored and shared with other libraries, there is still a need to identify each unique record, and the LCCN continues to perform that function.
Librarians all over the world use this unique identifier in the process of cataloging most books which have been published in the United States. It helps them reach the correct cataloging data (known as a cataloging record), which the Library of Congress and third parties make available on the Web and through other media.
In February 2008, the Library of Congress created the LCCN Permalink service, providing a stable URL for all Library of Congress Control Numbers.[1]
Format[edit]
In its most elementary form the number includes a year and a serial number. The year has two digits for 1898 to 2000, and four digits beginning in 2001. The three ambiguous years (1898, 1899, and 1900) are distinguished by the size of the serial number. There are also some peculiarities in numbers beginning with a "7" because of an unsuccessful experiment applied between 1969 and 1972.
Serial numbers are six digits long and should include leading zeros. The hyphen that is often seen separating the year and serial number is optional. More recently, the Library of Congress has instructed publishers not to include a hyphen.
See also[edit]

Authority control
Virtual International Authority File (VIAF)
CODEN
Integrated Authority File (GND; Gemeinsame Normdatei)
International Standard Book Number (ISBN)

References[edit]


^ "Library of Congress Update for 2008 ALA Annual Conference: January–May, 2008". Retrieved 2008-09-29.&#160;


External links[edit]



Wikidata has a property, P1144, for LCOC (see uses)





Wikidata has a property, P244, for LCAuth (see uses)



The Library of Congress Name Authority File (NAF) - Search by Name
Structure of the LC Control Number
Traditional and normalized forms of the LCCN
LCCN Permalink FAQs
Examples of Library of Congress Control Numbers (LCCN) from Penn State University Libraries





This Library of Congress article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.


v
t
e












					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Library_of_Congress_Control_Number&amp;oldid=688529873"					
				Categories: Library cataloging and classificationLibrary of CongressIdentifiersUnited States Library of Congress stubsHidden categories: All stub articles				
							
		
		
			