


		
		
		
			

							
						

			List of ancient Milesians
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								  (Redirected from Milesians (Greek))
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				For other uses, see Milesians (disambiguation).





This article does not cite any references (sources). Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2009)


The Milesians of Hellenic (Greek) civilization were the inhabitants of Miletus, a city in the Anatolia province of modern-day Turkey, near the coast of the Mediterranean Sea and at the mouth of the Meander River. Settlers from Crete moved to Miletus sometime in 16th century BC. By the 6th century BC, Miletus had become a maritime empire, and the Milesians spread out across Anatolia and even as far as the Crimea, Olbia, Ukraine and Eire founding new colonies,
Noted Milesians:

Miletus, the mythological founder of the city
Cadmus of Miletus, a historian, perhaps mythical
Arctinus of Miletus, 8th century BC Greek epic poet
Thales (c. 624–c. 546 BC), considered by many the "first" Greek natural philosopher; "the father of science"
Anaximander (c. 610–c. 546 BC), philosopher; pupil of Thales
Anaximenes of Miletus (c. 585–c. 528 BC), philosopher; friend or pupil of Anaximander
Hecataeus of Miletus (c. 550–c. 476 BC), historian
Hippodamus of Miletus (498–408 BC), Greek architect, urban planner, physician, mathematician, meteorologist and philosopher, considered the father of urban planning
Aspasia (c. 470-c. 400 BC), wife or courtesan of Pericles
Timotheus of Miletus (c. 446–357 BC), Greek musician and poet
Theopompus, pirate captain who served under Lysander in the Battle of Aegospotami (405 BC)
Eubulides (fl. 4th century BC), philosopher; formulated the "liar paradox"
Aristides of Miletus (fl. 2nd century BC), writer of shameless and amusing Milesian tales
Alexander Polyhistor or Alexander of Miletus (fl. first half of the 1st century BC), Greek historian and geographer
Aeschines of Miletus (fl. 1st century BC), Greek orator, a contemporary of Cicero
Hesychius of Miletus or Hesychius Illustrius, 6th century chronicler and biographer
Isidore of Miletus, 6th century Byzantine Greek architect

Milesian tyrants:

Aristagoras (fl. late 6th century-early 5th century BC)
Histiaeus (died 493 BC)
Timarchus of Miletus (fl. 3rd century BC)








					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_ancient_Milesians&amp;oldid=645555096"					
				Categories: Ancient MilesiansAncient Greece-related listsHidden categories: Articles lacking sources from December 2009All articles lacking sources				
							
		
		
			