


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Ludwig Wittgenstein
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				"Wittgenstein" redirects here. For other uses, see Wittgenstein (disambiguation).


Ludwig Wittgenstein



Photographed by Ben Richards, Swansea, Wales, 1947



Born
Ludwig Josef Johann Wittgenstein
(1889-04-26)26 April 1889
Vienna, Austria-Hungary


Died
29 April 1951(1951-04-29) (aged&#160;62)
Cambridge, England


Website
The Wittgenstein Archives at the University of Bergen
The Cambridge Wittgenstein Archive





Era
20th century philosophy


School
Analytic philosophy



Main interests

Logic, Metaphysics, Philosophy of language, Philosophy of mathematics, Philosophy of mind, Epistemology



Notable ideas

Picture theory of language
Truth functions
States of affairs
Logical necessity
Meaning is use
Language-games
Private language argument
Family resemblance
Rule following
Forms of life
Wittgensteinian fideism
Anti-realism
Wittgenstein's philosophy of mathematics
Ordinary language philosophy
Ideal language analysis
Meaning scepticism
Memory scepticism
Semantic externalism
Quietism
Critique of set theory[1]




Influences


Gottlob Frege, Johann Wolfgang Goethe, Søren Kierkegaard, G. E. Moore, Oswald Spengler, Ludwig Boltzmann, Karl Kraus, Adolf Loos, Piero Sraffa, Otto Weininger, Bertrand Russell, Arthur Schopenhauer, Baruch Spinoza, Leo Tolstoy, Heinrich Hertz,[2] Hermann von Helmholtz[3]








Influenced


Bertrand Russell, G.E. Moore, Frank P. Ramsey, Vienna Circle, Rudolf Carnap, Alan Turing, G.E.M. Anscombe, Peter Geach, Anthony Kenny, Barry Stroud, Gilbert Ryle, Saul Kripke, John Searle, John McDowell, Hans Sluga, Peter Hacker, Ian Hacking, Stephen Toulmin, Hannah Ginsborg, Quentin Skinner, Jean-François Lyotard, Richard Rorty, Jules Vuillemin, Jacques Bouveresse






Signature







Part of a series on


Ludwig Wittgenstein






Wittgenstein (second from right), Summer 1920



Early philosophy





Picture theory of language
Truth tables
Truth conditions
Truth functions
State of affairs
Logical necessity





Later philosophy




"Meaning is use"
Language-game
Private language argument
Family resemblance
Ideal language analysis
Rule following
Form of life
Anti-skepticism
Philosophy of mathematics




Movements




Analytic philosophy
Linguistic turn
Ideal language philosophy
Logical atomism
Logical positivism
Ordinary language philosophy
Fideism
Quietism




Works




Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus
Some Remarks on Logical Form
Blue and Brown Books
Philosophical Remarks
Philosophical Investigations
On Certainty
Culture and Value
Remarks on Frazer's Golden Bough

Remarks on the
Foundations of Mathematics

Zettel
Remarks on Colour

Lectures and Conversations on
Aesthetics, Psychology
and Religious Belief





People





Bertrand Russell
G. E. Moore
John Maynard Keynes
Paul Engelmann
Friedrich Waismann
Moritz Schlick
Rudolf Carnap
Francis Skinner
Frank Ramsey
Vienna Circle
G. E. M. Anscombe
Norman Malcolm
Rush Rhees
Peter Winch
Peter Geach
G. H. von Wright





Interpreters





Barry Stroud
Cora Diamond
Peter Hacker
Terry Eagleton
Stephen Toulmin
Saul Kripke
Anthony Kenny
Crispin Wright
Warren Goldfarb
James F. Conant
Gordon Baker
Stanley Cavell
D. Z. Phillips
Colin McGinn
Jaakko Hintikka
Oswald Hanfling
A. C. Grayling
Rupert Read
Michael Williams





Other topics




Cambridge Apostles

Cambridge University
Moral Sciences Club

Stonborough House







v
t
e





Ludwig Josef Johann Wittgenstein (/ˈvɪtɡənˌstaɪn/;[4] German: [ˈvɪtgənˌʃtaɪn]; 26 April 1889 – 29 April 1951) was an Austrian-British philosopher who worked primarily in logic, the philosophy of mathematics, the philosophy of mind, and the philosophy of language.[5] From 1929 to 1947, Wittgenstein taught at the University of Cambridge.[6] During his lifetime he published just one slim book, the 75-page Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (1921), one article, one book review and a children's dictionary.[7] His voluminous manuscripts were edited and published posthumously. Philosophical Investigations appeared as a book in 1953, and by the end of the century it was considered an important modern classic.[8] His teacher Bertrand Russell described Wittgenstein as "the most perfect example I have ever known of genius as traditionally conceived; passionate, profound, intense, and dominating."[9]
Born in Vienna into one of Europe's richest families, he inherited a large fortune from his father in 1913. He gave some considerable sums to poor artists. In a period of severe personal depression after the first World War, he then gave away his entire fortune to his brothers and sisters.[10][11] Three of his brothers committed suicide, with Wittgenstein contemplating it too.[12] He left academia several times—serving as an officer on the front line during World War I, where he was decorated a number of times for his courage; teaching in schools in remote Austrian villages where he encountered controversy for hitting children when they made mistakes in mathematics; and working as a hospital porter during World War II in London where he told patients not to take the drugs they were prescribed while largely managing to keep secret the fact that he was one of the world's most famous philosophers.[13] He described philosophy, however, as "the only work that gives me real satisfaction."[14]
His philosophy is often divided into an early period, exemplified by the Tractatus, and a later period, articulated in the Philosophical Investigations. The early Wittgenstein was concerned with the logical relationship between propositions and the world and believed that by providing an account of the logic underlying this relationship, he had solved all philosophical problems. The later Wittgenstein rejected many of the assumptions of the Tractatus, arguing that the meaning of words is best understood as their use within a given language-game.[15]
Wittgenstein's influence has been felt in nearly every field of the humanities and social sciences, yet there are diverging interpretations of his thought. In the words of his friend and colleague Georg Henrik von Wright:

He was of the opinion... that his ideas were generally misunderstood and distorted even by those who professed to be his disciples. He doubted he would be better understood in the future. He once said he felt as though he was writing for people who would think in a different way, breathe a different air of life, from that of present-day men.[16]




Contents


1 Background

1.1 The Wittgensteins
1.2 Early life
1.3 Family temperament; brothers' suicides


2 1903–1906: Realschule in Linz

2.1 Realschule in Linz
2.2 Faith
2.3 Influence of Otto Weininger
2.4 Jewish background and Hitler


3 1906–1913: University

3.1 Engineering at Berlin and Manchester
3.2 Arrival at Cambridge
3.3 Cambridge Moral Sciences Club and Apostles
3.4 Sexual orientation and relationship with David Pinsent


4 1913–1920: World War I and the Tractatus

4.1 Work on Logik
4.2 Military service
4.3 Completion of the Tractatus


5 1920–1928: Teaching, the Tractatus, Haus Wittgenstein

5.1 Teacher training in Vienna
5.2 Teaching posts in Austria
5.3 Publication of the Tractatus
5.4 Visit from Frank Ramsey, Puchberg
5.5 Haidbauer incident, Otterthal
5.6 The Vienna Circle
5.7 Haus Wittgenstein


6 1929–1941: Fellowship at Cambridge

6.1 PhD and fellowship
6.2 Anschluss
6.3 Professor of philosophy
6.4 World War II and Guy's Hospital


7 1947–1951: Final years

7.1 Death


8 1953: Publication of the Philosophical Investigations
9 Legacy

9.1 Interpreters


10 Cultural references
11 Works
12 See also
13 Notes
14 References
15 Further reading
16 External links



Background[edit]
The Wittgensteins[edit]
Further information: Karl Wittgenstein




Karl Wittgenstein was one of the richest men in Europe.[17]


According to a family tree prepared in Jerusalem after World War II, Wittgenstein's paternal great-grandfather was Moses Meier, a Jewish land agent who lived with his wife, Brendel Simon, in Bad Laasphe in the Principality of Wittgenstein, Westphalia.[18] In July 1808, Napoleon issued a decree that everyone, including Jews, must adopt an inheritable family surname, and so Meier's son, also Moses, took the name of his employers, the Sayn-Wittgensteins, and became Moses Meier Wittgenstein.[19] His son, Hermann Christian Wittgenstein—who took the middle name "Christian" to distance himself from his Jewish background—married Fanny Figdor, also Jewish, who converted to Protestantism just before they married, and the couple founded a successful business trading in wool in Leipzig.[20] Ludwig's grandmother Fanny was a first cousin of the famous violinist Joseph Joachim.[21]
They had 11 children—among them Wittgenstein's father. Karl Otto Clemens Wittgenstein (1847–1913) became an industrial tycoon, and by the late 1880s was one of the richest men in Europe, with an effective monopoly on Austria's steel cartel.[17][22] Thanks to Karl, the Wittgensteins became the second wealthiest family in Austria-Hungary, behind only the Rothschilds.[22] As a result of his decision in 1898 to invest substantially in the Netherlands and in Switzerland as well as overseas, particularly in the US, the family was to an extent shielded from the hyperinflation that hit Austria in 1922.[23] However, their wealth diminished due to post-1918 hyperinflation and subsequently during the Great Depression, although even as late as 1938 they owned 13 mansions in Vienna alone.[24]
Early life[edit]
See also: Paul Wittgenstein




Ludwig's sister Margaret, painted by Gustav Klimt for her wedding portrait in 1905


Wittgenstein's mother was Leopoldine Maria Josefa Kalmus, known among friends as Poldi. Her father was a Bohemian Jew and her mother was Austrian-Slovene Catholic—she was Wittgenstein's maternal grandmother and only non-Jewish grandparent, whose ancestry was Austrian, and so by Jewish law Wittgenstein was not Jewish.[25][26][27][28] She was an aunt of the Nobel Prize laureate Friedrich Hayek on her maternal side. Wittgenstein was born at 8:30 pm on 26 April 1889 in the so-called "Wittgenstein Palace" at Alleegasse 16, now the Argentinierstrasse, near the Karlskirche.[29] Karl and Poldi had nine children in all. There were four girls: Hermine, Margaret (Gretl), Helene, and a fourth daughter Dora who died as a baby; and five boys: Johannes (Hans), Kurt, Rudolf (Rudi), Paul—who became a concert pianist despite losing an arm in World War I—and Ludwig, who was the youngest of the family.[30]
The children were baptized as Catholics, received formal Catholic instruction, and raised in an exceptionally intense environment.[31] The family was at the center of Vienna's cultural life; Bruno Walter described the life at the Wittgensteins' palace as an "all-pervading atmosphere of humanity and culture."[32] Karl was a leading patron of the arts, commissioning works by Auguste Rodin and financing the city's exhibition hall and art gallery, the Secession Building. Gustav Klimt painted Wittgenstein's sister for her wedding portrait, and Johannes Brahms and Gustav Mahler gave regular concerts in the family's numerous music rooms.[32][33]
For Wittgenstein, who highly valued precision and discipline, contemporary music was never considered acceptable at all. "Music," he said to his friend Drury in 1930, "came to a full stop with Brahms; and even in Brahms I can begin to hear the noise of machinery."[34] Wittgenstein himself had absolute pitch,[35] and his devotion to music remained vitally important to him throughout his life: he made frequent use of musical examples and metaphors in his philosophical writings, and was unusually adept at whistling lengthy and detailed musical passages.[36] He also learnt to play the clarinet in his thirties.[37] A fragment of music (three bars), composed by Wittgenstein, was discovered in one of his 1931 notebooks, by Dr Michael Nedo, Director of the Wittgenstein Institute in Cambridge.[38]
Family temperament; brothers' suicides[edit]




From left, Helene, Rudi, Hermine, Ludwig (the baby), Gretl, Paul, Hans, and Kurt, around 1890


Ray Monk writes that Karl's aim was to turn his sons into captains of industry; they were not sent to school lest they acquire bad habits, but were educated at home to prepare them for work in Karl's industrial empire.[39] Three of the five brothers would later commit suicide.[40] Psychiatrist Michael Fitzgerald argues that Karl was a harsh perfectionist who lacked empathy, and that Wittgenstein's mother was anxious and insecure, unable to stand up to her husband.[41] Johannes Brahms said of the family, whom he visited regularly: "They seemed to act towards one another as if they were at court."[22] The family appeared to have a strong streak of depression running through it. Anthony Gottlieb tells a story about Paul practicing on one of the seven grand pianos in the Wittgensteins' main family mansion, when he suddenly shouted at Ludwig in the next room: "I cannot play when you are in the house, as I feel your scepticism seeping towards me from under the door!"[42]




Ludwig (bottom-right), Paul, and their sisters, late 1890s


The family Palais housed seven grand pianos[43] and each of the siblings pursued music "with an enthusiasm that, at times, bordered on the pathological."[44] The eldest brother, Hans, was hailed as a musical prodigy. At the age of four, writes Alexander Waugh, Hans could identify the Doppler effect in a passing siren as a quarter-tone drop in pitch, and at five started crying "Wrong! Wrong!" when two brass bands in a carnival played the same tune in different keys. But he died in mysterious circumstances in May 1902, when he ran away to America and disappeared from a boat in Chesapeake Bay, most likely having committed suicide.[45]
Two years later, aged 22 and studying chemistry at the Berlin Academy, the third eldest brother, Rudi, committed suicide in a Berlin bar. He had asked the pianist to play Thomas Koschat's "Verlassen, verlassen, verlassen bin ich" ("Forsaken, forsaken, forsaken am I"),[46] before mixing himself a drink of milk and potassium cyanide. He had left several suicide notes, one to his parents that said he was grieving over the death of a friend, and another that referred to his "perverted disposition". It was reported at the time that he had sought advice from the Scientific-Humanitarian Committee, an organization that was campaigning against Paragraph 175 of the German Criminal Code, which prohibited homosexual sex. His father forbade the family from ever mentioning his name again.[47]


“
I won't say 'See you tomorrow' because that would be like predicting the future, and I'm pretty sure I can't do that.
”



—&#160;Wittgenstein, 1949[48]



The second eldest brother, Kurt, an officer and company director, shot himself on 27 October 1918 at the end of World War I, when the Austrian troops he was commanding refused to obey his orders and deserted en masse.[39] According to Gottlieb, Hermine had said Kurt seemed to carry "...the germ of disgust for life within himself."[49] Later Wittgenstein wrote: "I ought to have... become a star in the sky. Instead of which I have remained stuck on earth."[50]
1903–1906: Realschule in Linz[edit]
Realschule in Linz[edit]




The Realschule in Linz


Wittgenstein was taught by private tutors at home until he was fourteen years old. Subsequently, for three years, he attended a school. After the deaths of Hans and Rudi, Karl relented, and allowed Paul and Ludwig to be sent to school. Waugh writes that it was too late for Wittgenstein to pass his exams for the more academic Gymnasium in Wiener Neustadt; having had no formal schooling, he failed his entrance exam and only barely managed after extra tutoring to pass the exam for the more technically oriented K.u.k. Realschule in Linz, a small state school with 300 pupils.[51] In 1903, when he was 14, he began his three years of formal schooling there, lodging nearby in term time with the family of a Dr. Srigl, a master at the local gymnasium, the family giving him the nickname Luki.[52]
On starting at the Realschule, Wittgenstein had been moved forward a year.[53] Historian Brigitte Hamann writes that he stood out from the other boys: he spoke an unusually pure form of High German with a stutter, dressed elegantly, and was sensitive and unsociable.[54] Monk writes that the other boys made fun of him, singing after him: "Wittgenstein wandelt wehmütig widriger Winde wegen Wienwärts"[37] ("Wittgenstein strolls wistfully Vienna-wards due to adverse winds"). In his leaving certificate, he received a top mark (5) in religious studies; a 2 for conduct and English, 3 for French, geography, history, mathematics and physics, and 4 for German, chemistry, geometry and freehand drawing.[52] He had particular difficulty with spelling and failed his written German exam because of it. He wrote in 1931: "My bad spelling in youth, up to the age of about 18 or 19, is connected with the whole of the rest of my character (my weakness in study)."[52]
Faith[edit]
Wittgenstein was baptized as an infant by a Catholic priest and received formal instruction in Catholic doctrine as a child.[55] It was while he was at the Realschule that he decided he had lost his faith in God.[56] He nevertheless believed in the importance of the idea of confession. He wrote in his diaries about having made a major confession to his oldest sister, Hermine, while he was at the Realschule; Monk writes that it may have been about his loss of faith. He also discussed it with Gretl, his other sister, who directed him to Arthur Schopenhauer's The World as Will and Representation.[56] As a teenager, Wittgenstein adopted Schopenhauer's epistemological idealism. However, after his study of the philosophy of mathematics, he abandoned epistemological idealism for Gottlob Frege's conceptual realism.[16] In later years, Wittgenstein was highly dismissive of Schopenhauer, describing him as an ultimately "shallow" thinker: "Schopenhauer has quite a crude mind... where real depth starts, his comes to an end."[57]
Wittgenstein's faith would undergo developmental transformations over time, much like his philosophical ideas; his relationship with Christianity and religion, in general, for which he professed a sincere and devoted reverence, would eventually flourish. Undoubtedly, amongst other Christian thinkers, Wittgenstein was influenced by St. Augustine, with whom he would occasionally converse in his Philosophical Investigations. Philosophically, Wittgenstein's thought shows fundamental alignment with religious discourse.[58] For example, Wittgenstein would become one of the century's fiercest critics of Scientism.[59]
With age, his deepening Christianity led to many religious elucidations and clarifications, as he untangled language problems in religion, attacking, for example, the temptation to think of God's existence as a matter of scientific evidence.[60] In 1947, finding it more difficult to work, he wrote, "I have had a letter from an old friend in Austria, a priest. In it he says that he hopes my work will go well, if it should be God's will. Now that is all I want: if it should be God's will." [61] In Wittgenstein's Culture and Value, it is found, "Is what I am doing [my work in philosophy] really worth the effort? Yes, but only if a light shines on it from above." His close friend Norman Malcolm would write, “Wittgenstein’s mature life was strongly marked by religious thought and feeling. I am inclined to think that he was more deeply religious than are many people who correctly regard themselves as religious believers.” [62] At last, Wittgenstein writes, "Bach wrote on the title page of his Orgelbuechlein, ‘To the glory of the most high God, and that my neighbour may be benefited thereby.’ That is what I would have liked to say about my work.” [61]
Influence of Otto Weininger[edit]




Austrian philosopher Otto Weininger (1880–1903)


While a student at the Realschule, Wittgenstein was influenced by Austrian philosopher Otto Weininger's 1903 book Geschlecht und Charakter (Sex and Character). Weininger (1880–1903), who was also Jewish, argued that the concepts male and female exist only as Platonic forms, and that Jews tend to embody the platonic femininity. Whereas men are basically rational, women operate only at the level of their emotions and sexual organs. Jews, Weininger argued, are similar, saturated with femininity, with no sense of right and wrong, and no soul. Weininger argues that man must choose between his masculine and feminine sides, consciousness and unconsciousness, Platonic love and sexuality. Love and sexual desire stand in contradiction, and love between a woman and a man is therefore doomed to misery or immorality. The only life worth living is the spiritual one—to live as a woman or a Jew means one has no right to live at all; the choice is genius or death. Weininger committed suicide, shooting himself in 1903, shortly after publishing the book.[63] Many years later, as a professor at Cambridge, Wittgenstein distributed copies of Weininger's book to his bemused academic colleagues. He said that Weininger's arguments were wrong, but that it was the way they were wrong that was interesting.[64]
Jewish background and Hitler[edit]
Further information: History of the Jews in Austria
There is much debate about the extent to which Wittgenstein and his siblings, who were of 3/4 Jewish descent, saw themselves as Jews. The issue has arisen in particular regarding Wittgenstein's schooldays, because Adolf Hitler was at the same school for part of the same time.[65] Laurence Goldstein argues it is "overwhelmingly probable" the boys met each other: that Hitler would have disliked Wittgenstein, a "stammering, precocious, precious, aristocratic upstart ..."[66] Other commentators have dismissed as irresponsible and uninformed any suggestion that Wittgenstein's wealth and unusual personality may have fed Hitler's antisemitism, in part because there is no indication that Hitler would have seen Wittgenstein as Jewish.[67]
Wittgenstein and Hitler were born just six days apart, though Hitler had been held back a year, while Wittgenstein was moved forward by one, so they ended up two grades apart at the Realschule.[68] Monk estimates they were both at the school during the 1904–1905 school year, but says there is no evidence they had anything to do with each other.[69] Several commentators have argued that a school photograph of Hitler may show Wittgenstein in the lower left corner,[70] but Hamann says the photograph stems from 1900 or 1901, before Wittgenstein's time.[71]
In his own writings[72] Wittgenstein frequently referred to himself as Jewish, at times as part of an apparent self-flagellation. For example, while berating himself for being a "reproductive" as opposed to "productive" thinker, he attributed this to his own Jewish sense of identity, writing: "The saint is the only Jewish genius. Even the greatest Jewish thinker is no more than talented. (Myself for instance)."[73] While Wittgenstein would later claim that "[m]y thoughts are 100% Hebraic,"[74] as Hans Sluga has argued, if so, "His was a self-doubting Judaism, which had always the possibility of collapsing into a destructive self-hatred (as it did in Weininger's case) but which also held an immense promise of innovation and genius."[75]
1906–1913: University[edit]
Engineering at Berlin and Manchester[edit]




The old Technische Hochschule in Charlottenburg, Berlin


He began his studies in mechanical engineering at the Technische Hochschule in Charlottenburg, Berlin, on 23 October 1906, lodging with the family of professor Dr. Jolles. He attended for three semesters, and was awarded a diploma on 5 May 1908. During his time at the Institute, Wittgenstein developed an interest in aeronautics.[76] He arrived at the Victoria University of Manchester in the spring of 1908 to do his doctorate, full of plans for aeronautical projects, including designing and flying his own plane. He conducted research into the behavior of kites in the upper atmosphere, experimenting at a meteorological observation site near Glossop.[77] He also worked on the design of a propeller with small jet engines on the end of its blades, something he patented in 1911, and which earned him a research studentship from the university in the autumn of 1908.[78]




Wittgenstein stayed at the Grouse Inn in 1908 while engaged in research near Glossop.[77]


It was at this time that he became interested in the foundations of mathematics, particularly after reading Bertrand Russell's The Principles of Mathematics (1903), and Gottlob Frege's Grundgesetze der Arithmetik, vol. 1 (1893) and vol. 2 (1903).[79] Wittgenstein's sister Hermine said he became obsessed with mathematics as a result, and was anyway losing interest in aeronautics.[78] He decided instead that he needed to study logic and the foundations of mathematics, describing himself as in a "constant, indescribable, almost pathological state of agitation."[78] In the summer of 1911 he visited Frege at the University of Jena to show him some philosophy of mathematics and logic he had written, and to ask whether it was worth pursuing.[80] He wrote: "I was shown into Frege's study. Frege was a small, neat man with a pointed beard who bounced around the room as he talked. He absolutely wiped the floor with me, and I felt very depressed; but at the end he said 'You must come again', so I cheered up. I had several discussions with him after that. Frege would never talk about anything but logic and mathematics, if I started on some other subject, he would say something polite and then plunge back into logic and mathematics."[81]
Arrival at Cambridge[edit]




The Wren Library, Trinity College, Cambridge


Wittgenstein wanted to study with Frege, but Frege suggested he attend the University of Cambridge to study under Russell, so on 18 October 1911 Wittgenstein arrived unannounced at Russell's rooms in Trinity College.[82] Russell was having tea with C. K. Ogden, when, according to Russell, "an unknown German appeared, speaking very little English but refusing to speak German. He turned out to be a man who had learned engineering at Charlottenburg, but during this course had acquired, by himself, a passion for the philosophy of mathematics &amp; has now come to Cambridge on purpose to hear me."[80] He was soon not only attending Russell's lectures, but dominating them. The lectures were poorly attended and Russell often found himself lecturing only to C. D. Broad, E. H. Neville, and H. T. J. Norton.[80] Wittgenstein started following him after lectures back to his rooms to discuss more philosophy, until it was time for the evening meal in Hall. Russell grew irritated; he wrote to his lover Lady Ottoline Morrell: "My German friend threatens to be an infliction."[83]
Russell soon came to believe that Wittgenstein was a genius, especially after he had examined Wittgenstein's written work. He wrote in November 1911 that he had at first thought Wittgenstein might be a crank, but soon decided he was a genius: "Some of his early views made the decision difficult. He maintained, for example, at one time that all existential propositions are meaningless. This was in a lecture room, and I invited him to consider the proposition: 'There is no hippopotamus in this room at present.' When he refused to believe this, I looked under all the desks without finding one; but he remained unconvinced."[83] Three months after Wittgenstein's arrival Russell told Morrell: "I love him &amp; feel he will solve the problems I am too old to solve ... He is the young man one hopes for."[84] The role-reversal between him and Wittgenstein was such that he wrote in 1916, after Wittgenstein had criticized his own work: "His criticism, 'tho I don't think he realized it at the time, was an event of first-rate importance in my life, and affected everything I have done since. I saw that he was right, and I saw that I could not hope ever again to do fundamental work in philosophy."[85]
Cambridge Moral Sciences Club and Apostles[edit]




Bertrand Russell, in 1907


In 1912 Wittgenstein joined the Cambridge Moral Sciences Club, an influential discussion group for philosophy dons and students, delivering his first paper there on 29 November that year, a four-minute talk defining philosophy as "all those primitive propositions which are assumed as true without proof by the various sciences."[86] He dominated the society and stopped attending entirely in the early 1930s after complaints that he gave no one else a chance to speak.[87]
The club became infamous within popular philosophy because of a meeting on 25 October 1946 at Richard Braithwaite's rooms in King's, where Karl Popper, another Viennese philosopher, had been invited as the guest speaker. Popper's paper was Are there philosophical problems?, in which he struck up a position against Wittgenstein's, contending that problems in philosophy are real, not just linguistic puzzles as Wittgenstein argued. Accounts vary as to what happened next, but Wittgenstein apparently started waving a hot poker, demanding that Popper give him an example of a moral rule. Popper offered one—"Not to threaten visiting speakers with pokers"—at which point Russell told Wittgenstein he had misunderstood and Wittgenstein left. Popper maintained that Wittgenstein 'stormed out', but it had become accepted practice for him to leave early (because of his aforementioned ability to dominate discussion). It was the only time the philosophers, three of the most eminent in the world, were ever in the same room together.[88] The minutes record that the meeting was "charged to an unusual degree with a spirit of controversy."[89]
John Maynard Keynes also invited him to join the Cambridge Apostles, an elite secret society formed in 1820, which both Russell and G. E. Moore had joined as students, but Wittgenstein did not enjoy it and attended infrequently. Russell had been worried that Wittgenstein would not appreciate the group's unseriousness, style of humour, or the fact that the members were in love with one another.[90] He was admitted in 1912 but resigned almost immediately because he could not tolerate the level of the discussion on the Hearth Rug; they took him back though in the 1920s when he returned to Cambridge. (He also had trouble tolerating the discussions in the Moral Sciences Club.)
Sexual orientation and relationship with David Pinsent[edit]
Wittgenstein had romantic relations with both men and women. He is generally believed to have fallen in love with at least three men: David Hume Pinsent in 1912, Francis Skinner in 1930, and Ben Richards in the late 1940s.[91] He later revealed that, as a teenager in Vienna, he had had an affair with a woman.[92] Additionally, in the 1920s Wittgenstein became infatuated with a young Swiss woman, Marguerite Respinger, modelling a sculpture of her and proposing marriage, albeit on condition that they did not have children.[93]
Wittgenstein's platonic relationship with David Pinsent (1891–1918) occurred during an intellectually formative period, and is well documented. Bertrand Russell introduced Wittgenstein to Pinsent in the summer of 1912. A mathematics undergraduate and descendant of David Hume, Pinsent soon became Wittgenstein's closest friend.[94] The men worked together on experiments in the psychology laboratory about the role of rhythm in the appreciation of music, and Wittgenstein delivered a paper on the subject to the British Psychological Association in Cambridge in 1912. They also travelled together, including to Iceland in September 1912—the expenses paid by Wittgenstein, including first class travel, the hiring of a private train, and new clothes and spending money for Pinsent—and later to Norway. Pinsent's diaries provide valuable insights into Wittgenstein's personality - sensitive, nervous and attuned to the tiniest slight or change in mood from Pinsent.[95] In his diaries Pinsent wrote about shopping for furniture with Wittgenstein in Cambridge when the latter was given rooms in Trinity; most of what they found in the stores was not minimalist enough for Wittgenstein's aesthetics: "I went and helped him interview a lot of furniture at various shops ... It was rather amusing: he is terribly fastidious and we led the shopman a frightful dance, Vittgenstein [sic] ejaculating "No—Beastly!" to 90 percent of what he shewed [archaic spelling] us!"[96]
He wrote in May 1912 that Wittgenstein had just begun to study the history of philosophy: "He expresses the most naive surprise that all the philosophers he once worshipped in ignorance are after all stupid and dishonest and make disgusting mistakes!"[96] The last time they saw each other was at a Birmingham railway station on 8 October 1913, when they said goodbye before Wittgenstein left to live in Norway.
1913–1920: World War I and the Tractatus[edit]
Work on Logik[edit]




Entries from October 1914 in Wittgenstein's diary, on display at the Wren Library, Trinity College, Cambridge


Karl Wittgenstein died on 20 January 1913, and after receiving his inheritance Wittgenstein became one of the wealthiest men in Europe.[97] He donated some of his money, at first anonymously, to Austrian artists and writers, including Rainer Maria Rilke and Georg Trakl. Wittgenstein came to feel that he could not get to the heart of his most fundamental questions while surrounded by other academics, and so in 1913 he retreated to the village of Skjolden in Norway, where he rented the second floor of a house for the winter. He later saw this as one of the most productive periods of his life, writing Logik (Notes on Logic), the predecessor of much of the Tractatus.[82] While in Norway, Wittgenstein learned Norwegian to converse with the local villagers, and Danish to read the works of the Danish philosopher Søren Kierkegaard.[98]
At Wittgenstein's insistence, Moore, who was now a Cambridge don, visited him in Norway in 1914, reluctantly because Wittgenstein exhausted him. David Edmonds and John Eidinow write that Wittgenstein regarded Moore, an internationally-known philosopher, as an example of how far someone could get in life with "absolutely no intelligence whatever."[99] In Norway it was clear that Moore was expected to act as Wittgenstein's secretary, taking down his notes, with Wittgenstein falling into a rage when Moore got something wrong.[100] When he returned to Cambridge, Moore asked the university to consider accepting Logik as sufficient for a bachelor's degree, but they refused, saying it wasn't formatted properly: no footnotes, no preface. Wittgenstein was furious, writing to Moore in May 1914: "If I am not worth your making an exception for me even in some STUPID details then I may as well go to Hell directly; and if I am worth it and you don't do it then—by God—you might go there."[101] Moore was apparently distraught; he wrote in his diary that he felt sick and could not get the letter out of his head.[102] The two did not speak again until 1929.[100]
Military service[edit]




Austro-Hungarian supply line over the Vršič pass, on the Italian front, October 1917


On the outbreak of World War I, Wittgenstein immediately volunteered for the Austro-Hungarian Army, despite being eligible for a medical exemption.[103][104] He served first on a ship and then in an artillery workshop 'several miles from the action'.[105] He was wounded in an accidental explosion, and hospitalised to Kraków.[106] In March 1916, he was posted to a fighting unit on the front line of the Russian front, as part of the Austrian 7th Army, where his unit was involved in some of the heaviest fighting, defending against the Brusilov Offensive.[107] Wittgenstein directed the fire of his own artillery from an observation post in no-man's land against Allied troops - one of the most dangerous jobs there was, since he was targeted by enemy snipers.[108] In action against British troops, he was decorated with the Military Merit with Swords on the Ribbon, and was commended by the army for "His exceptionally courageous behaviour, calmness, sang-froid, and heroism," that "won the total admiration of the troops."[109] In January 1917, he was sent as a member of a howitzer regiment to the Russian front, where he won several more medals for bravery including the Silver Medal for Valour, First Class.[107] In 1918, he was promoted to lieutenant and sent to the Italian front as part of an artillery regiment. For his part in the final Austrian offensive of June 1918, he was recommended for the Gold Medal for Valour, one of the highest honours in the Austrian army, but was instead awarded the Band of the Military Service Medal with Swords&#160;— it being decided that this particular action, although extraordinarily brave, had been insufficiently consequential to merit the highest honour.[110]
Throughout the war, he kept notebooks in which he frequently wrote philosophical reflections alongside personal remarks, including his contempt for the character of the other soldiers.[111] He discovered Leo Tolstoy's 1896 The Gospel in Brief at a bookshop in Tarnów, and carried it everywhere, recommending it to anyone in distress, to the point where he became known to his fellow soldiers as "the man with the gospels."[112] In 1916 Wittgenstein read Dostoevsky's The Brothers Karamazov so often that he knew whole passages of it by heart, particularly the speeches of the elder Zosima, who represented for him a powerful Christian ideal, a holy man "who could see directly into the souls of other people."[113] Iain King has suggested his writing changed substantially in 1916, when he started confronting much greater dangers.[114] Russell said he returned from the war a changed man, one with a deeply mystical and ascetic attitude.[115]
Completion of the Tractatus[edit]
In the summer of 1918 Wittgenstein took military leave and went to stay in one of his family's Vienna summer houses, Neuwaldegg. It was there in August 1918 that he completed the Tractatus, which he submitted with the title Der Satz (German: proposition, sentence, phrase, set, but also "leap") to the publishers Jahoda and Siegel.[116]
A series of events around this time left him deeply upset. On 13 August, his uncle Paul died. On 25 October, he learned that Jahoda and Siegel had decided not to publish the Tractatus, and on 27 October, his brother Kurt killed himself, the third of his brothers to commit suicide. It was around this time he received a letter from David Pinsent's mother to say that Pinsent had been killed in a plane crash on 8 May.[117] Wittgenstein was distraught to the point of being suicidal. He was sent back to the Italian front after his leave and, as a result of the defeat of the Austrian army, was captured by Allied forces on 3 November in Trentino. He subsequently spent nine months in an Italian prisoner of war camp.
He returned to his family in Vienna on 25 August 1919, by all accounts physically and mentally spent. He apparently talked incessantly about suicide, terrifying his sisters and brother Paul. He decided to do two things: to enroll in teacher training college as an elementary school teacher, and to get rid of his fortune. In 1914, it had been providing him with an income of 300,000 Kronen a year, but by 1919 was worth a great deal more, with a sizable portfolio of investments in the United States and the Netherlands. He divided it among his siblings, except for Margarete, insisting that it not be held in trust for him. His family saw him as ill, and acquiesced.[116]
1920–1928: Teaching, the Tractatus, Haus Wittgenstein[edit]
Teacher training in Vienna[edit]
In September 1919 he enrolled in the Lehrerbildungsanstalt (teacher training college) in the Kundmanngasse in Vienna. His sister Hermine said that Wittgenstein working as an elementary teacher was like using a precision instrument to open crates, but the family decided not to interfere.[118] Thomas Bernhard, more critically, wrote of this period in Wittgenstein's life: "the multi-millionaire as a village schoolmaster is surely a piece of perversity."[119]
Teaching posts in Austria[edit]
In the summer of 1920, Wittgenstein worked as a gardener for a monastery. At first he applied, under a false name, for a teaching post at Reichenau, was awarded the job, but he declined it when his identity was discovered. As a teacher, he wished to no longer be recognized as a member of the famous Wittgenstein family. In response, his brother Paul wrote:

"It is out of the question, really completely out of the question, that anybody bearing our name and whose elegant and gentle upbringing can be seen a thousand paces off, would not be identified as a member of our family... That one can neither simulate nor dissimulate anything including a refined education I need hardly tell you."[120]

In 1920, Wittgenstein was given his first job as a primary school teacher in Trattenbach, under his real name, in a remote village of a few hundred people. His first letters describe it as beautiful, but in October 1921, he wrote to Russell: "I am still at Trattenbach, surrounded, as ever, by odiousness and baseness. I know that human beings on the average are not worth much anywhere, but here they are much more good-for-nothing and irresponsible than elsewhere."[121] He was soon the object of gossip among the villagers, who found him eccentric at best. He did not get on well with the other teachers; when he found his lodgings too noisy, he made a bed for himself in the school kitchen. He was an enthusiastic teacher, offering late-night extra tuition to several of the students, something that did not endear him to the parents, though some of them came to adore him; his sister Hermine occasionally watched him teach and said the students "literally crawled over each other in their desire to be chosen for answers or demonstrations."[122]
To the less able, it seems that he became something of a tyrant. The first two hours of each day were devoted to mathematics, hours that Monk writes some of the pupils recalled years later with horror.[123] They reported that he caned the boys and boxed their ears, and also that he pulled the girls' hair;[124] This was not unusual at the time for boys, but for the villagers he went too far in doing it to the girls too; girls were not expected to understand algebra, much less have their ears boxed over it. The violence apart, Monk writes that he quickly became a village legend, shouting "Krautsalat!" ("coleslaw" - i.e. shredded cabbage) when the headmaster played the piano, and "Nonsense!" when a priest was answering children's questions.[125]
Publication of the Tractatus[edit]


“
The whole modern conception of the world is founded on the illusion that the so-called laws of nature are the explanations of natural phenomena.
Thus people today stop at the laws of nature, treating them as something inviolable, just as God and Fate were treated in past ages. And in fact both were right and both wrong; though the view of the ancients is clearer insofar as they have an acknowledged terminus, while the modern system tries to make it look as if everything were explained.

”



—&#160;Wittgenstein, Tractatus, 6.371-2



While Wittgenstein was living in isolation in rural Austria, the Tractatus was published to considerable interest, first in German in 1921 as Logisch-Philosophische Abhandlung, part of Wilhelm Ostwald's journal Annalen der Naturphilosophie, though Wittgenstein was not happy with the result and called it a pirate edition. Russell had agreed to write an introduction to explain why it was important, because it was otherwise unlikely to have been published: it was difficult if not impossible to understand, and Wittgenstein was unknown in philosophy.[126] In a letter to Russell, Wittgenstein wrote "The main point is the theory of what can be expressed (gesagt) by prop[osition]s—i.e. by language—(and, which comes to the same thing, what can be thought) and what can not be expressed by pro[position]s, but only shown (gezeigt); which, I believe, is the cardinal problem of philosophy."[127] But Wittgenstein was not happy with Russell's help. He had lost faith in Russell, finding him glib and his philosophy mechanistic, and felt he had fundamentally misunderstood the Tractatus.[128]
An English translation was prepared in Cambridge by Frank Ramsey, a mathematics undergraduate at King's commissioned by C. K. Ogden. It was Moore who suggested Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus for the title, an allusion to Baruch Spinoza's Tractatus Theologico-Politicus. Initially there were difficulties in finding a publisher for the English edition too, because Wittgenstein was insisting it appear without Russell's introduction; Cambridge University Press turned it down for that reason. Finally in 1922 an agreement was reached with Wittgenstein that Kegan Paul would print a bilingual edition with Russell's introduction and the Ramsey-Ogden translation.[129] This is the translation that was approved by Wittgenstein, but it is problematic in a number of ways. Wittgenstein's English was poor at the time, and Ramsey was a teenager who had only recently learned German, so philosophers often prefer to use a 1961 translation by David Pears and Brian McGuinness.[130]
An aim of the Tractatus is to reveal the relationship between language and the world: what can be said about it, and what can only be shown. Wittgenstein argues that language has an underlying logical structure, a structure that provides the limits of what can be said meaningfully, and therefore the limits of what can be thought. The limits of language, for Wittgenstein, are the limits of philosophy. Much of philosophy involves attempts to say the unsayable: "What we can say at all can be said clearly," he argues. Anything beyond that—religion, ethics, aesthetics, the mystical—cannot be discussed. They are not in themselves nonsensical, but any statement about them must be.[131] He wrote in the preface: "The book will, therefore, draw a limit to thinking, or rather—not to thinking, but to the expression of thoughts; for, in order to draw a limit to thinking we should have to be able to think both sides of this limit (we should therefore have to be able to think what cannot be thought)."[132]
The book is 75 pages long—"As to the shortness of the book, I am awfully sorry for it ... If you were to squeeze me like a lemon you would get nothing more out of me," he told Ogden—and presents seven numbered propositions (1–7), with various sub-levels (1, 1.1, 1.11):[133]

Die Welt ist alles, was der Fall ist.

The world is everything that is the case.[134]


Was der Fall ist, die Tatsache, ist das Bestehen von Sachverhalten.

What is the case, the fact, is the existence of atomic facts.


Das logische Bild der Tatsachen ist der Gedanke.

The logical picture of the facts is the thought.


Der Gedanke ist der sinnvolle Satz.

The thought is the signiﬁcant proposition.


Der Satz ist eine Wahrheitsfunktion der Elementarsätze.

Propositions are truth-functions of elementary propositions.


Die allgemeine Form der Wahrheitsfunktion ist: . Dies ist die allgemeine Form des Satzes.

The general form of a truth-function is: . This is the general form of proposition.


Wovon man nicht sprechen kann, darüber muß man schweigen.

Whereof one cannot speak, thereof one must be silent.



Visit from Frank Ramsey, Puchberg[edit]




Frank P. Ramsey visited Wittgenstein in Puchberg am Schneeberg in September 1923.


In September 1922 he moved to a secondary school in a nearby village, Hassbach, but considered the people there just as bad—"These people are not human at all but loathsome worms," he wrote to a friend—and he left after a month. In November he began work at another primary school, this time in Puchberg in the Schneeberg mountains. There, he told Russell, the villagers were "one-quarter animal and three-quarters human."
Frank P. Ramsey visited him on 17 September 1923 to discuss the Tractatus; he had agreed to write a review of it for Mind.[135] He reported in a letter home that Wittgenstein was living frugally in one tiny whitewashed room that only had space for a bed, washstand, a small table, and one small hard chair. Ramsey shared an evening meal with him of coarse bread, butter, and cocoa. Wittgenstein's school hours were eight to twelve or one, and he had afternoons free.[136] After Ramsey returned to Cambridge a long campaign began among Wittgenstein's friends to persuade him to return to Cambridge and away from what they saw as a hostile environment for him. He was accepting no help even from his family.[135] Ramsey wrote to John Maynard Keynes:

"[Wittgenstein's family] are very rich and extremely anxious to give him money or do anything for him in any way, and he rejects all their advances; even Christmas presents or presents of invalid's food, when he is ill, he sends back. And this is not because they aren't on good terms but because he won't have any money he hasn't earned ... It is an awful pity."[135]

Haidbauer incident, Otterthal[edit]
Main article: Haidbauer incident
He moved schools again in September 1924, this time to Otterthal, near Trattenbach; the socialist headmaster, Josef Putre, was someone Wittgenstein had become friends with while at Trattenbach. While he was there, he wrote a 42-page pronunciation and spelling dictionary for the children, Wörterbuch für Volksschulen, published in Vienna in 1926 by Hölder-Pichler-Tempsky, the only book of his apart from the Tractatus that was published in his lifetime.[129] A first edition sold in 2005 for £75,000.[137]
An incident occurred in April 1926 and became known as Der Vorfall Haidbauer (the Haidbauer incident). Josef Haidbauer was an 11-year-old pupil whose father had died and whose mother worked as a local maid. He was a slow learner, and one day Wittgenstein hit him two or three times on the head, causing him to collapse. Wittgenstein carried him to the headmaster's office, then quickly left the school, bumping into a parent, Herr Piribauer, on the way out. Piribauer had been sent for by the children when they saw Haidbauer collapse; Wittgenstein had previously pulled Piribauer's daughter, Hermine, so hard by the ears that her ears had bled.[138] Piribauer said that when he met Wittgenstein in the hall that day: "I called him all the names under the sun. I told him he wasn't a teacher, he was an animal-trainer! And that I was going to fetch the police right away!"[138]
Piribauer tried to have Wittgenstein arrested, but the village's police station was empty, and when he tried again the next day he was told Wittgenstein had disappeared. On 28 April 1926, Wittgenstein handed in his resignation to Wilhelm Kundt, a local school inspector, who tried to persuade him to stay; however, Wittgenstein was adamant that his days as a schoolteacher were over.[138] Proceedings were initiated in May, and the judge ordered a psychiatric report; in August 1926 a letter to Wittgenstein from a friend, Ludwig Hänsel, indicates that hearings were ongoing, but nothing is known about the case after that. Alexander Waugh writes that Wittgenstein's family and their money may have had a hand in covering things up. Waugh writes that Haidbauer died shortly afterwards of haemophilia; Monk says he died when he was 14 of leukaemia.[139]
Ten years later, in 1936, as part of a series of "confessions" he engaged in that year, Wittgenstein appeared without warning at the village saying he wanted to confess personally and ask for pardon from the children he had hit. He visited at least four of the children, including Hermine Piribauer, who apparently replied only with a "Ja, ja," though other former students were more hospitable. Monk writes that the purpose of these confessions was not "to hurt his pride, as a form of punishment; it was to dismantle it—to remove a barrier, as it were, that stood in the way of honest and decent thought." Of the apologies, Wittgenstein wrote, "This brought me into more settled waters... and to greater seriousness."[140]
The Vienna Circle[edit]
See also: Vienna Circle
The Tractatus was now the subject of much debate amongst philosophers, and Wittgenstein was a figure of increasing international fame. In particular, a discussion group of philosophers, scientists and mathematicians, known as the Vienna Circle, had built up largely as a result of the inspiration they had been given by reading the Tractatus.[135] From 1926, with the members of the Vienna Circle, Wittgenstein would take part in many discussions. However, during these discussions, it soon became evident that Wittgenstein held a different attitude towards philosophy than the members of the Circle whom his work had inspired. For example, during meetings of the Vienna Circle, he would express his disagreement with the group's misreading of his work by turning his back to them and reading poetry aloud.[141] In his autobiography, Rudolf Carnap describes Wittgenstein as the thinker who gave him the greatest inspiration. However, he also wrote that "there was a striking difference between Wittgenstein's attitude toward philosophical problems and that of Schlick and myself. Our attitude toward philosophical problems was not very different from that which scientists have toward their problems." As for Wittgenstein:

His point of view and his attitude toward people and problems, even theoretical problems, were much more similar to those of a creative artist than to those of a scientist; one might almost say, similar to those of a religious prophet or a seer... When finally, sometimes after a prolonged arduous effort, his answers came forth, his statement stood before us like a newly created piece of art or a divine revelation ... the impression he made on us was as if insight came to him as through divine inspiration, so that we could not help feeling that any sober rational comment or analysis of it would be a profanation.[142]

Haus Wittgenstein[edit]
Main article: Haus Wittgenstein




Wittgenstein worked on Haus Wittgenstein between 1926 and 1929.




“
"I am not interested in erecting a building, but in [...] presenting to myself the foundations of all possible buildings."
”



—&#160;Wittgenstein [143]



In 1926 Wittgenstein was again working as a gardener for a number of months, this time at the monastery of Hütteldorf, where he had also inquired about becoming a monk. His sister, Margaret, invited him to help with the design of her new townhouse in Vienna's Kundmanngasse. Wittgenstein, his friend Paul Engelmann, and a team of architects developed a spare modernist house. In particular, Wittgenstein focused on the windows, doors, and radiators, demanding that every detail be exactly as he specified. When the house was nearly finished Wittgenstein had an entire ceiling raised 30mm so that the room had the exact proportions he wanted. Monk writes that "This is not so marginal as it may at first appear, for it is precisely these details that lend what is otherwise a rather plain, even ugly house its distinctive beauty."[144]
It took him a year to design the door handles and another to design the radiators. Each window was covered by a metal screen that weighed 150&#160;kg, moved by a pulley Wittgenstein designed. Bernhard Leitner, author of The Architecture of Ludwig Wittgenstein, said there is barely anything comparable in the history of interior design: "It is as ingenious as it is expensive. A metal curtain that could be lowered into the floor."[144]
The house was finished by December 1928 and the family gathered there at Christmas to celebrate its completion. Wittgenstein's sister Hermine wrote: "Even though I admired the house very much....It seemed indeed to be much more a dwelling for the gods."[143] Wittgenstein said "the house I built for Gretl is the product of a decidedly sensitive ear and good manners, and expression of great understanding... But primordial life, wild life striving to erupt into the open - that is lacking."[145] Monk comments that the same might be said of the technically excellent, but austere, terracotta sculpture Wittgenstein had modelled of Marguerite Respinger in 1926, and that, as Russell first noticed, this "wild life striving to be in the open" was precisely the substance of Wittgenstein's philosophical work.[145]
1929–1941: Fellowship at Cambridge[edit]
PhD and fellowship[edit]
At the urging of Ramsey and others, Wittgenstein returned to Cambridge in 1929. Keynes wrote in a letter to his wife: "Well, God has arrived. I met him on the 5.15 train."[146] Despite this fame, he could not initially work at Cambridge as he did not have a degree, so he applied as an advanced undergraduate. Russell noted that his previous residency was sufficient for a PhD [clarification needed], and urged him to offer the Tractatus as his thesis. It was examined in 1929 by Russell and Moore; at the end of the thesis defence, Wittgenstein clapped the two examiners on the shoulder and said, "Don't worry, I know you'll never understand it."[147] Moore wrote in the examiner's report: "I myself consider that this is a work of genius; but, even if I am completely mistaken and it is nothing of the sort, it is well above the standard required for the Ph.D. degree."[148] Wittgenstein was appointed as a lecturer and was made a fellow of Trinity College.
Anschluss[edit]
Further information: Anschluss, Nuremberg Laws and Mischling Test
From 1936 to 1937, Wittgenstein lived again in Norway,[149] where he worked on the Philosophical Investigations. In the winter of 1936/7, he delivered a series of "confessions" to close friends, most of them about minor infractions like white lies, in an effort to cleanse himself. In 1938, he travelled to Ireland to visit Maurice O'Connor Drury, a friend who became a psychiatrist, and considered such training himself, with the intention of abandoning philosophy for it. The visit to Ireland was at the same time a response to the invitation of the then Irish Taoiseach, Éamon de Valera, himself a mathematics teacher. De Valera hoped Wittgenstein's presence would contribute to an academy for advanced mathematics.
While he was in Ireland in March 1938, Germany annexed Austria in the Anschluss; the Viennese Wittgenstein was now a citizen of the enlarged Germany and a Jew under the 1935 Nuremberg racial laws, because three of his grandparents had been born as Jews. The Nuremberg Laws classified people as Jews (Volljuden) if they had three or four Jewish grandparents, and as mixed blood (Mischling) if they had one or two. It meant inter alia that the Wittgensteins were restricted in whom they could marry or have sex with, and where they could work.[150]
After the Anschluss, his brother Paul left almost immediately for England, and later the US. The Nazis discovered his relationship with Hilde Schania, a brewer's daughter with whom he had had two children but whom he had never married, though he did later. Because she was not Jewish, he was served with a summons for Rassenschande (racial defilement). He told no one he was leaving the country, except for Hilde who agreed to follow him. He left so suddenly and quietly that for a time people believed he was the fourth Wittgenstein brother to have committed suicide.[151]
Wittgenstein began to investigate acquiring British or Irish citizenship with the help of Keynes, and apparently had to confess to his friends in England that he had earlier misrepresented himself to them as having just one Jewish grandparent, when in fact he had three.[152]
A few days before the invasion of Poland, Hitler personally granted Mischling status to the Wittgenstein siblings. In 1939 there were 2,100 applications for this, and Hitler granted only 12.[153] Anthony Gottlieb writes that the pretext was that their paternal grandfather had been the bastard son of a German prince, which allowed the Reichsbank to claim the gold, foreign currency, and stocks held in Switzerland by a Wittgenstein trust. Gretl, an American citizen by marriage, started the negotiations over the racial status of their grandfather, and the family's large foreign currency reserves were used as a bargaining tool. Paul had escaped to Switzerland and then the US in July 1938, and disagreed with the negotiations, leading to a permanent split between the siblings. After the war, when Paul was performing in Vienna, he did not visit Hermine who was dying there, and he had no further contact with Ludwig or Gretl.[42]
Professor of philosophy[edit]
After G. E. Moore resigned the chair in philosophy in 1939, Wittgenstein was elected, and acquired British citizenship soon afterwards. In July 1939 he travelled to Vienna to assist Gretl and his other sisters, visiting Berlin for one day to meet an official of the Reichsbank. After this, he travelled to New York to persuade Paul, whose agreement was required, to back the scheme. The required Befreiung was granted in August 1939. The unknown amount signed over to the Nazis by the Wittgenstein family, a week or so before the outbreak of war, included amongst many other assets, 1700&#160;kg of gold.[154] There is a report Wittgenstein visited Moscow a second time in 1939, travelling from Berlin, and again met the philosopher Sophia Janowskaya.[155]
Norman Malcolm, at the time a post-graduate research fellow at Cambridge, describes his first impressions of Wittgenstein in 1938:

"At a meeting of the Moral Science Club, after the paper for the evening was read and the discussion started, someone began to stammer a remark. He had extreme difficulty in expressing himself and his words were unintelligible to me. I whispered to my neighbour, 'Who's that?': he replied, 'Wittgenstein'. I was astonished because I had expected the famous author of the Tractatus to be an elderly man, whereas this man looked young – perhaps about 35. (His actual age was 49.) His face was lean and brown, his profile was aquiline and strikingly beautiful, his head was covered with a curly mass of brown hair. I observed the respectful attention that everyone in the room paid to him. After this unsuccessful beginning he did not speak for a time but was obviously struggling with his thoughts. His look was concentrated, he made striking gestures with his hands as if he was discoursing... Whether lecturing or conversing privately, Wittgenstein always spoke emphatically and with a distinctive intonation. He spoke excellent English, with the accent of an educated Englishman, although occasional Germanisms would appear in his constructions. His voice was resonant... His words came out, not fluently, but with great force. Anyone who heard him say anything knew that this was a singular person. His face was remarkably mobile and expressive when he talked. His eyes were deep and often fierce in their expression. His whole personality was commanding, even imperial."[156]

Describing Wittgenstein's lecture program, Malcolm continues:

"It is hardly correct to speak of these meetings as 'lectures', although this is what Wittgenstein called them. For one thing, he was carrying on original research in these meetings... Often the meetings consisted mainly of dialogue. Sometimes, however, when he was trying to draw a thought out of himself, he would prohibit, with a peremptory motion of the hand, any questions or remarks. There were frequent and prolonged periods of silence, with only an occasional mutter from Wittgenstein, and the stillest attention from the others. During these silences, Wittgenstein was extremely tense and active. His gaze was concentrated; his face was alive; his hands made arresting movements; his expression was stern. One knew that one was in the presence of extreme seriousness, absorption, and force of intellect... Wittgenstein was a frightening person at these classes."[157]

After work, Wittgenstein would often relax by watching Westerns, where he preferred to sit at the very front of the cinema, or reading detective stories especially the ones written by Norbert Davis.[158] [159] Norman Malcolm wrote that he would rush to the cinema when class ended.[160]
By this time, Wittgenstein's view on the foundations of mathematics had changed considerably. In his early 20s, Wittgenstein had thought logic could provide a solid foundation, and he had even considered updating Russell and Whitehead's Principia Mathematica. Now he denied there were any mathematical facts to be discovered. He gave a series of lectures on mathematics, discussing this and other topics, documented in a book, with lectures by Wittgenstein and discussions between him and several students, including the young Alan Turing.[161]
World War II and Guy's Hospital[edit]
Monk writes that Wittgenstein found it intolerable that a war was going on and he was teaching philosophy. He grew angry when any of his students wanted to become professional philosophers.[162]
In September 1941 he asked John Ryle, the brother of the philosopher Gilbert Ryle, if he could get a manual job at Guy's Hospital in London. John Ryle was professor of medicine at Cambridge and had been involved in helping Guy's prepare for the Blitz. Wittgenstein told Ryle he would die slowly if left at Cambridge, and he would rather die quickly. He started working at Guy's shortly afterwards as a dispensary porter, meaning that he delivered drugs from the pharmacy to the wards—where he apparently advised the patients not to take them.[163]
The hospital staff were not told he was one of the world's most famous philosophers, though some of the medical staff did recognize him—at least one had attended Moral Sciences Club meetings—but they were discreet. "Good God, don't tell anybody who I am!" Wittgenstein begged one of them.[164] Some of them nevertheless called him Professor Wittgenstein, and he was allowed to dine with the doctors. He wrote on 1 April 1942: "I no longer feel any hope for the future of my life. It is as though I had before me nothing more than a long stretch of living death. I cannot imagine any future for me other than a ghastly one. Friendless and joyless."[163]
He had developed a friendship with Keith Kirk, a working-class teenage friend of Francis Skinner, the mathematics undergraduate he had had a relationship with until Skinner's death in 1941 from polio. Skinner had given up academia, thanks at least in part to Wittgenstein's influence, and had been working as a mechanic in 1939, with Kirk as his apprentice. Kirk and Wittgenstein struck up a friendship, with Wittgenstein giving him lessons in physics to help him pass a City and Guilds exam. During his period of loneliness at Guy's he wrote in his diary: "For ten days I've heard nothing more from K, even though I pressed him a week ago for news. I think that he has perhaps broken with me. A tragic thought!"[36] Kirk had in fact got married, and they never saw one another again.[36]
While Wittgenstein was at Guy's he met Basil Reeve, a young doctor with an interest in philosophy, who, with Dr R T Grant, was studying the effect of shock on air-raid casualties. When the blitz ended there were fewer casualties to study. In November 1942, Grant and Reeve moved to the Royal Victoria Infirmary, Newcastle upon Tyne, to study road traffic and industrial casualties. Grant offered Wittgenstein a position as a laboratory assistant at a wage of £4 per week, and he lived in Newcastle (at 28 Brandling Park, Jesmond[165]) from 29 April 1943 until February 1944.[166]
1947–1951: Final years[edit]


“
Death is not an event in life: we do not live to experience death. If we take eternity to mean not infinite temporal duration but timelessness, then eternal life belongs to those who live in the present. Our life has no end in the way in which our visual field has no limits.
”



—&#160;Wittgenstein, Tractatus, 6.431



He resigned the professorship at Cambridge in 1947 to concentrate on his writing, and in 1947 and 1948 travelled to Ireland, staying at Ross's Hotel in Dublin and at a farmhouse in Redcross, County Wicklow, where he began the manuscript volume MS 137, Band R. Seeking solitude he moved to Rosro, a holiday cottage in Connemara owned by Maurice O'Connor-Drury.[167][dead link]
He also accepted an invitation from Norman Malcolm, then professor at Cornell University, to stay with him and his wife for several months at Ithaca, New York. He made the trip in April 1949, although he told Malcolm he was too unwell to do philosophical work: "I haven't done any work since the beginning of March &amp; I haven't had the strength of even trying to do any." A doctor in Dublin had diagnosed anaemia and prescribed iron and liver pills. The details of Wittgenstein's stay in America are recounted in Norman Malcolm's Ludwig Wittgenstein: A Memoir. During his summer in America, Wittgenstein began his epistemological discussions, in particular his engagement with philosophical skepticism, that would eventually become the final fragments On Certainty.




The plaque at "Storey's End", 76 Storey's Way, Cambridge, where Wittgenstein died.


He returned to London, where he was diagnosed with an inoperable prostate cancer, which had spread to his bone marrow. He spent the next two months in Vienna, where his sister Hermine died on 11 February 1950; he went to see her every day, but she was hardly able to speak or recognize him. "Great loss for me and all of us," he wrote. "Greater than I would have thought." He moved around a lot after Hermine's death staying with various friends: to Cambridge in April 1950, where he stayed with G. H. von Wright; to London to stay with Rush Rhees; then to Oxford to see Elizabeth Anscombe, writing to Norman Malcolm that he was hardly doing any philosophy. He went to Norway in August with Ben Richards, then returned to Cambridge, where on 27 November he moved into Storey's End at 76 Storey's Way, the home of his doctor, Edward Bevan, and his wife Joan; he had told them he did not want to die in a hospital, so they said he could spend his last days in their home instead. Joan at first was afraid of Wittgenstein, but they soon became good friends.[167]
By the beginning of 1951, it was clear that he had little time left. He wrote a new will in Oxford on 29 January, naming Rhees as his executor, and Anscombe and von Wright his literary administrators, and wrote to Norman Malcolm that month to say, "My mind's completely dead. This isn't a complaint, for I don't really suffer from it. I know that life must have an end once and that mental life can cease before the rest does."[168] In February he returned to the Bevans' home to work on MS 175 and MS 176. These and other manuscripts were later published as Remarks on Colour and On Certainty.[167][dead link] He wrote to Malcolm on 16 April 13 days before his death: "An extraordinary thing happened to me. About a month ago I suddenly found myself in the right frame of mind for doing philosophy. I had been absolutely certain that I'd never again be able to do it. It's the first time after more than 2 years that the curtain in my brain has gone up.—Of course, so far I've only worked for about 5 weeks &amp; it may be all over by tomorrow; but it bucks me up a lot now."[169]




Wittgenstein's grave at the Ascension Parish Burial Ground in Cambridge


Death[edit]
Wittgenstein began work on his final manuscript, MS 177, on 25 April 1951. It was his 62nd birthday on 26 April. He went for a walk the next afternoon, and wrote his last entry that day, 27 April. That evening, he became very ill; when his doctor told him he might live only a few days, he reportedly replied, "Good!" Joan stayed with him throughout that night, and just before losing consciousness for the last time on 28 April, he told her: "Tell them I've had a wonderful life." Norman Malcolm describes this as a "...strangely moving utterance."[169]
Four of Wittgenstein's former students arrived at his bedside—Ben Richards, Elizabeth Anscombe, Yorick Smythies, and Maurice O'Connor Drury. Anscombe and Smythies were Catholics; and, at the latter's request, a Dominican friar, Father Conrad Pepler, also attended. They were at first unsure what Wittgenstein would have wanted, but then remembered he had said he hoped his Catholic friends would pray for him, so they did, and he was pronounced dead shortly afterwards.
Wittgenstein was given a Catholic burial at Parish of the Ascension Burial Ground in Cambridge.[170] Drury later said he had been troubled ever since about whether that was the right thing to do.[171] The ledger gravestone has recently been refurbished by the British Wittgenstein Society.[citation needed]
On his religious views, Wittgenstein was said to be greatly interested in Catholicism and was sympathetic to it. In his university years, he expressed belief in the Resurrection of Jesus.[172] However, he did not consider himself to be a Catholic. According to Norman Malcolm, Wittgenstein saw Catholicism as more of a way of life than as a set of beliefs he personally held, considering that he did not accept any religious faith.[173][174]
Wittgenstein was said to be agnostic, in a qualified sense, in the last years of his life.[175][176]
1953: Publication of the Philosophical Investigations[edit]
Main articles: Philosophical Investigations, Language-game and Private language argument




Illustration of a "duckrabbit", discussed in the Philosophical Investigations, section XI, part II


The Blue Book, a set of notes dictated to his class at Cambridge in 1933–1934, contains the seeds of Wittgenstein's later thoughts on language, and is widely read as a turning-point in his philosophy of language.
Philosophical Investigations was published in two parts in 1953. Most of Part I was ready for printing in 1946, but Wittgenstein withdrew the manuscript from his publisher. The shorter Part II was added by his editors, Elizabeth Anscombe and Rush Rhees. Wittgenstein asks the reader to think of language as a multiplicity of language-games within which parts of language develop and function. He argues that philosophical problems are bewitchments that arise from philosophers' misguided attempts to consider the meaning of words independently of their context, usage, and grammar, what he called "language gone on holiday."[177]
According to Wittgenstein, philosophical problems arise when language is forced from its proper home into a metaphysical environment, where all the familiar and necessary landmarks and contextual clues are removed. He describes this metaphysical environment as like being on frictionless ice: where the conditions are apparently perfect for a philosophically and logically perfect language, all philosophical problems can be solved without the muddying effects of everyday contexts; but where, precisely because of the lack of friction, language can in fact do no work at all.[178] Wittgenstein argues that philosophers must leave the frictionless ice and return to the "rough ground" of ordinary language in use. Much of the Investigations consists of examples of how the first false steps can be avoided, so that philosophical problems are dissolved, rather than solved: "the clarity we are aiming at is indeed complete clarity. But this simply means that the philosophical problems should completely disappear."[179]
Legacy[edit]



This section requires expansion. (January 2013)


Wittgenstein left a voluminous archive of unpublished papers, including 83 manuscripts, 46 typescripts and 11 dictations, amounting to an estimated 20,000 pages. Choosing among repeated drafts, revisions, corrections and loose notes editorial work has found nearly one third of the total suitable for print.[180] An Internet facility hosted by the University of Bergen allows access to images of almost all the material and to search the available transcriptions.[181] In 2011 two new boxes of Wittgenstein papers were found.[182]
Philosophical Investigations was the only nearly finished project and the book was published in 1953. In 1999 a survey among American university and college teachers ranked the Investigations as the most important book of 20th-century philosophy, standing out as "the one crossover masterpiece in twentieth-century philosophy, appealing across diverse specializations and philosophical orientations."[183]
The Investigations also ranked 54th on a list of most influential twentieth-century works in cognitive science prepared by the University of Minnesota's Center for Cognitive Sciences.[184] Peter Hacker argues that Wittgenstein's influence on 20th-century analytical philosophy can be attributed to his early influence on the Vienna Circle and later influence on the Oxford "ordinary language" school and Cambridge philosophers.[185]
Interpreters[edit]
Since Wittgenstein's death, scholarly interpretations of his philosophy have differed. Scholars have differed on the continuity between "early" and "late" Wittgenstein (that is, the difference between his views expressed in the Tractatus and those in Philosophical Investigations), with some seeing the two as starkly disparate and others stressing the gradual transition between the two works through analysis of Wittgenstein's unpublished papers (the Nachlass).[186]
One significant debate in Wittgenstein scholarship concerns the work of interpreters who are referred to under the banner of the New Wittgenstein school such as Cora Diamond, Alice Crary and James F. Conant. While the Tractatus, particularly in its conclusion, seems paradoxical and self-undermining, New Wittgenstein scholars advance a "therapeutic" understanding of Wittgenstein's work—"an understanding of Wittgenstein as aspiring, not to advance metaphysical theories, but rather to help us work ourselves out of confusions we become entangled in when philosophizing."[187] To support this goal, the New Wittgenstein scholars propose a reading of the Tractatus as "plain nonsense"—arguing it does not attempt to convey a substantive philosophical project but instead simply tries to push the reader to abandon philosophical speculation. The therapeutic approach traces its roots to the philosophical work of John Wisdom[188] and the review of The Blue Book written by Oets Kolk Bouwsma.[186][189]
The therapeutic approach is not without critics: Hans-Johann Glock argues that the "plain nonsense" reading of the Tractatus "...is at odds with the external evidence, writings and conversations in which Wittgenstein states that the Tractatus is committed to the idea of ineffable insight."[186]
Cultural references[edit]
Wittgenstein is the subject of the 1993 film Wittgenstein, by English director Derek Jarman, which is loosely based on his life story as well as his philosophical thinking. The adult Wittgenstein is played by the Welsh actor Karl Johnson.
Critic Terry Eagleton has described Wittgenstein as the philosopher of poets and composers, playwrights and novelists.[190]

For Wittgenstein's philosophy as therapy, see: Peterman, James F. Philosophy as Therapy, SUNY Press, 1992, p.&#160;13,ff.
For the poetic and literary quality of his work, see: Perloff, Marjorie. Wittgenstein's Ladder: Poetic Language and the Strangeness of the Ordinary, University of Chicago Press, 1999; and Gibson, John and Wolfgang Huemer (eds.). The Literary Wittgenstein, Routledge, 2004, p 2.
See also: Eagleton, Terry. "My Wittgenstein" in Stephen Regan (ed.). The Eagleton Reader, Wiley-Blackwell, 1997, pp.&#160;337,ff

James Burke's The Day the Universe Changed contains a story:

Someone apparently went up to the great philosopher Wittgenstein and said "What a lot of morons back in the Middle Ages must have been to have looked, every morning, at the dawn and to have thought what they were seeing was the Sun going around the Earth," when every school kid knows that the Earth goes around the Sun, to which Wittgenstein replied, "Yeah, but I wonder what it would have looked like if the Sun had been going around the Earth?" [191]

Works[edit]

A collection of Ludwig Wittgenstein's manuscripts is held by Trinity College, Cambridge.

Logisch-Philosophische Abhandlung, Annalen der Naturphilosophie, 14 (1921)

Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, translated by C.K. Ogden (1922)


Philosophische Untersuchungen (1953)

Philosophical Investigations, translated by G.E.M. Anscombe (1953)


Bemerkungen über die Grundlagen der Mathematik, ed. by G.H. von Wright, R. Rhees, and G.E.M. Anscombe (1956), a selection of his work on the philosophy of logic and mathematics between 1937 and 1944.

Remarks on the Foundations of Mathematics, translated by G.E.M. Anscombe, rev. ed. (1978)


Bemerkungen über die Philosophie der Psychologie, ed. G.E.M. Anscombe and G.H. von Wright (1980)

Remarks on the Philosophy of Psychology, Vols. 1 and 2, translated by G.E.M. Anscombe, ed. G.E.M. Anscombe and G.H. von Wright (1980), a selection of which makes up Zettel.


The Blue and Brown Books (1958), notes dictated in English to Cambridge students in 1933–1935.
Philosophische Bemerkungen, ed. by Rush Rhees (1964)

Philosophical Remarks (1975)
Philosophical Grammar (1978)


Bemerkungen über die Farben, ed. by G.E.M. Anscombe (1977)

Remarks on Colour (1991), remarks on Goethe's Theory of Colours.


On Certainty, collection of aphorisms discussing the relation between knowledge and certainty, extremely influential in the philosophy of action.
Culture and Value, collection of personal remarks about various cultural issues, such as religion and music, as well as critique of Søren Kierkegaard's philosophy.
Zettel, collection of Wittgenstein's thoughts in fragmentary/"diary entry" format as with On Certainty and Culture and Value.


Works online


Review of P. Coffey's Science of Logic (1913): a polemical book review, written in 1912 for the March 1913 issue of The Cambridge Review when Wittgenstein was an undergraduate studying with Russell. The review is the earliest public record of Wittgenstein's philosophical views.
Wittgenstein Source: 5 000 pages of the Wittgenstein Nachlass online
Works by Ludwig Wittgenstein at Project Gutenberg
Google Edition of Remarks on Colour
Some Remarks on Logical Form
Cambridge (1932–3) lecture notes
The Blue Book
Lecture on Ethics
On Certainty at the Wayback Machine (archived December 10, 2005)


See also[edit]




Philosophy portal




International Wittgenstein Symposium


Notes[edit]


^ Wittgenstein's Philosophy of Mathematics: Wittgenstein's Intermediate Critique of Set Theory entry by Victor Rodych in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, March 21, 2011
^ "Wittgenstein As Engineer"
^ Patton, Lydia, 2009, "Signs, Toy Models, and the A Priori: from Helmholtz to Wittgenstein," Studies in the History and Philosophy of Science, 40 (3): 281–289.
^ "Wittgenstein". Random House Webster's Unabridged Dictionary.
^ Dennett, Daniel (29 March 1999). "LUDWIG WITTGENSTEIN: Philosopher (subscription required)&#160;— Time 100: Scientists and Thinkers issue". Time Magazine Online. Retrieved 29 November 2011.&#160;
^ Dennett, Daniel. "Ludwig Wittgenstein: Philosopher", Time magazine, 29 March 1999.
^ For his publications during his lifetime, see Monk, R., How to read Wittgenstein. W.W. Norton &amp; Company. 2005, p. 5.

For the number of words published in his lifetime, see Stern, David. "The Bergen Electronic Edition of Wittgenstein's Nachlass", The European Journal of Philosophy. Vol 18, issue 3, September 2010.


^ A poll among some 400 american university and college philosophy teachers ranked it at number one in 1999; see Lackey, Douglas "What Are the Modern Classics? The Baruch Poll of Great Philosophy in the Twentieth Century", Philosophical Forum. 30 (4), December 1999, pp. 329–346. For a summary of the poll, see here [1]. Retrieved 3 September 2010.
^ For the Russell quote, see McGuinness, Brian. Wittgenstein: A Life&#160;: Young Ludwig 1889–1921. University of California Press, 1988, p. 118.
^ When his father died in 1913 and Ludwig inherited a considerable fortune... Then, after the First World War, in which he fought as a volunteer in the Austro-Hungarian army, he gave away his entire fortune to his brothers and sisters and, plagued by depression, sought refuge in Lower Austria, where he worked as a primary school teacher. [Goethe Institute http://www.goethe.de/ges/phi/prt/en2341144.htm ]
^ Duffy, Bruce. "The do-it-yourself life of Ludwig Wittgenstein", The New York Times, 13 November 1988, p. 4/10.

For his selling his furniture, see "Ludwig Wittgenstein: Tractatus and Teaching", Cambridge Wittgenstein archive. Retrieved 4 September 2010.


^ For the brothers' suicides, see Waugh, Alexander. "The Wittgensteins: Viennese whirl", The Daily Telegraph, 30 August 2008.

Also see Gottlieb, Anthony. "A Nervous Splendor", The New Yorker, 9 April 2009.


^ Monk, R., Ludwig Wittgenstein: The Duty of Genius. Free Press, 1990, pp. 232–233, 431.

For his commendation, see Waugh, A., The House of Wittgenstein: a Family at War. Random House of Canada, 2008, p. 114.


^ Malcolm, (Additional note) p. 84.
^ PDF
^ a b Malcolm, p. 6.
^ a b Bramann, Jorn K. and Moran, John. "Karl Wittgenstein, Business Tycoon and Art Patron", Frostburg State University. Retrieved 2 September 2010.
^ See Schloss Wittgenstein. Various sources spell Meier's name Maier and Meyer.
^ Bartley, pp. 199–200.
^ Monk, pp. 4–5.
^ Monk, p. 5.
^ a b c Edmonds, Eidinow, "Wittgenstein's Poker", page 63
^ Monk, p. 7.
^ Edmonds, Eidinow, "Wittgenstein's Poker", page 102
^ Ranjit Chatterjee, Wittgenstein and Judaism: A Triumph of Concealment, 2005, p.178
^ A Nervous Splendor&#160;: The New Yorker
^ B. McGuinness, Wittgenstein: a life&#160;: young Ludwig 1889-1921
^ Wittgenstein, Leopoldine (Schenker Documents Online)
^ For his mother's Roman Catholic background, see "Ludwig Wittgenstein: Background", Wittgenstein archive, University of Cambridge. Retrieved 2 September 2010.

For his time and place of birth, see Edmonds, David and Eidinow, John. Wittgenstein's Poker. Faber and Faber, 2001, p. 57.


^ Bartley, William Warren. Wittgenstein. Open Court, 1994, p. 16, first published 1973.
^ http://www.cornellpress.cornell.edu/book/?GCOI=80140100188770
^ a b Monk, p. 8.
^ McGuinness, p. 18.
^ Theodore Redpath, Ludwig Wittgenstein: A Student's Memoir, London: Duckworth, 1990, p. 112
^ Edmonds, Eidinow, "Wittgenstein's Poker"
^ a b c Monk, pp. 442–443.
^ a b Monk, pp.14–15.
^ [2] "Three Bars by Wittgenstein" by Eric Heijerman, Muzikologija, 2005 (5): pp393-395
^ a b Monk, p. 11ff.
^ Kenny, Anthony. "Give Him Genius or Give Him Death", The New York Times, 30 December 1990.

Also see "Ludwig Wittgenstein: Background", Wittgenstein archive, University of Cambridge. Retrieved 7 September 2010.


^ Fitzgerald, Michael. "Did Ludwig Wittgenstein have Asperger's syndrome?", European Child &amp; Adolescent Psychiatry, volume 9, number 1, pp. 61–65. doi:10.1007/s007870050117
^ a b Gottlieb, Anthony. "A Nervous Splendor", The New Yorker, 9 April 2009.
^ Waugh p.38.
^ Waugh p.10.
^ Waugh, pp. 24–26.

Also see Monk, p. 11ff.


^ For the Koschat song, see "Verlassen bin ich" on YouTube. Retrieved 11 September 2010.
^ Waugh, pp. 22–23.

For the primary source, see Hirschfield, Magnus. Jahrbuch für sexuelle Zwischenstufen, Vol VI, 1904, p. 724, citing an unnamed Berlin newspaper, cited in turn by Bartley, p. 36.
More details in Waugh, Alexander. "The Wittgensteins: Viennese whirl", The Daily Telegraph, 30 August 2008.
Also see Gottlieb, Anthony. "A Nervous Splendor", The New Yorker, 9 April 2009.


^ Drury, Recollections p. 160; cf. The Danger of Words (1973) p. ix, xiv)
^ Waugh, p. 128.
^ McGuinness, Brian. Wittgenstein: a life&#160;: young Ludwig 1889–1921. University of California Press, 1988, p.156
^ Waugh, p. 33.

McGuinness, Brian. Wittgenstein: a life&#160;: young Ludwig 1889-1921. University of California Press, 1988, p. 51ff.
K.u.k. stood for "Kaiserlich und königlich.


^ a b c McGuinness, p. 51.
^ McGuinness, Brian. Wittgenstein: a life&#160;: young Ludwig 1889-1921. University of California Press, 1988, p. 51ff.
^ Hamann, Brigitte and Thornton, Thomas. Hitler's Vienna: A Dictator's Apprenticeship. Oxford University Press, 2000 (first published 1996 in German) pp. 15–16, 79.
^ http://books.google.com/books/about/Wittgenstein.html?id=VvXWAAAAMAAJ
^ a b Monk, p. 18.
^ Culture &amp; Value, p.24, 1933-4
^ Bruce R. Ashford, "Wittgenstein's Theologians: A Survey of Ludwig Wittgenstein's Impact on Theology"
^ Monk, Ray (July 20, 1999). "Wittgenstein's Forgotten Lesson". Prospect Magazine (July 1999) (Prospect Magazine). Retrieved 24 August 2014.&#160;
^ Ludwig Wittgenstein, "Lectures on Religious Belief"
^ a b Rush Rhees, "Ludwig Wittgenstein: Personal Recollections"
^ Norman Malcolm, "Wittgenstein: A Religious Point of View"
^ Monk, pp. 19–26.
^ p216, Philosophical Tales, Cohen, M., Blackwell 2008
^ For the view that Wittgenstein saw himself as completely German, not Jewish, see McGuinness, Brian. "Wittgenstein and the Idea of Jewishness", and for an opposing view, see Stern, David. "Was Wittgenstein Jewish?", both in James Carl Klagge. Wittgenstein: Biography and Philosophy. Cambridge University Press, 2001, pp. 231ff and p 237ff respectively.
^ Goldstein, Lawrence. Clear and Queer Thinking: Wittgenstein's Development and his Relevance to Modern Thought. Duckworth, 1999, p. 167ff. Also see "Clear and Queering Thinking", review in Mind, Oxford University Press, 2001.
^ McGinn, Marie. "Hi Ludwig", Times Literary Supplement, 26 May 2000.
^ Hitler started at the school on 17 September 1900, repeated the first year in 1901, and left in the autumn of 1905; see Kersaw, Ian. Hitler, 1889–1936. W. W. Norton &amp; Company, 2000, p. 16ff.

McGuinness, Brian. Wittgenstein: a life&#160;: young Ludwig 1889-1921. University of California Press, 1988, p. 51ff.


^ Monk, p. 15.

Brigitte Hamann argues in Hitler's Vienna (1996) that Hitler was bound to have laid eyes on Wittgenstein, because the latter was so conspicuous, though she told Focus magazine they were in different classes, and she agrees with Monk that they would have had nothing to do with one another. See Hamann, Brigitte and Thornton, Thomas. Hitler's Vienna: A Dictator's Apprenticeship. Oxford University Press, 2000, pp. 15–16, 79, and Thiede, Roger. "Phantom Wittgenstein", Focus magazine, 16 March 1998.


^ For examples, see Cornish, Kimberley. The Jew of Linz. Arrow, 1999.

Blum, Michael; Rollig, Stella; and Nyanga, Steven. "Monument to the birth of the 20th century", Revolver, 2005. Blum's material is also on display in an exhibition in the OK Centrum für Gegenwartskunst, Linz, and in the Galerija Nova, Zagreb, 2006. Retrieved 9 September 2010, and
Gibbons, Luke. "An extraordinary family saga", Irish Times, 29 November 2008.
For an opposing view, see Hamann, Brigitte and Thornton, Thomas. Hitler's Vienna: A Dictator's Apprenticeship. Oxford University Press, 2000, pp. 15–16, 79.
See the full image at the Bundesarchiv. Retrieved 27 September 2015. The archives give the date of the image as circa 1901.


^ Thiede, Roger. "Phantom Wittgenstein", Focus magazine, 16 March 1998.

The German Federal Archives says the image was taken "circa 1901"; it identifies the class as 1B and the teacher as Oskar Langer. See the full image and description at the Bundesarchiv. Retrieved 6 September 2010. The archive gives the date as circa 1901, but wrongly calls it the Realschule in Leonding, near Linz. Hitler attended primary school in Leonding, but from September 1901 went to the Realschule in Linz itself. See Kershaw, Ian. Hitler, 1889-1936. W. W. Norton &amp; Company, 2000, p. 16ff.
Christoph Haidacher and Richard Schober write that Langer taught at the school from 1884 until 1901; see Haidacher, Christoph and Schober, Richard. Von Stadtstaaten und Imperien, Universitätsverlag Wagner, 2006, p. 140.


^ See e.g. (MS 154)
^ Culture and Value, Ludwig Wittgenstein, (Oxford 1998), page 16e (see also, pages 15e-19e)
^ M.O'C. Drury, "Conversations with Wittgenstein", in Recollections of Wittgenstein, ed. R. Rhees, New York: Oxford University Press, revised edition, 1984,p. 161.
^ Hans D. Sluga, The Cambridge companion to Wittgenstein, (Cambridge, 1996) page 2
^ Monk, p. 27.
^ a b Monk, p. 29.
^ a b c Monk, pp. 30–35.
^ Beaney, Michael (ed.). The Frege Reader. Blackwell, 1997, pp. 194-223, 258–289.
^ a b c Monk, p. 36ff.
^ Kanterian, p. 36.
^ a b O'Connor, J.J. and Robertson, E.F. "Ludwig Josef Johann Wittgenstein", St Andrews University. Retrieved 2 September 2010.
^ a b McGuinness, Brian. Wittgenstein: A Life&#160;: Young Ludwig 1889–1921. University of California Press, 1988, pp. 88–89.
^ Monk, p. 41.
^ Russell, Bertrand. Autobiography. Routledge, 1998, p. 281.
^ Pitt, Jack. "Russell and the Cambridge Moral Sciences Club", "Russell: the Journal of Bertrand Russell Studies: Vol. 1, issue 2, article 3, winter 1982.

Also see Klagge, James Carl and Nordmann, Alfred (eds.) Ludwig Wittgenstein: Public and Private Occasions. Rowman &amp; Littlefield, 2003, p. 332, citing Michael Nedo and Michele Ranchetti (eds.). Ludwig Wittgenstein: sein Leben in Bildern und Texten. Suhrkamp, 1983, p. 89.


^ Edmonds, David and Eidinow, John. Wittgenstein's Poker. Faber and Faber, 2001, p. 22–28.
^ Eidinow, John and Edmonds, David. "When Ludwig met Karl...", The Guardian, 31 March 2001.

"Wittgenstein's Poker by David Edmonds and John Eidinow", The Guardian, 21 November 2001.


^ Minutes of the Wittgenstein's poker meeting, University of Cambridge, shown on Flickr. Retrieved 7 September 2010.
^ McGuinness, Brian. Wittgenstein: A Life: Young Ludwig 1889-1921. University of California Press, 1988, p. 118.
^ Monk, pp. 583–586.
^ Monk, pp. 369.
^ Monk, pp. 238-40 and 318
^ Goldstein, Laurence. Clear and queer thinking: Wittgenstein's development and his relevance to modern thought. Rowman &amp; Littlefield, 1999, p. 179.
^ Monk, p. 58ff. *See Pinsent, David Hume and Von Wright, G.H. A Portrait of Wittgenstein as a Young Man: From the Diary of David Hume Pinsent 1912-1914. Blackwell, 1990.
^ a b Kanterian, p. 40.
^ Monk, p. 71.
^ Stewart, Jon. (Ed.) Kierkegaard's Influence on Philosophy: German and Scandinavian Philosophy. Ashgate Publishing, 2009, p. 216.
^ Monk, p. 262.
^ a b Edmonds, David and Eidinow, John. Wittgenstein's Poker. Faber and Faber, 2001, p. 45–46.
^ Monk, p. 103.
^ McGuinness, Brian. Wittgenstein: A Life&#160;: Young Ludwig 1889–1921. University of California Press, 1988, p. 200.
^ Wittgenstein had a double hernia, according to philosopher Iain King, who recounts Wittgenstein's war record in an April 2014 article here (link to Military History Monthly magazine article), accessed 23rd July 2014.
^ Wittgenstein's medical exemption is confirmed in Philosophy Now magazine here (link to Philosophy Now), accessed 23rd July 2014.
^ According to philosopher Iain King, who described Wittgenstein's war record and its impact on his thinking here (link to Military History Monthly magazine article), accessed 23rd July 2014.
^ From Iain King, writing in April 2014 about Wittgenstein's war record and its impact on his thinking here (link to Military History Monthly magazine article), accessed 23rd July 2014.
^ a b Monk, pp.137–142.
^ From a July 2014 article in Philosophy Now magazine here (link to Philosophy Now), accessed 23rd July 2014.
^ Waugh, p. 114.
^ Monk, p. 154.
^ Klagge, James Carl (22 December 2010). Wittgenstein in exile. MIT Press. p.&#160;68. ISBN&#160;978-0-262-01534-9.&#160;
^ Monk, pp. 44, 116, 382–384.

Also see Bill Schardt &amp; David Large, "Wittgenstein, Tolstoy, and the Gospel in Brief", The Philosopher, Volume LXXXIX.


^ Monk, p. 136.

Also see Robert Hanna, "Kant, Wittgenstein, and Transcendental Philosophy".


^ King writes: "... the two halves of his war service seem to be reflected in a change of writing style. Protected from danger until spring 1916, his words were dry, abstract, and logical. Only when he was in the midst of action did he confront ethics and aesthetics, concluding their ‘truths’ could only be shown, not stated." - taken from 'Thinker at War' article on Wittgenstein (link), accessed 23rd July 2014.
^ Monk, p. 183.
^ a b Bartley, pp. 33–39, 45.
^ Bartley, pp. 33–34. For an original report, see "Death of D.H. Pinsent", Birmingham Daily Mail, 15 May 1918: "Recovery of the Body. The body of Mr. David Hugh Pinsent, a civilian observer, son of Mr and Mrs Hume Pinsent, of Foxcombe Hill, near Oxford and Birmingham, the second victim of last Wednesday's aeroplane accident in West Surrey, was last night found in the Basingstoke Canal, at Frimley." Courtesy of "Wittgenstein in Birmingham", mikeinmono, 3 August 2009. Retrieved 7 September 2010.
^ Monk, p. 169ff.
^ Edmonds, Eidinow, "Wittgenstein's Poker", page 68
^ Waugh, p. 150
^ Klagge, James Carl. Wittgenstein: Biography and Philosophy. Cambridge University Press, 2001, p. 185.
^ Malcolm, Norman. "Wittgenstein’s Confessions", London Review of Books, Vol. 3 No. 21, 19 November 1981.
^ Monk, p. 195.
^ Bartley, p. 107.
^ Monk, pp. 196, 198.
^ For the introduction, see Russell, Bertrand. Introduction, Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, May 1922.
^ Russell, Nieli. Wittgenstein: From Mysticism to Ordinary Language. SUNY Press, 1987, p. 199.
^ Edmonds, David and Eidinow, John. Wittgenstein's Poker. Faber and Faber, 2001, p. 35ff.
^ a b "Ludwig Wittgenstein: Tractatus and Teaching", Cambridge Wittgenstein archive]. Retrieved 4 September 2010.
^ For example, Ramsey translated "Sachverhalt" and "Sachlage" as "atomic fact" and "state of affairs" respectively. But Wittgenstein discusses non-existent "Sachverhalten", and there cannot be a non-existent fact. Pears and McGuinness made a number of changes, including translating "Sachverhalt" as "state of affairs" and "Sachlage" as situation. The new translation is often preferred, but some philosophers use the original, in part because Wittgenstein approved it, and because it avoids the idiomatic English of Pears-McGuinness. See:

White, Roger. Wittgenstein's Tractatus logico-philosophicus. Continuum International Publishing Group, 2006, p. 145.
For a discussion about the relative merits of the translations, see Morris, Michael Rowland. "Introduction", Routledge philosophy guidebook to Wittgenstein and the Tractatus. Taylor &amp; Francis, 2008; and Nelson, John O. "Is the Pears-McGuinness translation of the Tractatus really superior to Ogden's and Ramsey's?, Philosophical Investigations, 22:2, April 1999.
See the three versions (Wittgenstein's German, published 1921; Ramsey-Ogden's translation, published 1922; and the Pears-McGuinness translation, published 1961) side by side here [3], University of Massachusetts. Retrieved 4 September 2010.


^ Grayling, A. C. Wittgenstein: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford University Press, 2001, p. 16ff.
^ Tractatus (Ogden translation), preface.
^ For the comment to Ogden, see Monk, p. 207.
^ The English is from the original Ogden/Ramsey translation.
^ a b c d Monk, pp. 212, 214–216, 220–221.
^ Mellor, D.H. "Cambridge Philosophers I: F. P. Ramsey", Philosophy 70, 1995, pp. 243–262.
^ Ezard, John. "Philosopher's rare 'other book' goes on sale", The Guardian, 19 February 2005.
^ a b c Monk, pp. 224, 232–233.
^ Waugh, p. 162. Monk, p. 232.
^ Monk, pp. 370–371.
^ The Limits of Science—and Scientists
^ Rudolf Carnap, Autobiography, in P.A. Schlipp (ed) The Philosophy of Rudolf Carnap, The Library of Living Philosophers, Volume 11, La Salle Open Court, 1963, pages 25-27
^ a b Hyde, Lewis. "Making It". The New York Times, 6 April 2008.
^ a b Jeffries, Stuart. "A dwelling for the gods", The Guardian, 5 January 2002.
^ a b Monk, page 240
^ Monk, p. 255.
^ Monk, p. 271.
^ R. B. Braithwaite George Edward Moore, 1873 - 1958, in Alice Ambrose and Morris Lazerowitz. G.E. Moore: Essays in Retrospect. Allen &amp; Unwin, 1970.
^ Ludwig Wittgenstein: Return to Cambridge from the Cambridge Wittgenstein Archive
^ Waugh, pp. 137ff, 204–209.
^ Waugh, pp. 224–226.
^ For the view that Wittgenstein saw himself as a Jew, see Stern, David. "Was Wittgenstein Jewish?", in James Carl Klagge. Wittgenstein: Biography and Philosophy. Cambridge University Press, 2001, p. 237ff.
^ Edmonds, David and Eidinow, John. Wittgenstein's Poker. Faber and Faber, 2001, pp. 98, 105.
^ Edmonds, David and Eidinow, John. "Wittgenstein's Poker", Faber and Faber, London 2001, p. 98.
^ Moran, John. "Wittgenstein and Russia" New Left Review 73, May–June 1972, pp. 83–96.
^ Malcolm, pp. 23–4.
^ Malcolm, p. 25.
^ Monk, p. 528
^ Hoffmann, Josef. "Hard-boiled Wit: Ludwig Wittgenstein and Norbert Davis", CADS, no. 44, October 2003.
^ Malcolm, p. 26.
^ Diamond, Cora (ed.). Wittgenstein's Lectures on the Foundations of Mathematics. University Of Chicago Press, 1989.
^ For his desire that his students not pursue philosophy, see Malcolm, p. 28
^ a b Monk, p. 431ff.
^ Monk, p. 432.
^ Wittgenstein Upon Tyne Bill Schardt , Newcastle Philosophical Society. Retrieved December 2011
^ Monk, p. 447ff.
^ a b c "Ludwig Wittgenstein: Final Years", Cambridge Wittgenstein archive. Retrieved 8 September 2010.[dead link]

Also see Malcolm, p. 79ff.


^ Malcolm, p. 79ff.
^ a b Malcolm, pp. 80–81.
^ A Guide to Churchill College, Cambridge: text by Dr. Mark Goldie, pages 62 and 63 (2009)
^ Monk, pp. 576–580.
^ Finch, Peter (1984), Ludwig Wittgenstein, Culture and Value, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, p.&#160;33, What inclines even me to believe in Christ's resurrection? I play as it were with the thought.–If he did not rise from the dead, then he decomposed in the grave like every human being. He is dead &amp; decomposed. In that case he is a teacher, like any other &amp; can no longer help; &amp; we are once more orphaned &amp; alone. And have to make do with wisdom &amp; speculation. It is as though we are in a hell, where we can only dream &amp; are shut out from heaven, roofed in as it were. But if I am to be REALLY redeemed,– I need certainty–not wisdom, dreams, speculation–and this certainty is faith. And faith is faith in what my heart, my soul, needs, not my speculative intellect. For my soul, with its passions, as it were with its flesh and blood, must be redeemed, not my abstract mind. Perhaps one may say: Only love can believe the Resurrection. Or: it is love that believes the Resurrection&#160;
^ Norman Malcolm; G. H. Von Wright (2001). Ludwig Wittgenstein: A Memoir. Oxford University Press. pp.&#160;59–60. ISBN&#160;9780199247592. I believe that Wittgenstein was prepared by his own character and experience to comprehend the idea of a judging and redeeming God. But any cosmological conception of a Deity, derived from the notions of cause or of infinity, would be repugnant to him. He was impatient with 'proofs' of the existence of God, and with attempts to give religion a rational foundation. ...I do not wish to give the impression that Wittgenstein accepted any religious faith—he certainly did not—or that he was a religious person. But I think that there was in him, in some sense, the possibility of religion. I believe that he looked on religion as a 'form of life' (to use an expression from the Investigations) in which he did not participate, but with which he was sympathetic and which greatly interested him. Those who did participate he respected — although here as elsewhere he had contempt for insincerity. I suspect that he regarded religious belief as based on qualities of character and will that he himself did not possess. Of Smythies and Anscombe, both of whom had become Roman Catholics, he once said to me: 'I could not possibly bring myself to believe all the things that they believe.' I think that in this remark he was not disparaging their belief. It was rather an observation about his own capacity.&#160;
^ Tim Labron (2006). Wittgenstein's Religious Point of View. Continuum International Publishing Group. p.&#160;47. ISBN&#160;9780826490278. Wittgenstein has no goal to either support or reject religion; his only interest is to keep discussions, whether religious or not, clear.&#160;
^ William Child (2011). Wittgenstein. Taylor &amp; Francis. p.&#160;218. ISBN&#160;9781136731372. "Was Wittgenstein religious? If we call him an agnostic, this must not be understood in the sense of the familiar polemical agnosticism that concentrates, and prides itself, on the argument that man could never know about these matters. The idea of a God in the sense of the Bible, the image of God as the creator of the world, hardly ever engaged Wittgenstein's attention..., but the notion of a last judgement was of profound concern to him." - (Engelmann)&#160;
^ Edward Kanterian (2007). Ludwig Wittgenstein. Reaktion Books. pp.&#160;145–146. ISBN&#160;9781861893208.&#160;
^ PI, §38.
^ PI, §107.
^ PI, §133.
^ Stern D., "The Bergen Electronic Edition of Wittgenstein's Nachlass", The European Journal of Philosophy. Vol 18, issue 3, September 2010.
^ The Wittgenstein Archives at the University of Bergen (WAB)
^ Cambridge University Press release: Unpublished Wittgenstein Archive explored
^ Lackey, Douglas "What Are the Modern Classics? The Baruch Poll of Great Philosophy in the Twentieth Century", Philosophical Forum. 30 (4), December 1999, pp. 329–346. For a summary of the poll, see here. Retrieved 3 September 2010.
^ "The one hundred most influential works in cognitive science in the 20th century". Millennium Project.&#160;
^ "Peter Hacker". Philosophy Now. Retrieved 17 October 2013.&#160;
^ a b c Glock, Hans-Johann (2007). "Perspectives on Wittgenstein: An Intermittently Opinionated Survey". In Kahane, Guy; Kanterian, Edward; Kuusela, Oskari. Wittgenstein and his interpreters: essays in memory of Gordon Baker. Blackwell. pp.&#160;37–65. ISBN&#160;9781405129220.&#160;
^ Alice Crary, The New Wittgenstein, p. 1
^ Wisdom, John (1953). Philosophy and Psycho-Analysis. Blackwell.&#160;
^ Bouwsma, O. K. (16 March 1961). "The Blue Book". The Journal of Philosophy 58 (6): 141–162. doi:10.2307/2023409. Retrieved 15 November 2014.&#160;
^ For ethical and religious themes, see Barrett, Cyril. Wittgenstein on Ethics and Religious Belief. Blackwell, 1991, p. 138.
^ The Day the Universe Changed at Documentary-Video; distributed by Ambrose Video Publishing, Inc., New York, NY


References[edit]


Bartley, William Warren. Wittgenstein. Open Court, 1994, first published 1973.
Barrett, Cyril. Wittgenstein on Ethics and Religious Belief. Blackwell, 1991.
Beaney, Michael (ed.). The Frege Reader. Blackwell, 1997.
Braithwaite, R. B. "George Edward Moore, 1873 - 1958", in Alice Ambrose and Morris Lazerowitz. (eds.). G.E. Moore: Essays in Retrospect. Allen &amp; Unwin, 1970.
Diamond, Cora (ed.). Wittgenstein's Lectures on the Foundations of Mathematics. University Of Chicago Press, 1989.
Creegan, Charles. Wittgenstein and Kierkegaard: Religion, Individuality and Philosophical Method. Routledge, 1989.
Drury, Maurice O'Connor et al. The Danger of Words and Writings on Wittgenstein. Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1973.
Drury, Maurice O'Connor. "Conversations with Wittgenstein", in Rush Rhees (ed.). Recollections of Wittgenstein: Hermine Wittgenstein--Fania Pascal--F.R. Leavis--John King--M. O'C. Drury. Oxford University Press, 1984.
Edmonds, David and Eidinow, John. Wittgenstein's Poker. Ecco, 2001.
Edwards, James C. Ethics Without Philosophy: Wittgenstein and the Moral Life. University Presses of Florida, 1982.
Gellner, Ernest. Words and Things. Routledge &amp; Kegan Paul, 1979, originally published 1959.
Goldstein, Laurence. Clear and Queer Thinking: Wittgenstein's Development and his Relevance to Modern Thought. Rowman &amp; Littlefield, 1999.
Hamann, Brigitte and Thornton, Thomas. Hitler's Vienna: A Dictator's Apprenticeship. Oxford University Press, 2000.
Kanterian, Edward. Ludwig Wittgenstein. Reaktion Books, 2007.
Klagge, James Carl. Wittgenstein: Biography and Philosophy. Cambridge University Press, 2001.
Klagge, James Carl and Nordmann, Alfred (eds.). Ludwig Wittgenstein: Public and Private Occasions. Rowman &amp; Littlefield, 2003.
Kripke, Saul. Wittgenstein on rules and private language: an elementary exposition. Harvard University Press, 1982.
Leitner, Bernhard. The Architecture of Ludwig Wittgenstein: A Documentation. Press of the Nova Scotia College of Art and Design, 1973.
Malcolm, Norman. Ludwig Wittgenstein: A Memoir. Oxford University Press, 1958.
McGuinness, Brian. Wittgenstein: A Life&#160;: Young Ludwig 1889-1921. University of California Press, 1988.
Monk, Ray. Ludwig Wittgenstein: The Duty of Genius. Free Press, 1990.
Nedo, Michael and Ranchetti, Michele (eds.). Ludwig Wittgenstein: sein Leben in Bildern und Texten. Suhrkamp, 1983.
Perloff, Marjorie. Wittgenstein's Ladder: Poetic Language and the Strangeness of the Ordinary. University of Chicago Press, 1996.
Peterman, James F. Philosophy as therapy. SUNY Press, 1992.
Russell, Bertrand. Autobiography. Routledge, 1998.
Russell, Bertrand. "Introduction", Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, May 1922.
Shanker, S., &amp; Shanker, V. A. (eds.). Ludwig Wittgenstein: Critical Assessments. Croom Helm, 1986.
Sluga, Hans D. (ed.). The Cambridge Companion to Wittgenstein. Cambridge University Press, 1996.
Waugh, Alexander. The House of Wittgenstein: A Family at War. Random House of Canada, 2008.
Whitehead, Alfred North and Russell, Bertrand. Principia Mathematica. Cambridge University Press, first published 1910.


Further reading[edit]


Bergen and Cambridge archives


Wittgenstein Archives at the University of Bergen. Retrieved 16 September 2010.




Wittgenstein News, University of Bergen. Retrieved 16 September 2010.
Wittgenstein Source, University of Bergen. Retrieved 16 September 2010.




The Cambridge Wittgenstein Archive. Retrieved 16 September 2010.


Papers about his Nachlass


Stern, David. "The Bergen Electronic Edition of Wittgenstein's Nachlass", The European Journal of Philosophy. Vol 18, issue 3, September 2010.
Von Wright, G.H. "The Wittgenstein Papers", The Philosophical Review. 78, 1969.


Other


Baker, G.P. and Hacker, P.M.S. Wittgenstein: Understanding and Meaning. Blackwell, 1980.
Baker, G.P. and Hacker, P.M.S. Wittgenstein: Rules, Grammar, and Necessity. Blackwell, 1985.
Baker, G.P. and Hacker, P.M.S. Wittgenstein: Meaning and Mind. Blackwell, 1990.
Brockhaus, Richard R. Pulling Up the Ladder: The Metaphysical Roots of Wittgenstein's Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus. Open Court, 1990.
Conant, James F. "Putting Two and Two Together: Kierkegaard, Wittgenstein and the Point of View for Their Work as Authors" in The Grammar of Religious Belief, edited by D.Z. Phillips. St. Martins Press, NY: 1996
Engelmann, Paul. Letters from Ludwig Wittgenstein. Basil Blackwell, 1967
Fraser, Giles. "Investigating Wittgenstein, part 1: Falling in love", The Guardian, 25 January 2010.
Grayling, A. C. Wittgenstein: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford University Press, 2001.
Hacker, P.M.S. Insight and Illusion: Themes in the Philosophy of Wittgenstein. Clarendon Press, 1986.
Hacker, P.M.S. "Wittgenstein, Ludwig Josef Johann", in Ted Honderich (ed.). The Oxford Companion to Philosophy. Oxford University Press, 1995.
Hacker, P.M.S. Wittgenstein's Place in Twentieth Century Analytic Philosophy. Blackwell, 1996.
Hacker, P.M.S. Wittgenstein: Mind and Will. Blackwell, 1996.
Jormakka, Kari. "The Fifth Wittgenstein", Datutop 24, 2004, a discussion of the connection between Wittgenstein's architecture and his philosophy.
Levy, Paul. Moore: G.E. Moore and the Cambridge Apostles. Weidenfeld &amp; Nicholson, 1979.
Luchte, James. "Under the Aspect of Time (“sub specie temporis”): Heidegger, Wittgenstein, and the Place of the Nothing", Philosophy Today, Volume 53, Number 2 (Spring, 2009)
Lurie, Yuval. Wittgenstein on the Human Spirit.. Rodopi, 2012.
Macarthur, David. "Working on Oneself in Philosophy and Architecture: A Perfectionist Reading of the Wittgenstein House.” Architectural Theory Review, vol. 19, no. 2 (2014): 124–140.
McGuinness, Brian. Wittgenstein in Cambridge: Letters and Documents 1911-1951. Wiley-Blackwell, 2008.
Padilla Gálvez, J., Wittgenstein, from a New Point of View. Wittgenstein-Studien. Frankfurt a.M.: Lang, 2003. ISBN 3-631-50623-6.
Padilla Gálvez, J., Philosophical Anthropology. Wittgenstein's Perspectives. Frankfurt a. M.: Ontos Verlag, 2010. ISBN 978-3-86838-067-5.
Monk, Ray. How To Read Wittgenstein. Norton, 2005.
Pears, David F. "A Special Supplement: The Development of Wittgenstein’s Philosophy", The New York Review of Books, 10 July 1969.
Pears, David F. The False Prison, A Study of the Development of Wittgenstein's Philosophy, Volumes 1 and 2. Oxford University Press, 1987 and 1988.
Richter, Duncan J. "Ludwig Wittgenstein (1889—1951)", Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 30 August 2004. Retrieved 16 September 2010.
Scheman, Naomi and O'Connor, Peg (eds.). Feminist Interpretations of Ludwig Wittgenstein. Penn State Press, 2002.
Schönbaumsfeld, Genia. A Confusion of the Spheres: Kierkegaard and Wittgenstein on Philosophy and Religion. Oxford University Press, 2007.
Temelini, Michael. Wittgenstein and the Study of Politics. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2015.
Xanthos, Nicolas, "Wittgenstein's Language Games", in Louis Hebert (dir.), Signo (online), Rimouski (Quebec, Canada), 2006.


Works referencing Wittgenstein


Doctorow, E. L. City of God. Plume, 2001, depicts an imaginary rivalry between Wittgenstein and Einstein.
Doxiadis, Apostolos and Papadimitriou, Christos. Logicomix. Bloomsbury, 2009.
Duffy, Bruce. The World as I Found It. Ticknor &amp; Fields, 1987, a recreation of Wittgenstein's life.
Jarman, Derek. Wittgenstein, a biopic of Wittgenstein with a script by Terry Eagleton, British Film Institute, 1993.
Kerr, Philip. A Philosophical Investigation, Chatto &amp; Windus, 1992, a dystopian thriller set in 2012.
Markson, David. Wittgenstein's Mistress. Dalkey Archive Press, 1988, an experimental novel, a first-person account of what it would be like to live in the world of the Tractatus.
Tully, James. Strange Multiplicity: Constitutionalism in an Age of Diversity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995
Wallace, David Foster. The Broom of the System. Penguin Books, 1987, a novel.


External links[edit]



Find more about
Ludwig Wittgenstein
at Wikipedia's sister projects




Media from Commons



Quotations from Wikiquote



Source texts from Wikisource



Works by Ludwig Wittgenstein at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about Ludwig Wittgenstein at Internet Archive
Works by Ludwig Wittgenstein at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
Trinity College Chapel
Ludwig Wittgenstein at Find a Grave
John Searle on Ludwig Wittgenstein on YouTube
Chronology of Wittgenstein's Life and Work (constructed day-by-day, one hundred years on)
BBC Radio 4 programme on Wittgenstein (listen online)
A. J. Ayer’s Critique of Wittgenstein’s Private Language Argument









v
t
e


Ludwig Wittgenstein






Family



Margaret Stonborough-Wittgenstein
Karl Wittgenstein
Paul Wittgenstein
Works associated with Paul Wittgenstein








Early work



Picture theory of language
Truth tables








Later work



Language-game
Private language argument
Family resemblance
Rule following
Form of life
Wittgenstein's philosophy of mathematics








Publications



Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus
Some Remarks on Logical Form
Blue and Brown Books
Philosophical Remarks
Philosophical Investigations
On Certainty
Culture and Value
Remarks on Frazer's Golden Bough
Remarks on the Foundations of Mathematics
Zettel
Remarks on Colour
Lectures and Conversations on Aesthetics, Psychology, and Religious Belief








Movements



Analytic philosophy
Linguistic turn
Ideal language philosophy
Logical atomism
Logical positivism
Ordinary language philosophy
Wittgensteinian fideism
Quietism








Friends



G. E. M. Anscombe
R. B. Braithwaite
Rudolf Carnap
Paul Engelmann
John Maynard Keynes
Peter Geach
Norman Malcolm
G. E. Moore
David Pinsent
Frank P. Ramsey
Rush Rhees
Bertrand Russell
Moritz Schlick
Francis Skinner
Piero Sraffa
Vienna Circle
Friedrich Waismann
Peter Winch
G. H. von Wright








Biographers



David Edmonds
Ray Monk
William Warren Bartley








Secondary sources



A. J. Ayer
Gordon Baker
James F. Conant
Cora Diamond
Terry Eagleton
Peter Hacker
Saul Kripke
Anthony Kenny
Warren Goldfarb
Stanley Cavell
D. Z. Phillips
Colin McGinn
Jaakko Hintikka
Oswald Hanfling
A. C. Grayling
Rupert Read
Barry Stroud
Stephen Toulmin
Crispin Wright
Fergus Kerr








Miscellaneous



Cambridge Apostles
Cambridge University Moral Sciences Club
Haidbauer incident
Haus Wittgenstein
Fritz Mauthner








Film



Wittgenstein (film)
















v
t
e


Analytic philosophy






Philosophers



Robert Merrihew Adams
William P. Alston
J. L. Austin
A. J. Ayer
G. E. M. Anscombe
David Malet Armstrong
Robert Audi
Robert Brandom
C. D. Broad
Tyler Burge
John P. Burgess
Rudolf Carnap
Roderick Chisholm
Patricia Churchland
Paul Churchland
David Chalmers
Noam Chomsky
Donald Davidson
Daniel Dennett
Michael Dummett
Bas van Fraassen
Gottlob Frege
Jerry Fodor
Philippa Foot
Peter Geach
A. C. Grayling
Paul Grice
Alvin Goldman
R. M. Hare
Peter Hacker
John Hawthorne
Ian Hacking
Carl Hempel
Jaakko Hintikka
Peter van Inwagen
Frank Cameron Jackson
Christine Korsgaard
Saul Kripke
David Lewis
J. L. Mackie
Norman Malcolm
John McDowell
G. E. Moore
Thomas Nagel
Robert Nozick
Derek Parfit
D. Z. Phillips
Alvin Plantinga
A. N. Prior
Hilary Putnam
W. V. O. Quine
John Rawls
Hans Reichenbach
Bertrand Russell
Gilbert Ryle
John Searle
Moritz Schlick
Wilfrid Sellars
Peter Singer
Peter Strawson
Richard Swinburne
Peter Unger
Bernard Williams
Timothy Williamson
John Wisdom
Ludwig Wittgenstein
Stephen Yablo
more&#160;...








Theories



Deflationism
Direct reference theory
Empiricism
Holism
Logical atomism
Logical positivism
Naturalism
Naturalized epistemology
Neopragmatism
Neutral monism
Particularism
Reductionism
Scientism
Skepticism
Verificationism
more&#160;...








Concepts



Analysis
Analytic–synthetic distinction
Causal&#160;/ Deductive&#160;/ Epistemic closure
Concept
Counterfactual
Denotation&#160;/ reference
Definite description
Factive
Family resemblance
Intuition
Meaning&#160;(Proposition)
Modality
Natural kind&#160;/ projectability
Necessary–sufficient conditions
Paradox of analysis
Possible world
Reduction
Reflective equilibrium
Rigid-flaccid designators
Sense data
Supervenience
Thought experiment
Truth function
Truthmaker
Truth-bearer
Type–token distinction








Related articles



Australian realism
Ordinary language philosophy
Philosophical logic
Philosophy of language
Philosophy of science
Postanalytic philosophy
more&#160;...











Category
Task force&#160;(discussion)
Philosophy stubs
















v
t
e


Notable logicians









Anderson
Aristotle
Averroes
Avicenna
Bain
Barwise
Bernays
Boole
Boolos
Cantor
Carnap
Church
Chrysippus
Cohen
Curry
De Morgan
Dummett
Frege
Geach
Gentzen
Gödel
Hintikka
Hilbert
Kleene
Kripke
Leibniz
Lewis
Löwenheim
Łukasiewicz
Barcan Marcus
Peano
Peirce
Prior
Putnam
Quine
Russell
Schröder
Scott
Scotus
Skolem
Smullyan
Tarski
Turing
Whitehead
William of Ockham
Wittgenstein
Zermelo
















v
t
e


Metaphysics






Metaphysicians



Parmenides
Plato
Aristotle
Plotinus
Duns Scotus
Thomas Aquinas
Francisco Suárez
Nicolas Malebranche
René Descartes
John Locke
David Hume
Thomas Reid
Immanuel Kant
Isaac Newton
Arthur Schopenhauer
Baruch Spinoza
Georg W. F. Hegel
George Berkeley
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz
Henri Bergson
Friedrich Nietzsche
Charles Sanders Peirce
Joseph Maréchal
Ludwig Wittgenstein
Martin Heidegger
Alfred N. Whitehead
Bertrand Russell
Dorothy Emmet
G. E. Moore
Jean-Paul Sartre
Gilbert Ryle
Hilary Putnam
P. F. Strawson
R. G. Collingwood
Adolph Stöhr
Rudolf Carnap
Saul Kripke
Willard V. O. Quine
G. E. M. Anscombe
Donald Davidson
Michael Dummett
David Malet Armstrong
David Lewis
Alvin Plantinga
Peter van Inwagen
Derek Parfit
more ...








Theories



Abstract object theory
Action theory
Anti-realism
Determinism
Dualism
Enactivism
Essentialism
Existentialism
Free will
Idealism
Libertarianism
Liberty
Materialism
Meaning of life
Monism
Naturalism
Nihilism
Phenomenalism
Realism
Physicalism
Pirsig's metaphysics of Quality
Platonic idealism
Relativism
Scientific realism
Solipsism
Subjectivism
Substance theory
Type theory








Concepts



Abstract object
Anima mundi
Being
Category of being
Causality
Choice
Cogito ergo sum
Concept
Embodied cognition
Entity
Essence
Existence
Experience
Hypostatic abstraction
Idea
Identity
Identity and change
Information
Insight
Intelligence
Intention
Linguistic modality
Matter
Meaning
Memetics
Mental representation
Mind
Motion
Necessity
Notion
Object
Pattern
Perception
Physical body
Principle
Property
Qualia
Quality
Reality
Soul
Subject
Substantial form
Thought
Time
Truth
Type–token distinction
Universal
Unobservable
Value
more ...








Related topics



Axiology
Cosmology
Epistemology
Interpretations of quantum mechanics
Meta-
Ontology
Philosophy of mind
Philosophy of psychology
Philosophy of self
Philosophy of space and time
Teleology
Theoretical physics











 Category
 Portal
 WikiProject
















v
t
e


Epistemology






Epistemologists



Thomas Aquinas
Augustine of Hippo
William Alston
Robert Audi
A. J. Ayer
George Berkeley
Laurence BonJour
René Descartes
Edmund Gettier
Alvin Goldman
Nelson Goodman
Paul Grice
David Hume
Immanuel Kant
Søren Kierkegaard
Saul Kripke
David Lewis
John Locke
G. E. Moore
Robert Nozick
Alvin Plantinga
Plato
Hilary Putnam
Thomas Reid
Gilbert Ryle
P. F. Strawson
W.V.O. Quine
Bertrand Russell
Timothy Williamson
Ludwig Wittgenstein
Nicholas Wolterstorff
Vienna Circle








Theories



Coherentism
Constructivist epistemology
Contextualism
Determinism
Empiricism
Evolutionary epistemology
Fallibilism
Feminist epistemology
Fideism
Foundationalism
Genetic epistemology
Holism
Infinitism
Innatism
Internalism and externalism
Naïve realism
Naturalized epistemology
Phenomenalism
Positivism
Reductionism
Reliabilism
Representative realism
Rationalism
Skepticism
Theory of Forms
Transcendental idealism
Uniformitarianism








Concepts



A priori knowledge
Analysis
Analytic–synthetic distinction
Belief
Causality
Common sense
Descriptive knowledge
Exploratory thought
Gettier problem
Justification
Knowledge
Induction
Objectivity
Problem of induction
Problem of other minds
Perception
Proposition
Regress argument
Simplicity
Speculative reason
Truth
more...








Related articles



Outline of epistemology
Alethiology
Faith and rationality
Formal epistemology
Meta-epistemology
Philosophy of perception
Philosophy of science
Social epistemology











Portal
Category
Task Force
Stubs
Discussion
















v
t
e


Philosophy of language






Philosophers



Plato (Cratylus)
Gorgias
Confucius
Xunzi
Aristotle
Stoics
Pyrrhonists
Scholasticism
Ibn Rushd
Ibn Khaldun
Thomas Hobbes
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz
Johann Herder
Ludwig Noire
Wilhelm von Humboldt
Fritz Mauthner
Paul Ricœur
Ferdinand de Saussure
Gottlob Frege
Franz Boas
Paul Tillich
Edward Sapir
Leonard Bloomfield
Zhuangzi
Henri Bergson
Lev Vygotsky
Ludwig Wittgenstein

Philosophical Investigations
Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus


Bertrand Russell
Rudolf Carnap
Jacques Derrida

Of Grammatology
Limited Inc


Benjamin Lee Whorf
Gustav Bergmann
J. L. Austin
Noam Chomsky
Hans-Georg Gadamer
Saul Kripke
A. J. Ayer
G. E. M. Anscombe
Jaakko Hintikka
Michael Dummett
Donald Davidson
Paul Grice
Gilbert Ryle
P. F. Strawson
Willard Van Orman Quine
Hilary Putnam
David Lewis
John Searle
Joxe Azurmendi
Scott Soames
Stephen Yablo
John Hawthorne
Stephen Neale








Theories



Causal theory of reference
Contrast theory of meaning
Contrastivism
Conventionalism
Cratylism
Deconstruction
Descriptivist theory of names
Direct reference theory
Dramatism
Expressivism
Linguistic determinism
Logical atomism
Logical positivism
Mediated reference theory
Nominalism
Non-cognitivism
Phallogocentrism
Quietism
Relevance theory
Semantic externalism
Semantic holism
Structuralism
Supposition theory
Symbiosism
Theological noncognitivism
Theory of descriptions
Verification theory








Concepts



Ambiguity
Linguistic relativity
Meaning
Language
Truth-bearer
Proposition
Use–mention distinction
Concept
Categories
Set
Class
Intension
Logical form
Metalanguage
Mental representation
Principle of compositionality
Property
Sign
Sense and reference
Speech act
Symbol
Entity
Sentence
Statement
more...








Related articles



Analytic philosophy
Philosophy of information
Philosophical logic
Linguistics
Pragmatics
Rhetoric
Semantics
Formal semantics
Semiotics











Category
Task Force
Discussion
















v
t
e


Philosophy of mind






Philosophers



Anscombe
Austin
Aquinas
Bain
Bergson
Bhattacharya
Block
Brentano
Broad
Burge
Chalmers
Churchland
Dennett
Dharmakirti
Davidson
Descartes
Goldman
Heidegger
Husserl
Fodor
James
Kierkegaard
Leibniz
Lewis
McDowell
Merleau-Ponty
Minsky
Moore
Nagel
Parfit
Putnam
Popper
Rorty
Ryle
Searle
Spinoza
Turing
Vasubandhu
Wittgenstein
Zhuangzi
more...








Theories



Behaviorism
Biological naturalism
Dualism
Eliminative materialism
Emergent materialism
Epiphenomenalism
Functionalism
Idealism
Interactionism
Materialism
Monism
Naïve realism
Neutral monism
Phenomenalism
Phenomenology

existential
neurophenomenology


Physicalism

identity theory


Pragmatism
Property dualism
Representational
Solipsism
Subjectivism
Substance dualism








Concepts



Abstract object
Artificial intelligence
Chinese room
Cognition
Cognitive closure
Concept
Concept and object
Consciousness
Hard problem of consciousness
Hypostatic abstraction
Idea
Identity
Ingenuity
Intelligence
Intentionality
Introspection
Intuition
Language of thought
Materialism
Mental event
Mental image
Mental process
Mental property
Mental representation
Mind
Mind–body problem
New mysterianism
Pain
Problem of other minds
Propositional attitude
Qualia
Tabula rasa
Understanding
Zombie
more...








Related topics



Metaphysics
Philosophy of artificial intelligence&#160;/ information&#160;/ perception&#160;/ self











Portal
Category
Task Force
Discussion













Authority control



WorldCat
VIAF: 24609378
LCCN: n79032058
ISNI: 0000 0001 2099 9171
GND: 118634313
SELIBR: 206991
SUDOC: 027198715
BNF: cb11929322k (data)
BIBSYS: x90065407
ULAN: 500270292
MusicBrainz: 76f1379e-b20b-4d6d-8c6c-2b2fdc391bd7
MGP: 22537
NLA: 35615905
NDL: 00461264
NKC: jn19990009220
BNE: XX987268















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ludwig_Wittgenstein&amp;oldid=690991354"					
				Categories: Ludwig Wittgenstein1889 births1951 deaths20th-century Austrian writers20th-century British writers20th-century philosophersAlumni of Trinity College, CambridgeAnalytic philosophersAustrian agnosticsAustrian expatriates in the United KingdomAustrian expatriates in the United StatesAustrian logiciansAustrian people of Jewish descentAustrian people of Czech-Jewish descentAustrian people of Slovenian descentAustrian philosophersAustrian prisoners of warAustrian refugeesAustro-Hungarian military personnel of World War ITechnical University of Berlin alumniBisexual menBisexual writersBritish agnosticsBritish logiciansBritish people of Austrian-Jewish descentBritish people of German-Jewish descentBritish people of Czech-Jewish descentBritish people of Slovenian descentBritish philosophersCambridge University Moral Sciences ClubCancer deaths in EnglandDeaths from prostate cancerEpistemologistsFellows of Trinity College, CambridgeLGBT military personnelLGBT writers from AustriaLGBT writers from the United KingdomLinguistic turnNaturalised citizens of the United KingdomOntologistsOrdinary language philosophyPeople associated with the University of ManchesterPhilosophers of languagePhilosophers of mathematicsPhilosophers of mindWittgensteinian philosophersWorld War I prisoners of war held by ItalyWriters from ViennaWittgenstein familyHidden categories: All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from May 2015Use dmy dates from November 2012Biography with signatureArticles with hCardsWikipedia articles needing clarification from November 2015All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from October 2015Articles to be expanded from January 2013All articles to be expandedAC with 15 elementsWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with BIBSYS identifiersWikipedia articles with ULAN identifiersWikipedia articles with MusicBrainz identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiers				
							
		
		
			