


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Lyrics
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				For the Wikipedia policies regarding the use of lyrics, see WP:LYRICS.




Lyrics in sheet music. This is a homorhythmic (i.e., hymn-style) arrangement of a traditional piece entitled "Adeste Fideles", in standard two-staff format for mixed voices. &#160;Play&#160;(help·info)


Lyrics are words that make up a song usually consisting of verses and choruses. The writer of lyrics is a lyricist. The words to an extended musical composition such as an opera are, however, usually known as a "libretto" and their writer, as a "librettist". The meaning of lyrics can either be explicit or implicit. Some lyrics are abstract, almost unintelligible, and, in such cases, their explication emphasizes form, articulation, meter, and symmetry of expression.



Contents


1 Etymology
2 Poems as lyrics
3 Shifter
4 Copyright and royalties
5 Academic study
6 Search engines

6.1 Riskiest search
6.2 Lyrics in Google search results


7 See also
8 References
9 External links



Etymology[edit]




A lyrist on the Standard of Ur, c. 2500&#160;BC.


"Lyric" derives via Latin lyricus from the Greek λυρικός (lyrikós),[1] the adjectival form of lyre.[2] It first appeared in English in the mid-16th century in reference, to the Earl of Surrey's translations of Petrarch and to his own sonnets.[3] Greek lyric poetry had been defined by the manner in which it was sung accompanied by the lyre or cithara,[4] as opposed to the chanted formal epics or the more passionate elegies accompanied by the flute. The personal nature of many of the verses of the Nine Lyric Poets led to the present sense of "lyric poetry" but the original Greek sense—words set to music—eventually led to its use as "lyrics", first attested in Stainer and Barrett's 1876 Dictionary of Musical Terms.[5] Stainer and Barrett used the word as a singular substantive: "Lyric, poetry or blank verse intended to be set to music and sung". By the 1930s, the present use of the plurale tantum "lyrics" had begun; it has been standard since the 1950s.[1] The singular form "lyric" still appears; its present use, however, is to refer to a specific phrase within a song's lyrics.
Poems as lyrics[edit]





This section may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. No cleanup reason has been specified. Please help improve this section if you can. (November 2010)







This section possibly contains original research. Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations. Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. (March 2008)


The differences between poem and song may become less meaningful where verse is set to music, to the point that any distinction becomes untenable. This is perhaps recognised in the way popular songs have lyrics.
However, the verse may pre-date its tune (in the way that "Rule Britannia" was set to music, and "And did those feet in ancient time" has become the hymn "Jerusalem"), or the tune may be lost over time but the words survive, matched by a number of different tunes (this is particularly common with hymns and ballads).
Possible classifications proliferate (under anthem, ballad, blues, carol, folk song, hymn, libretto, lied, lullaby, march, praise song, round, spiritual). Nursery rhymes may be songs, or doggerel: the term doesn't imply a distinction. The ghazal is a sung form that is considered primarily poetic. See also rapping, roots of hip hop music.
Analogously, verse drama might normally be judged (at its best) as poetry, but not consisting of poems (see dramatic verse).
In Baroque music, melodies and their lyrics where prose. Rather than paired lines they consist of rhetorical sentences or paragraphs consisting of an opening gesture, an amplification (often featuring sequence), and a close (featuring a cadence); in German Vordersatz-Fortspinnung-Epilog.[6] For example:

When I was a child,                                  [opening gesture]
I spake as a child,                                  [amplification...]
I understood as a child,                             [...]
I thought as a child;                                [...]
But when I became a man, I put away childish things. [close]
 -1 Corinthians 13:11

Shifter[edit]
In the lyrics of popular music a "shifter"[7] is a word, often a pronoun, "where reference varies according to who is speaking, when and where",[8] such as "I", "you", "my", "our". For example, who is the "my" of "My Generation"?
Copyright and royalties[edit]

See Royalties

Currently, there are many websites featuring song lyrics. This offering, however, is controversial, since some sites include copyrighted lyrics offered without the holder's permission. The U.S. Music Publishers' Association (MPA), which represents sheet music companies, launched a legal campaign against such websites in December 2005, the MPA's president, Lauren Keiser, said the free lyrics web sites are "completely illegal" and wanted some website operators jailed.[9]
Lyrics licenses could be obtained in North America through one of the two aggregators; Gracenote Inc. and LyricFind. The first company to provide licensed lyrics was Yahoo!, quickly followed by MetroLyrics and Lyrics.com. More and more lyric websites are beginning to provide licensed lyrics, such as SongMeanings and LyricWiki.[10]
Many competing lyrics web sites are still offering unlicensed content, causing challenges around the legality and accuracy of lyrics.[11] In the latest attempt to crack down unlicensed lyrics web sites a federal court has ordered LiveUniverse, a network of websites run by MySpace co-founder Brad Greenspan, to cease operating four sites offering unlicensed song lyrics.[12]
Academic study[edit]
Lyrics can be studied from an academic perspective. For example, some lyrics can be considered a form of social commentary. Lyrics often contain political, social, and economic themes—as well as aesthetic elements—and so can communicate culturally significant messages. These messages can be explicit, or implied through metaphor or symbolism. Lyrics can also be analyzed with respect to the sense of unity (or lack of unity) it has with its supporting music. Analysis based on tonality and contrast are particular examples. Former Oxford Professor of Poetry Christopher Ricks famously published Dylan's Visions of Sin, an in-depth and characteristically Ricksian analysis of the lyrics of Bob Dylan; Ricks gives the caveat that to have studied the poetry of the lyrics in tandem with the music would have made for a much more complicated critical feat.
Search engines[edit]
Riskiest search[edit]
A 2009 report published by McAfee found that lyrics-related searches and searches containing the word "free" are the most likely to have risky results from search engines, both in terms of average risk of all results, and maximum risk of any result.[13]
Lyrics in Google search results[edit]
Beginning in late 2014, Google changed its search results pages to include song lyrics. When users search for a name of a song, Google can now display the lyrics directly in the search results page.[14]
See also[edit]




Poetry portal




Lyricist, a writer of lyrics
Libretto, the "little book" of an extended musical piece, written by a librettist
"singing in the Spirit", vocal improvisation in a spiritual context
scat singing &amp; vocalese, vocal improvisation in jazz
bol, kouji, beatbox, forms of vocal mimicry or percussion

References[edit]


^ a b Oxford English Dictionary 1st ed. lyric, adj. and n." 1903. Accessed 15&#160;Jan&#160;2014.
^ Liddell, Henry &amp; al. A Greek–English Lexicon 9th ed., "λυρικός". Clarendon Press (Oxford), 1996. Hosted at the Perseus Project. Accessed 15&#160;Jan&#160;2014.
^ Sidney, Philip. An Apologie for Poetrie op.&#160;cit. OED (1903).
^ Miller, Andrew. Greek Lyric: An Anthology in Translation, pp.&#160;xii&#160;ff. Hackett Publishing (Indianapolis), 1996. ISBN 978-0872202917.
^ Stainer, John &amp; al. A Dictionary of Musical Terms, p.&#160;276. (London), 1876.
^ Kelly, Thomas Forest (2011). Early Music: A Very Short Introduction, p.53. ISBN 978-0-19-973076-6.
^ Durant (1984). Cited in Middleton, Richard (1990/2002). Studying Popular Music. Philadelphia: Open University Press. ISBN 0-335-15275-9.
^ Middleton (1990), p.167.
^ "Song sites face legal crackdown". BBC News. 12 December 2005. Retrieved 7 January 2007.&#160;
^ "Advertising on SongMeanings". SongMeanings. Retrieved 21 July 2012. All of our lyrics are legally licensed through LyricFind.&#160;
^ Plambeck, Joseph (May 9, 2010). "Lyrics Sites at Center of Fight Over Royalties". The New York Times. Retrieved May 9, 2010.&#160;
^ "Court Orders LiveUniverse to Shutter Unlicensed Lyrics Sites". Digital Media Wire. August 11, 2010. Retrieved September 5, 2010.&#160;
^ Keats, Shane; Koshy, Eipe (2009). "The Web's Most Dangerous Search Terms" (PDF). McAfee. Retrieved 21 July 2012.&#160;
^ Jose, Pagliery (23 December 2014). "Google now displays song lyrics in search results". CNN.com. Retrieved 23 December 2014.&#160;


External links[edit]



Look up lyrics&#160;or lyric in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.










v
t
e


Music






Classical history



Prehistoric
Ancient
Religious

Biblical


Medieval
Renaissance
Baroque
Classical period
Romantic
Impressionist
20th century
Contemporary
Popular music
21st century











Theory
Composition






Form
Genre
Notation
Composer
Improvisation








Education and study



Music history
Music psychology

cultural aspects


Musicology
Ethnomusicology
Ecomusicology








Production



Musician
Performance
Conducting
Lyrics
Song
Single
A-side and B-side
EP
Cover
Remix
Album

compilation
live
studio
remix


Record label
Record producer
Sampling
Music technology









Cultural and
regional genres




African

Central
East
North
Southern
West


Asian

Central
East
Middle Eastern
South
Southeast


European

Central
Eastern
Northern
Southeastern
Southern
Western


Latin American

Central American
South American


North American

Caribbean


Oceanian

Melanesian
Micronesian
Polynesian










By sovereign state




&#160;
&#160;









Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
Andorra
Angola
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Armenia
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Bahamas
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belarus
Belgium
Belize
Benin
Bhutan
Bolivia
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Botswana
Brazil
Brunei
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Chile
China
Colombia
Comoros
Costa Rica
Croatia
Cuba
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Denmark
Djibouti
Dominica
Dominican Republic
East Timor
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Estonia
Ethiopia
Federated States of Micronesia
Fiji
Finland
France
Gabon
Gambia
Georgia
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Grenada
Guatemala
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Ivory Coast
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Kiribati
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Latvia
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives
Mali
Malta
Marshall Islands
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico
Moldova
Monaco
Mongolia
Montenegro
Morocco
Mozambique
Myanmar
Namibia
Nauru
Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
North Korea
Norway
Oman
Pakistan
Palau
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Qatar
Republic of Macedonia
Republic of the Congo
Romania
Russia
Rwanda
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Samoa
San Marino
São Tomé and Príncipe
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Serbia
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Slovakia
Slovenia
Solomon Islands
Somalia
South Africa
South Korea
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Suriname
Swaziland
Sweden
Switzerland
Syria
Taiwan
Tajikistan
Tanzania
Thailand
Togo
Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Tuvalu
Uganda
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Vanuatu
Vatican City
Venezuela
Vietnam
Yemen
Zambia
Zimbabwe











Lists



Index
Outline
Terminology
Instruments
Musical forms by era
Cultural and regional genres
Popular music genres
Albums
Songs
Jazz and popular music glossary
Audio








See also



Musical instrument
Music festival
Music therapy
Music and politics











Category
Portal
WikiProject















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lyrics&amp;oldid=687274680"					
				Categories: PoetryLyricsHidden categories: Articles containing Ancient Greek-language textArticles with hAudio microformatsArticles needing cleanup from November 2010All articles needing cleanupCleanup tagged articles without a reason field from November 2010Wikipedia pages needing cleanup from November 2010Articles that may contain original research from March 2008All articles that may contain original research				
							
		
		
			