


		
		
		
			

							
						



			Martin Luther King, Jr.
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								  (Redirected from Martin Luther King Jr.)
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				"Martin Luther King" and "MLK" redirect here. For other uses, see Martin Luther King (disambiguation) and MLK (disambiguation).


Martin Luther King, Jr.



King in 1964



Born
Michael King, Jr.
(1929-01-15)January 15, 1929
Atlanta, Georgia, U.S.


Died
April 4, 1968(1968-04-04) (aged&#160;39)
Memphis, Tennessee, U.S.


Cause&#160;of death
Assassination


Monuments
Martin Luther King, Jr. Memorial


Alma&#160;mater



Morehouse College (B.A.)
Crozer Theological Seminary (B.D.)
Boston University (Ph.D.)





Occupation
clergyman, activist


Organization
Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC)


Movement
African-American Civil Rights Movement, Peace movement


Religion
Christianity


Denomination
Baptist (Progressive National Baptist Convention)


Spouse(s)
Coretta Scott King (m. 1953–1968; his death)


Children



Yolanda Denise King (1955–2007)
Martin Luther King III (b. 1957)
Dexter Scott King (b. 1961)
Bernice Albertine King (b. 1963)





Parent(s)



Martin Luther King, Sr.
Alberta Williams King





Awards



Nobel Peace Prize (1964)
Presidential Medal of Freedom (1977, posthumous)
Congressional Gold Medal (2004, posthumous)





Signature








This article is part of a series about
Martin Luther King, Jr.




Biography
Sermons and speeches


Campaigns

Montgomery Bus Boycott
Birmingham campaign
March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom
Selma to Montgomery marches
Chicago Open Housing Movement
Poor People's Campaign


Death and memorial

Assassination
American federal holiday
National memorial





Martin Luther King, Jr. (January 15, 1929&#160;– April 4, 1968) was an American Baptist minister, activist, humanitarian, and leader in the African-American Civil Rights Movement. He is best known for his role in the advancement of civil rights using nonviolent civil disobedience based on his Christian beliefs.
King became a civil rights activist early in his career. He led the 1955 Montgomery Bus Boycott and helped found the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) in 1957, serving as its first president. With the SCLC, King led an unsuccessful 1962 struggle against segregation in Albany, Georgia (the Albany Movement), and helped organize the 1963 nonviolent protests in Birmingham, Alabama. King also helped to organize the 1963 March on Washington, where he delivered his famous "I Have a Dream" speech. There, he established his reputation as one of the greatest orators in American history.
On October 14, 1964, King received the Nobel Peace Prize for combating racial inequality through nonviolence. In 1965, he helped to organize the Selma to Montgomery marches, and the following year he and SCLC took the movement north to Chicago to work on segregated housing. In the final years of his life, King expanded his focus to include poverty and speak against the Vietnam War, alienating many of his liberal allies with a 1967 speech titled "Beyond Vietnam".
In 1968, King was planning a national occupation of Washington, D.C., to be called the Poor People's Campaign, when he was assassinated on April 4 in Memphis, Tennessee. His death was followed by riots in many U.S. cities.
King was posthumously awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom and the Congressional Gold Medal. Martin Luther King, Jr. Day was established as a holiday in numerous cities and states beginning in 1971, and as a U.S. federal holiday in 1986. Hundreds of streets in the U.S. have been renamed in his honor, and a county in Washington State was also renamed for him. The Martin Luther King, Jr. Memorial on the National Mall in Washington, D.C., was dedicated in 2011.



Contents


1 Early life and education

1.1 Doctoral studies


2 Ideas, influences, and political stances

2.1 Religion
2.2 Nonviolence
2.3 Politics
2.4 Compensation
2.5 The lack of attention given to family planning


3 Montgomery Bus Boycott, 1955
4 Southern Christian Leadership Conference

4.1 Albany Movement
4.2 Birmingham campaign
4.3 St. Augustine, Florida
4.4 Selma, Alabama
4.5 New York City


5 March on Washington, 1963
6 Selma Voting Rights Movement and "Bloody Sunday", 1965
7 Chicago Open Housing Movement, 1966
8 Opposition to the Vietnam War
9 Poor People's Campaign, 1968

9.1 After King's death


10 Assassination and aftermath

10.1 Aftermath
10.2 Allegations of conspiracy


11 FBI and King's personal life

11.1 FBI surveillance and wiretapping
11.2 NSA monitoring of King's communications
11.3 Allegations of communism
11.4 Adultery
11.5 Police observation during the assassination


12 Legacy

12.1 Martin Luther King, Jr. Day
12.2 Liturgical commemorations
12.3 UK legacy and The Martin Luther King Peace Committee


13 Awards and recognition

13.1 Memorials and eponymous places and buildings


14 Bibliography
15 See also
16 References

16.1 Notes
16.2 Citations
16.3 Sources
16.4 Further reading


17 External links



Early life and education




King's high school alma mater was named after African-American scholar Booker T. Washington.


King was born on January 15, 1929, in Atlanta, Georgia, to Reverend Martin Luther King, Sr., and Alberta Williams King.[1] King's legal name at birth was Michael King,[2] and his father was also born Michael King, but the elder King changed his and his son's names following a 1934 trip to Germany to attend the Fifth Baptist World Alliance Congress in Berlin. It was during this time he chose to be called Martin Luther King in honor of the German reformer Martin Luther.[3][4] King had Irish ancestry through his paternal great-grandfather.[5][6]
King was a middle child, between an older sister, Willie Christine King, and a younger brother, Alfred Daniel Williams King.[7] King sang with his church choir at the 1939 Atlanta premiere of the movie Gone with the Wind.[8] King liked singing and music. King's mother, an accomplished organist and choir leader, took him to various churches to sing. He received attention for singing "I Want to Be More and More Like Jesus." King later became a member of the junior choir in his church.[9]
King said his father regularly whipped him until he was fifteen and a neighbor reported hearing the elder King telling his son "he would make something of him even if he had to beat him to death." King saw his father's proud and unafraid protests in relation to segregation, such as Martin, Sr., refusing to listen to a traffic policeman after being referred to as "boy" or stalking out of a store with his son when being told by a shoe clerk that they would have to move to the rear to be served.[10]
When King was a child, he befriended a white boy whose father owned a business near his family's home. When the boys were 6, they attended different schools, with King attending a segregated school for African-Americans. King then lost his friend because the child's father no longer wanted them to play together.[11]
King suffered from depression throughout much of his life. In his adolescent years, he initially felt some resentment against whites due to the "racial humiliation" that he, his family, and his neighbors often had to endure in the segregated South.[12] At age 12, shortly after his maternal grandmother died, King blamed himself and jumped out of a second story window, but survived.[13]
King was originally skeptical of many of Christianity's claims.[14] At the age of thirteen, he denied the bodily resurrection of Jesus during Sunday school. From this point, he stated, "doubts began to spring forth unrelentingly".[15] However, he later concluded that the Bible has "many profound truths which one cannot escape" and decided to enter the seminary.[14]
Growing up in Atlanta, King attended Booker T. Washington High School. He became known for his public speaking ability and was part of the school's debate team.[16] King became the youngest assistant manager of a newspaper delivery station for the Atlanta Journal in 1942 at age 13.[17] During his junior year, he won first prize in an oratorical contest sponsored by the Negro Elks Club in Dublin, Georgia. Returning home to Atlanta by bus, he and his teacher were ordered by the driver to stand so white passengers could sit down. King refused initially, but complied after his teacher informed him that he would be breaking the law if he did not go along with the order. He later characterized this incident as "the angriest I have ever been in my life".[16] A precocious student, he skipped both the ninth and the twelfth grades of high school.[18] It was during King's junior year that Morehouse College announced it would accept any high school juniors who could pass its entrance exam. At that time, most of the students had abandoned their studies to participate in World War II. Due to this, the school became desperate to fill in classrooms. At age 15, King passed the exam and entered Morehouse.[16] The summer before his last year at Morehouse, in 1947, an eighteen-year-old King made the choice to enter the ministry after he concluded the church offered the most assuring way to answer "an inner urge to serve humanity". King's "inner urge" had begun developing and he made peace with the Baptist Church, as he believed he would be a "rational" minister with sermons that were "a respectful force for ideas, even social protest."[19]
In 1948, he graduated from Morehouse with a B.A. degree in sociology, and enrolled in Crozer Theological Seminary in Chester, Pennsylvania, from which he graduated with a B.Div. degree in 1951.[20][21] King's father fully supported his decision to continue his education. King was joined in attending Crozer by Walter McCall, a former classmate at Morehouse.[22] At Crozer, King was elected president of the student body.[23] The African-American students of Crozer for the most part conducted their social activity on Edwards Street. King was endeared to the street due to a classmate having an aunt that prepared the two collard greens, which they both relished.[24] King once called out a student for keeping beer in his room because of their shared responsibility as African-Americans to bear "the burdens of the Negro race." For a time, he was interested in Walter Rauschenbusch's "social gospel".[23] In his third year there, he became romantically involved with the daughter of an immigrant German woman working as a cook in the cafeteria. The daughter had been involved with a professor prior to her relationship with King. King had plans of marrying her, but was advised not to by friends due to the reaction an interracial relationship would spark from both blacks and whites, as well as the chances of it destroying his chances of ever pastoring a church in the South. King tearfully told a friend that he could not endure his mother's pain over the marriage and broke the relationship off around six months later. He would continue to have lingering feelings, with one friend being quoted as saying, "He never recovered."[23]
King married Coretta Scott, on June 18, 1953, on the lawn of her parents' house in her hometown of Heiberger, Alabama.[25] They became the parents of four children: Yolanda King (b. 1955), Martin Luther King III (b. 1957), Dexter Scott King (b. 1961), and Bernice King (b. 1963).[26] During their marriage, King limited Coretta's role in the Civil Rights Movement, expecting her to be a housewife and mother.[27]
Doctoral studies
See also: Martin Luther King, Jr. authorship issues
King then began doctoral studies in systematic theology at Boston University and received his Ph.D. degree on June 5, 1955, with a dissertation on "A Comparison of the Conceptions of God in the Thinking of Paul Tillich and Henry Nelson Wieman". An academic inquiry concluded in October 1991 that portions of his dissertation had been plagiarized and he had acted improperly. However, "[d]espite its finding, the committee said that 'no thought should be given to the revocation of Dr. King's doctoral degree,' an action that the panel said would serve no purpose."[28][29][30] The committee also found that the dissertation still "makes an intelligent contribution to scholarship." However, a letter is now attached to King's dissertation in the university library, noting that numerous passages were included without the appropriate quotations and citations of sources.[31]
Ideas, influences, and political stances
Religion
King became pastor of the Dexter Avenue Baptist Church in Montgomery, Alabama, when he was twenty-five years old, in 1954.[32] As a Christian minister, his main influence was Jesus Christ and the Christian gospels, which he would almost always quote in his religious meetings, speeches at church, and in public discourses. King's faith was strongly based in Jesus' commandment of loving your neighbor as yourself, loving God above all, and loving your enemies, praying for them and blessing them. His nonviolent thought was also based in the injunction to turn the other cheek in the Sermon on the Mount, and Jesus' teaching of putting the sword back into its place (Matthew 26:52).[33] In his famous Letter from Birmingham Jail, King urged action consistent with what he describes as Jesus' "extremist" love, and also quoted numerous other Christian pacifist authors, which was very usual for him. In another sermon, he stated:

Before I was a civil rights leader, I was a preacher of the Gospel. This was my first calling and it still remains my greatest commitment. You know, actually all that I do in civil rights I do because I consider it a part of my ministry. I have no other ambitions in life but to achieve excellence in the Christian ministry. I don't plan to run for any political office. I don't plan to do anything but remain a preacher. And what I'm doing in this struggle, along with many others, grows out of my feeling that the preacher must be concerned about the whole man.
— King, 1967[34][35]

In his speech "I've Been to the Mountaintop", he stated that he just wanted to do God's will.
Nonviolence




King at a Civil Rights March on Washington, D.C.


Veteran African-American civil rights activist Bayard Rustin was King's first regular advisor on nonviolence.[36] King was also advised by the white activists Harris Wofford and Glenn Smiley.[37] Rustin and Smiley came from the Christian pacifist tradition, and Wofford and Rustin both studied Gandhi's teachings. Rustin had applied nonviolence with the Journey of Reconciliation campaign in the 1940s,[38] and Wofford had been promoting Gandhism to Southern blacks since the early 1950s.[37] King had initially known little about Gandhi and rarely used the term "nonviolence" during his early years of activism in the early 1950s. King initially believed in and practiced self-defense, even obtaining guns in his household as a means of defense against possible attackers. The pacifists guided King by showing him the alternative of nonviolent resistance, arguing that this would be a better means to accomplish his goals of civil rights than self-defense. King then vowed to no longer personally use arms.[39][40]
In the aftermath of the boycott, King wrote Stride Toward Freedom, which included the chapter Pilgrimage to Nonviolence. King outlined his understanding of nonviolence, which seeks to win an opponent to friendship, rather than to humiliate or defeat him. The chapter draws from an address by Wofford, with Rustin and Stanley Levison also providing guidance and ghostwriting.[41]
Inspired by Mahatma Gandhi's success with nonviolent activism, King had "for a long time&#160;... wanted to take a trip to India".[42] With assistance from Harris Wofford, the American Friends Service Committee, and other supporters, he was able to fund the journey in April 1959.[43] [44] The trip to India affected King, deepening his understanding of nonviolent resistance and his commitment to America's struggle for civil rights. In a radio address made during his final evening in India, King reflected, "Since being in India, I am more convinced than ever before that the method of nonviolent resistance is the most potent weapon available to oppressed people in their struggle for justice and human dignity".
Bayard Rustin's open homosexuality, support of democratic socialism, and his former ties to the Communist Party USA caused many white and African-American leaders to demand King distance himself from Rustin,[45] which King agreed to do.[46] However, King agreed that Rustin should be one of the main organizers of the 1963 March on Washington.[47]
King's admiration of Gandhi's nonviolence did not diminish in later years. He went so far as to hold up his example when receiving the Nobel Peace Prize in 1964, hailing the "successful precedent" of using nonviolence "in a magnificent way by Mohandas K. Gandhi to challenge the might of the British Empire&#160;... He struggled only with the weapons of truth, soul force, non-injury and courage."[48]
Gandhi seemed to have influenced him with certain moral principles,[49] though Gandhi himself had been influenced by The Kingdom of God Is Within You, a nonviolent classic written by Christian anarchist Leo Tolstoy. In turn, both Gandhi and Martin Luther King had read Tolstoy, and King, Gandhi and Tolstoy had been strongly influenced by Jesus' Sermon on the Mount. King quoted Tolstoy's War and Peace in 1959.[50]
Another influence for King's nonviolent method was Henry David Thoreau's essay On Civil Disobedience, which King read in his student days. He was influenced by the idea of refusing to cooperate with an evil system.[51] He also was greatly influenced by the works of Protestant theologians Reinhold Niebuhr and Paul Tillich,[52] as well as Walter Rauschenbusch's Christianity and the Social Crisis. King also sometimes used the concept of "agape" (brotherly Christian love).[53] However, after 1960, he ceased employing it in his writings.[54]
Even after renouncing his personal use of guns, King had a complex relationship with the phenomenon of self-defense in the movement. He publicly discouraged it as a widespread practice, but acknowledged that it was sometimes necessary.[55] Throughout his career King was frequently protected by other civil rights activists who carried arms, such as Colonel Stone Johnson,[56] Robert Hayling, and the Deacons for Defense and Justice.[57][58]
Politics
As the leader of the SCLC, King maintained a policy of not publicly endorsing a U.S. political party or candidate: "I feel someone must remain in the position of non-alignment, so that he can look objectively at both parties and be the conscience of both—not the servant or master of either."[59] In a 1958 interview, he expressed his view that neither party was perfect, saying, "I don't think the Republican party is a party full of the almighty God nor is the Democratic party. They both have weaknesses&#160;... And I'm not inextricably bound to either party."[60] King did praise Democratic Senator Paul Douglas of Illinois as being the "greatest of all senators" because of his fierce advocacy for civil rights causes over the years.[61]
King critiqued both parties' performance on promoting racial equality:

Actually, the Negro has been betrayed by both the Republican and the Democratic party. The Democrats have betrayed him by capitulating to the whims and caprices of the Southern Dixiecrats. The Republicans have betrayed him by capitulating to the blatant hypocrisy of reactionary right wing northern Republicans. And this coalition of southern Dixiecrats and right wing reactionary northern Republicans defeats every bill and every move towards liberal legislation in the area of civil rights.[62]

Although King never publicly supported a political party or candidate for president, in a letter to a civil rights supporter in October 1956 he said that he was undecided as to whether he would vote for Adlai Stevenson or Dwight Eisenhower, but that "In the past I always voted the Democratic ticket."[63] In his autobiography, King says that in 1960 he privately voted for Democratic candidate John F. Kennedy: "I felt that Kennedy would make the best president. I never came out with an endorsement. My father did, but I never made one." King adds that he likely would have made an exception to his non-endorsement policy for a second Kennedy term, saying "Had President Kennedy lived, I would probably have endorsed him in 1964."[64] In 1964, King urged his supporters "and all people of goodwill" to vote against Republican Senator Barry Goldwater for president, saying that his election "would be a tragedy, and certainly suicidal almost, for the nation and the world."[65] King supported the ideals of democratic socialism, although he was reluctant to speak directly of this support due to the anti-communist sentiment being projected throughout America at the time, and the association of socialism with communism. King believed that capitalism could not adequately provide the basic necessities of many American people, particularly the African American community.[66]
Compensation
King stated that black Americans, as well as other disadvantaged Americans, should be compensated for historical wrongs. In an interview conducted for Playboy in 1965, he said that granting black Americans only equality could not realistically close the economic gap between them and whites. King said that he did not seek a full restitution of wages lost to slavery, which he believed impossible, but proposed a government compensatory program of $50&#160;billion over ten years to all disadvantaged groups.[67]
He posited that "the money spent would be more than amply justified by the benefits that would accrue to the nation through a spectacular decline in school dropouts, family breakups, crime rates, illegitimacy, swollen relief rolls, rioting and other social evils".[68] He presented this idea as an application of the common law regarding settlement of unpaid labor, but clarified that he felt that the money should not be spent exclusively on blacks. He stated, "It should benefit the disadvantaged of all races".[69]
The lack of attention given to family planning
On being awarded the Planned Parenthood Federation of America's Margaret Sanger Award on 5th May, 1966, King said:

Recently, the press has been filled with reports of sightings of flying saucers. While we need not give credence to these stories, they allow our imagination to speculate on how visitors from outer space would judge us. I am afraid they would be stupefied at our conduct. They would observe that for death planning we spend billions to create engines and strategies for war. They would also observe that we spend millions to prevent death by disease and other causes. Finally they would observe that we spend paltry sums for population planning, even though its spontaneous growth is an urgent threat to life on our planet. Our visitors from outer space could be forgiven if they reported home that our planet is inhabited by a race of insane men whose future is bleak and uncertain.
There is no human circumstance more tragic than the persisting existence of a harmful condition for which a remedy is readily available. Family planning, to relate population to world resources, is possible, practical and necessary. Unlike plagues of the dark ages or contemporary diseases we do not yet understand, the modern plague of overpopulation is soluble by means we have discovered and with resources we possess.
What is lacking is not sufficient knowledge of the solution but universal consciousness of the gravity of the problem and education of the billions who are its victims.&#160;...[70][71]

Montgomery Bus Boycott, 1955
Main articles: Montgomery Bus Boycott and Jim Crow laws § Public arena




Rosa Parks with King, 1955


In March 1955, a fifteen-year-old school girl in Montgomery, Claudette Colvin, refused to give up her bus seat to a white man in compliance with Jim Crow laws, laws in the US South that enforced racial segregation. King was on the committee from the Birmingham African-American community that looked into the case; because Colvin was pregnant and unmarried, E.D. Nixon and Clifford Durr decided to wait for a better case to pursue.[72]
On December 1, 1955, Rosa Parks was arrested for refusing to give up her seat.[73] The Montgomery Bus Boycott, urged and planned by Nixon and led by King, soon followed.[74] The boycott lasted for 385 days,[75] and the situation became so tense that King's house was bombed.[76] King was arrested during this campaign, which concluded with a United States District Court ruling in Browder v. Gayle that ended racial segregation on all Montgomery public buses.[77][78] King's role in the bus boycott transformed him into a national figure and the best-known spokesman of the civil rights movement.[79]
Southern Christian Leadership Conference
In 1957, King, Ralph Abernathy, Fred Shuttlesworth, Joseph Lowery, and other civil rights activists founded the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC). The group was created to harness the moral authority and organizing power of black churches to conduct nonviolent protests in the service of civil rights reform. One of the group's inspirations was the crusades of evangelist Billy Graham, who befriended King after he attended a Graham crusade in New York City in 1957.[80] King led the SCLC until his death.[81] The SCLC's 1957 Prayer Pilgrimage for Freedom was the first time King addressed a national audience.[82] Other civil rights leaders involved in the SCLC with King included: James Bevel, Allen Johnson, Curtis W. Harris, Walter E. Fauntroy, C. T. Vivian, Andrew Young, The Freedom Singers, Charles Evers, Cleveland Robinson, Randolph Blackwell, Annie Bell Robinson Devine, Charles Kenzie Steele, Alfred Daniel Williams King, Benjamin Hooks, Aaron Henry and Bayard Rustin.[83]
On September 20, 1958, while signing copies of his book Stride Toward Freedom in Blumstein's department store in Harlem,[84] King narrowly escaped death when Izola Curry, a mentally ill black woman who believed he was conspiring against her with communists, stabbed him in the chest with a letter opener. After emergency surgery, King was hospitalized for several weeks, while Curry was found mentally incompetent to stand trial.[85][86] In 1959, he published a short book called The Measure of A Man, which contained his sermons "What is Man?" and "The Dimensions of a Complete Life". The sermons argued for man's need for God's love and criticized the racial injustices of Western civilization.[87]
Harry Wachtel—who joined King's legal advisor Clarence B. Jones in defending four ministers of the SCLC in a libel suit over a newspaper advertisement (New York Times Co. v. Sullivan)—founded a tax-exempt fund to cover the expenses of the suit and to assist the nonviolent civil rights movement through a more effective means of fundraising. This organization was named the "Gandhi Society for Human Rights". King served as honorary president for the group. Displeased with the pace of President Kennedy's addressing the issue of segregation, King and the Gandhi Society produced a document in 1962 calling on the President to follow in the footsteps of Abraham Lincoln and use an Executive Order to deliver a blow for Civil Rights as a kind of Second Emancipation Proclamation - Kennedy did not execute the order.[88]




Lyndon Johnson and Robert Kennedy with Civil Rights leaders, June 22, 1963


The FBI, under written directive from Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy, began tapping King's telephone in the fall of 1963.[89] Concerned that allegations of communists in the SCLC, if made public, would derail the administration's civil rights initiatives, Kennedy warned King to discontinue the suspect associations, and later felt compelled to issue the written directive authorizing the FBI to wiretap King and other SCLC leaders.[90] J. Edgar Hoover feared Communists were trying to infiltrate the Civil Rights movement, but when no such evidence emerged, the bureau used the incidental details caught on tape over the next five years in attempts to force King out of the preeminent leadership position.[91]
King believed that organized, nonviolent protest against the system of southern segregation known as Jim Crow laws would lead to extensive media coverage of the struggle for black equality and voting rights. Journalistic accounts and televised footage of the daily deprivation and indignities suffered by southern blacks, and of segregationist violence and harassment of civil rights workers and marchers, produced a wave of sympathetic public opinion that convinced the majority of Americans that the Civil Rights Movement was the most important issue in American politics in the early 1960s.[92][93]
King organized and led marches for blacks' right to vote, desegregation, labor rights and other basic civil rights.[78] Most of these rights were successfully enacted into the law of the United States with the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the 1965 Voting Rights Act.[94][95]
King and the SCLC put into practice many of the principles of the Christian Left and applied the tactics of nonviolent protest with great success by strategically choosing the method of protest and the places in which protests were carried out. There were often dramatic stand-offs with segregationist authorities. Sometimes these confrontations turned violent.[96]
Throughout his participation in the civil rights movement, King was criticized by many groups. This included opposition by more militant blacks such as Nation of Islam member Malcolm X.[97] Stokely Carmichael was a separatist and disagreed with King's plea for racial integration because he considered it an insult to a uniquely African-American culture.[98] Omali Yeshitela urged Africans to remember the history of violent European colonization and how power was not secured by Europeans through integration, but by violence and force.[99]
Albany Movement
Main article: Albany Movement
The Albany Movement was a desegregation coalition formed in Albany, Georgia, in November 1961. In December, King and the SCLC became involved. The movement mobilized thousands of citizens for a broad-front nonviolent attack on every aspect of segregation within the city and attracted nationwide attention. When King first visited on December 15, 1961, he "had planned to stay a day or so and return home after giving counsel."[100] The following day he was swept up in a mass arrest of peaceful demonstrators, and he declined bail until the city made concessions. According to King, "that agreement was dishonored and violated by the city" after he left town.[100]
King returned in July 1962, and was sentenced to forty-five days in jail or a $178 fine. He chose jail. Three days into his sentence, Police Chief Laurie Pritchett discreetly arranged for King's fine to be paid and ordered his release. "We had witnessed persons being kicked off lunch counter stools&#160;... ejected from churches&#160;... and thrown into jail&#160;... But for the first time, we witnessed being kicked out of jail."[101] It was later acknowledged by the King Center that Billy Graham was the one who bailed King out of jail during this time.[102]
After nearly a year of intense activism with few tangible results, the movement began to deteriorate. King requested a halt to all demonstrations and a "Day of Penance" to promote nonviolence and maintain the moral high ground. Divisions within the black community and the canny, low-key response by local government defeated efforts.[103] Though the Albany effort proved a key lesson in tactics for Dr. King and the national civil rights movement,[104] the national media was highly critical of King's role in the defeat, and the SCLC's lack of results contributed to a growing gulf between the organization and the more radical SNCC. After Albany, King sought to choose engagements for the SCLC in which he could control the circumstances, rather than entering into pre-existing situations.[105]
Birmingham campaign
Main article: Birmingham campaign




King following his arrest in Birmingham


In April 1963, the SCLC began a campaign against racial segregation and economic injustice in Birmingham, Alabama. The campaign used nonviolent but intentionally confrontational tactics, developed in part by Rev. Wyatt Tee Walker. Black people in Birmingham, organizing with the SCLC, occupied public spaces with marches and sit-ins, openly violating laws that they considered unjust.
King's intent was to provoke mass arrests and "create a situation so crisis-packed that it will inevitably open the door to negotiation".[106] However, the campaign's early volunteers did not succeed in shutting down the city, or in drawing media attention to the police's actions. Over the concerns of an uncertain King, SCLC strategist James Bevel changed the course of the campaign by recruiting children and young adults to join in the demonstrations.[107] Newsweek called this strategy a Children's Crusade.[108][109]
During the protests, the Birmingham Police Department, led by Eugene "Bull" Connor, used high-pressure water jets and police dogs against protesters, including children. Footage of the police response was broadcast on national television news and dominated the nation's attention, shocking many white Americans and consolidating black Americans behind the movement.[110] Not all of the demonstrators were peaceful, despite the avowed intentions of the SCLC. In some cases, bystanders attacked the police, who responded with force. King and the SCLC were criticized for putting children in harm's way. But the campaign was a success: Connor lost his job, the "Jim Crow" signs came down, and public places became more open to blacks. King's reputation improved immensely.[108]
King was arrested and jailed early in the campaign—his 13th arrest[111] out of 29.[112] From his cell, he composed the now-famous Letter from Birmingham Jail which responds to calls on the movement to pursue legal channels for social change. King argues that the crisis of racism is too urgent, and the current system too entrenched: "We know through painful experience that freedom is never voluntarily given by the oppressor; it must be demanded by the oppressed."[113] He points out that the Boston Tea Party, a celebrated act of rebellion in the American colonies, was illegal civil disobedience, and that, conversely, "everything Adolf Hitler did in Germany was 'legal'".[113] King also expresses his frustration with white moderates and clergymen too timid to oppose an unjust system:

I have almost reached the regrettable conclusion that the Negro's great stumbling block in his stride toward freedom is not the White Citizen's Councilor or the Ku Klux Klanner, but the white moderate, who is more devoted to "order" than to justice; who prefers a negative peace which is the absence of tension to a positive peace which is the presence of justice; who constantly says: "I agree with you in the goal you seek, but I cannot agree with your methods of direct action"; who paternalistic-ally believes he can set the timetable for another man's freedom; who lives by a mythical concept of time and who constantly advises the Negro to wait for a "more convenient season".[113]

St. Augustine, Florida
Main article: St. Augustine movement
In March 1964, King and the SCLC joined forces with Robert Hayling's then-controversial movement in St. Augustine, Florida. Hayling's group had been affiliated with the NAACP but was forced out of the organization for advocating armed self-defense alongside nonviolent tactics. Ironically, the pacifist SCLC accepted them.[114] King and the SCLC worked to bring white Northern activists to St. Augustine, including a delegation of rabbis and the 72-year-old mother of the governor of Massachusetts, all of whom were arrested.[115][116] During June, the movement marched nightly through the city, "often facing counter demonstrations by the Klan, and provoking violence that garnered national media attention." Hundreds of the marchers were arrested and jailed. During the course of this movement, the Civil Rights Act of 1964 was passed.[117]
Selma, Alabama
Main article: Selma to Montgomery marches
In December 1964, King and the SCLC joined forces with the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) in Selma, Alabama, where the SNCC had been working on voter registration for several months.[118] A local judge issued an injunction that barred any gathering of 3 or more people affiliated with the SNCC, SCLC, DCVL, or any of 41 named civil rights leaders. This injunction temporarily halted civil rights activity until King defied it by speaking at Brown Chapel on January 2, 1965.[119]
New York City
On February 6, 1964, King delivered the inaugural speech of a lecture series initiated at the New School called "The American Race Crisis". No audio record of his speech has been found, but in August 2013, almost 50 years later, the school discovered an audiotape with 15 minutes of a question-and-answer session that followed King's address. In these remarks, King referred to a conversation he had recently had with Jawaharlal Nehru in which he compared the sad condition of many African Americans to that of India's untouchables.[120]
March on Washington, 1963
Main article: March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom




March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom


King, representing the SCLC, was among the leaders of the so-called "Big Six" civil rights organizations who were instrumental in the organization of the March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom, which took place on August 28, 1963. The other leaders and organizations comprising the Big Six were Roy Wilkins from the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People; Whitney Young, National Urban League; A. Philip Randolph, Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters; John Lewis, SNCC; and James L. Farmer, Jr., of the Congress of Racial Equality.[121]
The primary logistical and strategic organizer was King's colleague Bayard Rustin.[122] For King, this role was another which courted controversy, since he was one of the key figures who acceded to the wishes of President John F. Kennedy in changing the focus of the march.[123][124] Kennedy initially opposed the march outright, because he was concerned it would negatively impact the drive for passage of civil rights legislation. However, the organizers were firm that the march would proceed.[125] With the march going forward, the Kennedys decided it was important to work to ensure its success. President Kennedy was concerned the turnout would be less than 100,000. Therefore, he enlisted the aid of additional church leaders and the UAW union to help mobilize demonstrators for the cause.[126]




King is most famous for his "I Have a Dream" speech, given in front of the Lincoln Memorial during the 1963 March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom.


The march originally was conceived as an event to dramatize the desperate condition of blacks in the southern U.S. and an opportunity to place organizers' concerns and grievances squarely before the seat of power in the nation's capital. Organizers intended to denounce the federal government for its failure to safeguard the civil rights and physical safety of civil rights workers and blacks. However, the group acquiesced to presidential pressure and influence, and the event ultimately took on a far less strident tone.[127] As a result, some civil rights activists felt it presented an inaccurate, sanitized pageant of racial harmony; Malcolm X called it the "Farce on Washington", and the Nation of Islam forbade its members from attending the march.[127][128]





I Have a Dream

Sorry, your browser either has JavaScript disabled or does not have any supported player.
You can download the clip or download a player to play the clip in your browser.

30-second sample from "I Have a Dream" speech by Martin Luther King, Jr., at the March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom on August 28, 1963




Problems playing this file? See media help.


The march did, however, make specific demands: an end to racial segregation in public schools; meaningful civil rights legislation, including a law prohibiting racial discrimination in employment; protection of civil rights workers from police brutality; a $2 minimum wage for all workers; and self-government for Washington, D.C., then governed by congressional committee.[129][130][131] Despite tensions, the march was a resounding success.[132] More than a quarter of a million people of diverse ethnicities attended the event, sprawling from the steps of the Lincoln Memorial onto the National Mall and around the reflecting pool. At the time, it was the largest gathering of protesters in Washington, D.C.'s history.[132]
King delivered a 17-minute speech, later known as "I Have a Dream". In the speech's most famous passage—in which he departed from his prepared text, possibly at the prompting of Mahalia Jackson, who shouted behind him, "Tell them about the dream!"[133][134]—King said:[135]


I say to you today, my friends, so even though we face the difficulties of today and tomorrow, I still have a dream. It is a dream deeply rooted in the American dream.
I have a dream that one day this nation will rise up and live out the true meaning of its creed: 'We hold these truths to be self-evident: that all men are created equal.'
I have a dream that one day on the red hills of Georgia the sons of former slaves and the sons of former slave owners will be able to sit down together at the table of brotherhood.
I have a dream that one day even the state of Mississippi, a state sweltering with the heat of injustice, sweltering with the heat of oppression, will be transformed into an oasis of freedom and justice.
I have a dream that my four little children will one day live in a nation where they will not be judged by the color of their skin but by the content of their character.
I have a dream today.
I have a dream that one day, down in Alabama, with its vicious racists, with its governor having his lips dripping with the words of interposition and nullification; one day right there in Alabama, little black boys and black girls will be able to join hands with little white boys and white girls as sisters and brothers.
I have a dream today.


"I Have a Dream" came to be regarded as one of the finest speeches in the history of American oratory.[136] The March, and especially King's speech, helped put civil rights at the top of the agenda of reformers in the United States and facilitated passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.[137][138]
The original, typewritten copy of the speech, including Dr. King's handwritten notes on it, was discovered in 1984 to be in the hands of George Raveling, the first African-American basketball coach of the University of Iowa. In 1963, Raveling, then 26, was standing near the podium, and immediately after the oration, impulsively asked King if he could have his copy of the speech. He got it.[139]

Selma Voting Rights Movement and "Bloody Sunday", 1965
Main article: Selma to Montgomery marches
Acting on James Bevel's call for a march from Selma to Montgomery, King, Bevel, and the SCLC, in partial collaboration with SNCC, attempted to organize the march to the state's capital. The first attempt to march on March 7, 1965, was aborted because of mob and police violence against the demonstrators. This day has become known as Bloody Sunday, and was a major turning point in the effort to gain public support for the Civil Rights Movement. It was the clearest demonstration up to that time of the dramatic potential of King's nonviolence strategy. King, however, was not present.[140]




The civil rights march from Selma to Montgomery, Alabama in 1965


King met with officials in the Lyndon B. Johnson Administration on March 5 in order to request an injunction against any prosecution of the demonstrators. He did not attend the march due to church duties, but he later wrote, "If I had any idea that the state troopers would use the kind of brutality they did, I would have felt compelled to give up my church duties altogether to lead the line."[141] Footage of police brutality against the protesters was broadcast extensively and aroused national public outrage.[142]
King next attempted to organize a march for March 9. The SCLC petitioned for an injunction in federal court against the State of Alabama; this was denied and the judge issued an order blocking the march until after a hearing. Nonetheless, King led marchers on March 9 to the Edmund Pettus Bridge in Selma, then held a short prayer session before turning the marchers around and asking them to disperse so as not to violate the court order. The unexpected ending of this second march aroused the surprise and anger of many within the local movement.[143] The march finally went ahead fully on March 25, 1965.[144][145] At the conclusion of the march on the steps of the state capitol, King delivered a speech that became known as "How Long, Not Long". In it, King stated that equal rights for African Americans could not be far away, "because the arc of the moral universe is long, but it bends toward justice".[a][146][147]
Chicago Open Housing Movement, 1966
Main article: Chicago Freedom Movement




President Lyndon Johnson with King in 1966


In 1966, after several successes in the South, King, Bevel, and others in the civil rights organizations tried to spread the movement to the North, with Chicago as their first destination. King and Ralph Abernathy, both from the middle class, moved into a building at 1550 S. Hamlin Ave., in the slums of North Lawndale[148] on Chicago's West Side, as an educational experience and to demonstrate their support and empathy for the poor.[149]
The SCLC formed a coalition with CCCO, Coordinating Council of Community Organizations, an organization founded by Albert Raby, and the combined organizations' efforts were fostered under the aegis of the Chicago Freedom Movement.[150] During that spring, several white couple / black couple tests of real estate offices uncovered racial steering: discriminatory processing of housing requests by couples who were exact matches in income, background, number of children, and other attributes.[151] Several larger marches were planned and executed: in Bogan, Belmont Cragin, Jefferson Park, Evergreen Park (a suburb southwest of Chicago), Gage Park, Marquette Park, and others.[150][152][153]
Abernathy later wrote that the movement received a worse reception in Chicago than in the South. Marches, especially the one through Marquette Park on August 5, 1966, were met by thrown bottles and screaming throngs. Rioting seemed very possible.[154][155] King's beliefs militated against his staging a violent event, and he negotiated an agreement with Mayor Richard J. Daley to cancel a march in order to avoid the violence that he feared would result.[156] King was hit by a brick during one march but continued to lead marches in the face of personal danger.[157]
When King and his allies returned to the South, they left Jesse Jackson, a seminary student who had previously joined the movement in the South, in charge of their organization.[158] Jackson continued their struggle for civil rights by organizing the Operation Breadbasket movement that targeted chain stores that did not deal fairly with blacks.[159]
Opposition to the Vietnam War
See also: Opposition to the U.S. involvement in the Vietnam War

External audio

 You may watch the speech, "Why I Am Opposed to the War in Vietnam", by Martin Luther King here.


King long opposed American involvement in the Vietnam War,[160] but at first avoided the topic in public speeches in order to avoid the interference with civil rights goals that criticism of President Johnson's policies might have created.[160] However, at the urging of SCLC's former Director of Direct Action and now the head of the Spring Mobilization Committee to End the War in Vietnam, James Bevel,[161] King eventually agreed to publicly oppose the war as opposition was growing among the American public.[160] In an April 4, 1967, appearance at the New York City Riverside Church—exactly one year before his death—King delivered a speech titled "Beyond Vietnam: A Time to Break Silence".[162] He spoke strongly against the U.S.'s role in the war, arguing that the U.S. was in Vietnam "to occupy it as an American colony"[163] and calling the U.S. government "the greatest purveyor of violence in the world today".[164] He also connected the war with economic injustice, arguing that the country needed serious moral change:

A true revolution of values will soon look uneasily on the glaring contrast of poverty and wealth. With righteous indignation, it will look across the seas and see individual capitalists of the West investing huge sums of money in Asia, Africa and South America, only to take the profits out with no concern for the social betterment of the countries, and say: "This is not just."[165]

King also opposed the Vietnam War because it took money and resources that could have been spent on social welfare at home. The United States Congress was spending more and more on the military and less and less on anti-poverty programs at the same time. He summed up this aspect by saying, "A nation that continues year after year to spend more money on military defense than on programs of social uplift is approaching spiritual death".[165] He stated that North Vietnam "did not begin to send in any large number of supplies or men until American forces had arrived in the tens of thousands",[166] and accused the U.S. of having killed a million Vietnamese, "mostly children".[167] King also criticized American opposition to North Vietnam's land reforms.[168]
King's opposition cost him significant support among white allies, including President Johnson, Billy Graham,[169] union leaders and powerful publishers.[170] "The press is being stacked against me", King said,[171] complaining of what he described as a double standard that applauded his nonviolence at home, but deplored it when applied "toward little brown Vietnamese children".[172] Life magazine called the speech "demagogic slander that sounded like a script for Radio Hanoi",[165] and The Washington Post declared that King had "diminished his usefulness to his cause, his country, his people".[172][173]




King speaking to an anti-Vietnam war rally at the University of Minnesota, St. Paul on April 27, 1967


The "Beyond Vietnam" speech reflected King's evolving political advocacy in his later years, which paralleled the teachings of the progressive Highlander Research and Education Center, with which he was affiliated.[174][175] King began to speak of the need for fundamental changes in the political and economic life of the nation, and more frequently expressed his opposition to the war and his desire to see a redistribution of resources to correct racial and economic injustice.[176] He guarded his language in public to avoid being linked to communism by his enemies, but in private he sometimes spoke of his support for democratic socialism.[177][178] In a 1952 letter to Coretta Scott, he said "I imagine you already know that I am much more socialistic in my economic theory than capitalistic&#160;..."[179] In one speech, he stated that "something is wrong with capitalism" and claimed, "There must be a better distribution of wealth, and maybe America must move toward a democratic socialism."[180] King had read Marx while at Morehouse, but while he rejected "traditional capitalism", he also rejected communism because of its "materialistic interpretation of history" that denied religion, its "ethical relativism", and its "political totalitarianism".[181]
King also stated in "Beyond Vietnam" that "true compassion is more than flinging a coin to a beggar&#160;... it comes to see that an edifice which produces beggars needs restructuring".[182] King quoted a United States official who said that, from Vietnam to Latin America, the country was "on the wrong side of a world revolution".[182] King condemned America's "alliance with the landed gentry of Latin America", and said that the U.S. should support "the shirtless and barefoot people" in the Third World rather than suppressing their attempts at revolution.[182]
On April 15, 1967, King participated in and spoke at an anti-war march from New York's Central Park to the United Nations organized by the Spring Mobilization Committee to End the War in Vietnam and initiated by its chairman, James Bevel. At the U.N. King also brought up issues of civil rights and the draft.

I have not urged a mechanical fusion of the civil rights and peace movements. There are people who have come to see the moral imperative of equality, but who cannot yet see the moral imperative of world brotherhood. I would like to see the fervor of the civil-rights movement imbued into the peace movement to instill it with greater strength. And I believe everyone has a duty to be in both the civil-rights and peace movements. But for those who presently choose but one, I would hope they will finally come to see the moral roots common to both.[183]

Seeing an opportunity to unite civil rights activists and anti-war activists,[161] Bevel convinced King to become even more active in the anti-war effort.[161] Despite his growing public opposition towards the Vietnam War, King was also not fond of the hippie culture which developed from the anti-war movement.[184] In his 1967 Massey Lecture, King stated:

The importance of the hippies is not in their unconventional behavior, but in the fact that hundreds of thousands of young people, in turning to a flight from reality, are expressing a profoundly discrediting view on the society they emerge from.[184]

On January 13, 1968, the day after President Johnson's State of the Union Address, King called for a large march on Washington against "one of history's most cruel and senseless wars".[185][186]

We need to make clear in this political year, to congressmen on both sides of the aisle and to the president of the United States, that we will no longer tolerate, we will no longer vote for men who continue to see the killings of Vietnamese and Americans as the best way of advancing the goals of freedom and self-determination in Southeast Asia.[185][186]

Poor People's Campaign, 1968
Main article: Poor People's Campaign
In 1968, King and the SCLC organized the "Poor People's Campaign" to address issues of economic justice. King traveled the country to assemble "a multiracial army of the poor" that would march on Washington to engage in nonviolent civil disobedience at the Capitol until Congress created an "economic bill of rights" for poor Americans.[187][188]
The campaign was preceded by King's final book, Where Do We Go from Here: Chaos or Community?, which laid out his view of how to address social issues and poverty. King quoted from Henry George and George's book, Progress and Poverty, particularly in support of a guaranteed basic income.[189][190][191] The campaign culminated in a march on Washington, D.C., demanding economic aid to the poorest communities of the United States.
King and the SCLC called on the government to invest in rebuilding America's cities. He felt that Congress had shown "hostility to the poor" by spending "military funds with alacrity and generosity". He contrasted this with the situation faced by poor Americans, claiming that Congress had merely provided "poverty funds with miserliness".[188] His vision was for change that was more revolutionary than mere reform: he cited systematic flaws of "racism, poverty, militarism and materialism", and argued that "reconstruction of society itself is the real issue to be faced".[192]
The Poor People's Campaign was controversial even within the civil rights movement. Rustin resigned from the march, stating that the goals of the campaign were too broad, that its demands were unrealizable, and that he thought that these campaigns would accelerate the backlash and repression on the poor and the black.[193]
After King's death
The plan to set up a shantytown in Washington, D.C., was carried out soon after the April 4 assassination. Criticism of King's plan was subdued in the wake of his death, and the SCLC received an unprecedented wave of donations for the purpose of carrying it out. The campaign officially began in Memphis, on May 2, at the hotel where King was murdered.[194]
Thousands of demonstrators arrived on the National Mall and established a camp they called "Resurrection City". They stayed for six weeks.[195]
Assassination and aftermath
Main article: Assassination of Martin Luther King, Jr.




The Lorraine Motel, where King was assassinated, is now the site of the National Civil Rights Museum.







I've Been to the Mountaintop

Sorry, your browser either has JavaScript disabled or does not have any supported player.
You can download the clip or download a player to play the clip in your browser.

Final 30 seconds of "I've Been to the Mountaintop" speech by Martin Luther King, Jr.




Problems playing this file? See media help.


On March 29, 1968, King went to Memphis, Tennessee, in support of the black sanitary public works employees, represented by AFSCME Local 1733, who had been on strike since March 12 for higher wages and better treatment. In one incident, black street repairmen received pay for two hours when they were sent home because of bad weather, but white employees were paid for the full day.[196][197][198]
On April 3, King addressed a rally and delivered his "I've Been to the Mountaintop" address at Mason Temple, the world headquarters of the Church of God in Christ. King's flight to Memphis had been delayed by a bomb threat against his plane.[199] In the close of the last speech of his career, in reference to the bomb threat, King said the following:

And then I got to Memphis. And some began to say the threats, or talk about the threats that were out. What would happen to me from some of our sick white brothers?
Well, I don't know what will happen now. We've got some difficult days ahead. But it doesn't matter with me now. Because I've been to the mountaintop. And I don't mind. Like anybody, I would like to live a long life. Longevity has its place. But I'm not concerned about that now. I just want to do God's will. And He's allowed me to go up to the mountain. And I've looked over. And I've seen the promised land. I may not get there with you. But I want you to know tonight, that we, as a people, will get to the promised land. So I'm happy, tonight. I'm not worried about anything. I'm not fearing any man. Mine eyes have seen the glory of the coming of the Lord.[200]

King was booked in room 306 at the Lorraine Motel, owned by Walter Bailey, in Memphis. Abernathy, who was present at the assassination, testified to the United States House Select Committee on Assassinations that King and his entourage stayed at room 306 at the Lorraine Motel so often it was known as the "King-Abernathy suite".[201] According to Jesse Jackson, who was present, King's last words on the balcony before his assassination were spoken to musician Ben Branch, who was scheduled to perform that night at an event King was attending: "Ben, make sure you play 'Take My Hand, Precious Lord' in the meeting tonight. Play it real pretty."[202]
Then, at 6:01&#160;p.m., April 4, 1968, a shot rang out as King stood on the motel's second-floor balcony. The bullet entered through his right cheek, smashing his jaw, then traveled down his spinal cord before lodging in his shoulder.[203][204] Abernathy heard the shot from inside the motel room and ran to the balcony to find King on the floor.[205] Jackson stated after the shooting that he cradled King's head as King lay on the balcony, but this account was disputed by other colleagues of King's; Jackson later changed his statement to say that he had "reached out" for King.[206]
After emergency chest surgery, King died at St. Joseph's Hospital at 7:05&#160;p.m.[207] According to biographer Taylor Branch, King's autopsy revealed that though only 39 years old, he "had the heart of a 60 year old", which Branch attributed to the stress of 13 years in the Civil Rights Movement.[208]
Aftermath
Further information: King assassination riots
The assassination led to a nationwide wave of race riots in Washington, D.C.; Chicago; Baltimore; Louisville; Kansas City; and dozens of other cities.[209][210] Presidential candidate Robert F. "Bobby" Kennedy was on his way to Indianapolis for a campaign rally when he was informed of King's death. He gave a short speech to the gathering of supporters informing them of the tragedy and urging them to continue King's ideal of nonviolence.[211] James Farmer, Jr., and other civil rights leaders also called for nonviolent action, while the more militant Stokely Carmichael called for a more forceful response.[212] The city of Memphis quickly settled the strike on terms favorable to the sanitation workers.[213]
President Lyndon B. Johnson declared April 7 a national day of mourning for the civil rights leader.[214] Vice President Hubert Humphrey attended King's funeral on behalf of the President, as there were fears that Johnson's presence might incite protests and perhaps violence.[215] At his widow's request, King's last sermon at Ebenezer Baptist Church was played at the funeral,[216] a recording of his "Drum Major" sermon, given on February 4, 1968. In that sermon, King made a request that at his funeral no mention of his awards and honors be made, but that it be said that he tried to "feed the hungry", "clothe the naked", "be right on the [Vietnam] war question", and "love and serve humanity".[217] His good friend Mahalia Jackson sang his favorite hymn, "Take My Hand, Precious Lord", at the funeral.[218]
Two months after King's death, escaped convict James Earl Ray was captured at London Heathrow Airport while trying to leave the United Kingdom on a false Canadian passport in the name of Ramon George Sneyd on his way to white-ruled Rhodesia.[219] Ray was quickly extradited to Tennessee and charged with King's murder. He confessed to the assassination on March 10, 1969, though he recanted this confession three days later.[220] On the advice of his attorney Percy Foreman, Ray pled guilty to avoid a trial conviction and thus the possibility of receiving the death penalty. He was sentenced to a 99-year prison term.[220][221] Ray later claimed a man he met in Montreal, Quebec, with the alias "Raoul" was involved and that the assassination was the result of a conspiracy.[222][223] He spent the remainder of his life attempting, unsuccessfully, to withdraw his guilty plea and secure the trial he never had.[221]
Allegations of conspiracy
Ray's lawyers maintained he was a scapegoat similar to the way that John F. Kennedy assassin Lee Harvey Oswald is seen by conspiracy theorists.[224] Supporters of this assertion say that Ray's confession was given under pressure and that he had been threatened with the death penalty.[221][225] They admit Ray was a thief and burglar, but claim he had no record of committing violent crimes with a weapon.[223] However, prison records in different U.S. cities have shown that he was incarcerated on numerous occasions for charges of armed robbery.[226] In a 2008 interview with CNN, Jerry Ray, the younger brother of James Earl Ray, claimed that James was smart and was sometimes able to get away with armed robbery. Jerry Ray said that he had assisted his brother on one such robbery. "I never been with nobody as bold as he is," Jerry said. "He just walked in and put that gun on somebody, it was just like it's an everyday thing."[226]
Those suspecting a conspiracy in the assassination point to the two successive ballistics tests which proved that a rifle similar to Ray's Remington Gamemaster had been the murder weapon. Those tests did not implicate Ray's specific rifle.[221][227] Witnesses near King at the moment of his death said that the shot came from another location. They said that it came from behind thick shrubbery near the boarding house—which had been cut away in the days following the assassination—and not from the boarding house window.[228] However, Ray's fingerprints were found on various objects (a rifle, a pair of binoculars, articles of clothing, a newspaper) that were left in the bathroom where it was determined the gunfire came from.[226] An examination of the rifle containing Ray's fingerprints also determined that at least one shot was fired from the firearm at the time of the assassination.[226]




Martin Luther King and Coretta Scott King's sarcophagus, located on the grounds of the Martin Luther King, Jr. National Historic Site in Atlanta, Georgia


In 1997, King's son Dexter Scott King met with Ray, and publicly supported Ray's efforts to obtain a new trial.[229]
Two years later, Coretta Scott King, King's widow, along with the rest of King's family, won a wrongful death claim against Loyd Jowers and "other unknown co-conspirators". Jowers claimed to have received $100,000 to arrange King's assassination. The jury of six whites and six blacks found in favor of the King family, finding Jowers to be complicit in a conspiracy against King and that government agencies were party to the assassination.[230][231] William F. Pepper represented the King family in the trial.[232]
In 2000, the U.S. Department of Justice completed the investigation into Jowers' claims but did not find evidence to support allegations about conspiracy. The investigation report recommended no further investigation unless some new reliable facts are presented.[233] A sister of Jowers admitted that he had fabricated the story so he could make $300,000 from selling the story, and she in turn corroborated his story in order to get some money to pay her income tax.[234][235]
In 2002, The New York Times reported that a church minister, Rev. Ronald Denton Wilson, claimed his father, Henry Clay Wilson—not James Earl Ray—assassinated King. He stated, "It wasn't a racist thing; he thought Martin Luther King was connected with communism, and he wanted to get him out of the way." Wilson provided no evidence to back up his claims.[236]
King researchers David Garrow and Gerald Posner disagreed with William F. Pepper's claims that the government killed King.[237] In 2003, William Pepper published a book about the long investigation and trial, as well as his representation of James Earl Ray in his bid for a trial, laying out the evidence and criticizing other accounts.[238] King's friend and colleague, James Bevel, also disputed the argument that Ray acted alone, stating, "There is no way a ten-cent white boy could develop a plan to kill a million-dollar black man."[239] In 2004, Jesse Jackson stated:

The fact is there were saboteurs to disrupt the march. And within our own organization, we found a very key person who was on the government payroll. So infiltration within, saboteurs from without and the press attacks.&#160;... I will never believe that James Earl Ray had the motive, the money and the mobility to have done it himself. Our government was very involved in setting the stage for and I think the escape route for James Earl Ray.[240]

FBI and King's personal life
FBI surveillance and wiretapping
FBI director J. Edgar Hoover personally ordered surveillance of King, with the intent to undermine his power as a civil rights leader.[170][241] According to the Church Committee, a 1975 investigation by the U.S. Congress, "From December 1963 until his death in 1968, Martin Luther King Jr. was the target of an intensive campaign by the Federal Bureau of Investigation to 'neutralize' him as an effective civil rights leader."[242]
The Bureau received authorization to proceed with wiretapping from Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy in the fall of 1963[243] and informed President John F. Kennedy, both of whom unsuccessfully tried to persuade King to dissociate himself from Stanley Levison, a New York lawyer who had been involved with Communist Party USA.[244][245] Although Robert Kennedy only gave written approval for limited wiretapping of King's phones "on a trial basis, for a month or so",[246] Hoover extended the clearance so his men were "unshackled" to look for evidence in any areas of King's life they deemed worthy.[247] The Bureau placed wiretaps on Levison's and King's home and office phones, and bugged King's rooms in hotels as he traveled across the country.[244][248] In 1967, Hoover listed the SCLC as a black nationalist hate group, with the instructions: "No opportunity should be missed to exploit through counterintelligence techniques the organizational and personal conflicts of the leaderships of the groups&#160;... to insure the targeted group is disrupted, ridiculed, or discredited."[241][249]
NSA monitoring of King's communications
In a secret operation code-named "Minaret", the National Security Agency (NSA) monitored the communications of leading Americans, including King, who criticized the U.S. war in Vietnam.[250] A review by the NSA itself concluded that Minaret was "disreputable if not outright illegal."[250]
Allegations of communism
For years, Hoover had been suspicious about potential influence of communists in social movements such as labor unions and civil rights.[251] Hoover directed the FBI to track King in 1957, and the SCLC as it was established (it did not have a full-time executive director until 1960).[91] The investigations were largely superficial until 1962, when the FBI learned that one of King's most trusted advisers was New York City lawyer Stanley Levison.[252]
The FBI feared Levison was working as an "agent of influence" over King, in spite of its own reports in 1963 that Levison had left the Party and was no longer associated in business dealings with them.[253] Another King lieutenant, Hunter Pitts O'Dell, was also linked to the Communist Party by sworn testimony before the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC).[254] However, by 1976 the FBI had acknowledged that it had not obtained any evidence that King himself or the SCLC were actually involved with any communist organizations.[242]
For his part, King adamantly denied having any connections to communism, stating in a 1965 Playboy interview that "there are as many Communists in this freedom movement as there are Eskimos in Florida".[255] He argued that Hoover was "following the path of appeasement of political powers in the South" and that his concern for communist infiltration of the Civil Rights Movement was meant to "aid and abet the salacious claims of southern racists and the extreme right-wing elements".[242] Hoover did not believe King's pledge of innocence and replied by saying that King was "the most notorious liar in the country".[256] After King gave his "I Have A Dream" speech during the March on Washington on August 28, 1963, the FBI described King as "the most dangerous and effective Negro leader in the country".[248] It alleged that he was "knowingly, willingly and regularly cooperating with and taking guidance from communists".[257]
The attempt to prove that King was a communist was related to the feeling of many segregationists that blacks in the South were happy with their lot but had been stirred up by "communists" and "outside agitators".[258] However, the 1950s and '60s Civil Rights Movement arose from activism within the black community dating back to before World War I. King said that "the Negro revolution is a genuine revolution, born from the same womb that produces all massive social upheavals—the womb of intolerable conditions and unendurable situations."[259]
Adultery




Martin Luther King, Jr., and Malcolm X, March 26, 1964


Having concluded that King was dangerous due to communist infiltration, the FBI shifted to attempting to discredit King through revelations regarding his private life. FBI surveillance of King, some of it since made public, attempted to demonstrate that he also engaged in numerous extramarital affairs.[248] Lyndon Johnson once said that King was a "hypocritical preacher".[260]
Ralph Abernathy stated in his 1989 autobiography And the Walls Came Tumbling Down that King had a "weakness for women", although they "all understood and believed in the biblical prohibition against sex outside of marriage. It was just that he had a particularly difficult time with that temptation".[261] In a later interview, Abernathy said that he only wrote the term "womanizing", that he did not specifically say King had extramarital sex and that the infidelities King had were emotional rather than sexual.[262] Abernathy criticized the media for sensationalizing the statements he wrote about King's affairs,[262] such as the allegation that he admitted in his book that King had a sexual affair the night before he was assassinated.[262] In his original wording, Abernathy had claimed he saw King coming out of his room with a lady when he awoke the next morning and later claimed that "he may have been in there discussing and debating and trying to get her to go along with the movement, I don't know."[262]
In his 1986 book Bearing the Cross, David Garrow wrote about a number of extramarital affairs, including one woman King saw almost daily. According to Garrow, "that relationship&#160;... increasingly became the emotional centerpiece of King's life, but it did not eliminate the incidental couplings&#160;... of King's travels." He alleged that King explained his extramarital affairs as "a form of anxiety reduction". Garrow asserted that King's supposed promiscuity caused him "painful and at times overwhelming guilt".[263] King's wife Coretta appeared to have accepted his affairs with equanimity, saying once that "all that other business just doesn't have a place in the very high level relationship we enjoyed."[264] Shortly after Bearing the Cross was released, civil rights author Howell Raines gave the book a positive review but opined that Garrow's allegations about King's sex life were "sensational" and stated that Garrow was "amassing facts rather than analyzing them".[265]
The FBI distributed reports regarding such affairs to the executive branch, friendly reporters, potential coalition partners and funding sources of the SCLC, and King's family.[266] The Bureau also sent anonymous letters to King threatening to reveal information if he did not cease his civil rights work.[267] One anonymous letter sent to King just before he received the Nobel Peace Prize read, in part:




The so-called "suicide letter",[268] mailed anonymously by the FBI



The American public, the church organizations that have been helping—Protestants, Catholics and Jews will know you for what you are—an evil beast. So will others who have backed you. You are done. King, there is only one thing left for you to do. You know what it is. You have just 34 days in which to do (this exact number has been selected for a specific reason, it has definite practical significant  [sic]). You are done. There is but one way out for you. You better take it before your filthy fraudulent self is bared to the nation.[269]

A tape recording of several of King's extramarital liaisons, excerpted from FBI wiretaps, accompanied the letter.[270] King interpreted this package as an attempt to drive him to suicide,[271] although William Sullivan, head of the Domestic Intelligence Division at the time, argued that it may have only been intended to "convince Dr. King to resign from the SCLC".[242] King refused to give in to the FBI's threats.[248]
Judge John Lewis Smith, Jr., in 1977 ordered all known copies of the recorded audiotapes and written transcripts resulting from the FBI's electronic surveillance of King between 1963 and 1968 to be held in the National Archives and sealed from public access until 2027.[272]
Police observation during the assassination
Across from the Lorraine Motel, next to the boarding house in which Ray was staying, was a fire station. Police officers were stationed in the fire station to keep King under surveillance.[273] Agents were watching King at the time he was shot.[274] Immediately following the shooting, officers rushed out of the station to the motel. Marrell McCollough, an undercover police officer, was the first person to administer first aid to King.[275] The antagonism between King and the FBI, the lack of an all points bulletin to find the killer, and the police presence nearby led to speculation that the FBI was involved in the assassination.[276]
Legacy




President Johnson signs the Civil Rights Act of 1964. Among the guests behind him is Martin Luther King.






Martin Luther King, Jr., statue over the west entrance of Westminster Abbey, installed in 1998






Protesters at the 2012 Republican National Convention display Dr. King's words and image on a banner


King's main legacy was to secure progress on civil rights in the U.S. Just days after King's assassination, Congress passed the Civil Rights Act of 1968.[277] Title VIII of the Act, commonly known as the Fair Housing Act, prohibited discrimination in housing and housing-related transactions on the basis of race, religion, or national origin (later expanded to include sex, familial status, and disability). This legislation was seen as a tribute to King's struggle in his final years to combat residential discrimination in the U.S.[277]
Internationally, King's legacy includes influences on the Black Consciousness Movement and Civil Rights Movement in South Africa.[278][279] King's work was cited by and served as an inspiration for South African leader Albert Lutuli, who fought for racial justice in his country and was later awarded the Nobel Prize.[280] The day following King's assassination, school teacher Jane Elliott conducted her first "Blue Eyes/Brown Eyes" exercise with her class of elementary school students in Riceville, Iowa. Her purpose was to help them understand King's death as it related to racism, something they little understood as they lived in a predominantly white community.[281] King has become a national icon in the history of American liberalism and American progressivism.[282]
King's wife, Coretta Scott King, followed in her husband's footsteps and was active in matters of social justice and civil rights until her death in 2006. The same year that Martin Luther King was assassinated, she established the King Center in Atlanta, Georgia, dedicated to preserving his legacy and the work of championing nonviolent conflict resolution and tolerance worldwide.[283] Their son, Dexter King, serves as the center's chairman.[284][285] Daughter Yolanda King, who died in 2007, was a motivational speaker, author and founder of Higher Ground Productions, an organization specializing in diversity training.[286]
Even within the King family, members disagree about his religious and political views about gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender people. King's widow Coretta said publicly that she believed her husband would have supported gay rights.[287] However, his youngest child, Bernice King, has said publicly that he would have been opposed to gay marriage.[288]
On February 4, 1968, at the Ebenezer Baptist Church, in speaking about how he wished to be remembered after his death, King stated:

I'd like somebody to mention that day that Martin Luther King Jr. tried to give his life serving others. I'd like for somebody to say that day that Martin Luther King Jr. tried to love somebody.
I want you to say that day that I tried to be right on the war question. I want you to be able to say that day that I did try to feed the hungry. I want you to be able to say that day that I did try in my life to clothe those who were naked. I want you to say on that day that I did try in my life to visit those who were in prison. And I want you to say that I tried to love and serve humanity.
Yes, if you want to say that I was a drum major. Say that I was a drum major for justice. Say that I was a drum major for peace. I was a drum major for righteousness. And all of the other shallow things will not matter. I won't have any money to leave behind. I won't have the fine and luxurious things of life to leave behind. But I just want to leave a committed life behind.[212][289]

Martin Luther King, Jr. Day
Main article: Martin Luther King, Jr. Day
Beginning in 1971, cities such as St. Louis, Missouri, and states established annual holidays to honor King.[290] At the White House Rose Garden on November 2, 1983, President Ronald Reagan signed a bill creating a federal holiday to honor King. Observed for the first time on January 20, 1986, it is called Martin Luther King, Jr. Day. Following President George H. W. Bush's 1992 proclamation, the holiday is observed on the third Monday of January each year, near the time of King's birthday.[291][292] On January 17, 2000, for the first time, Martin Luther King, Jr. Day was officially observed in all fifty U.S. states.[293] Arizona (1992), New Hampshire (1999) and Utah (2000) were the last three states to recognized the holiday. Utah previously celebrated the holiday at the same time but under the name Human Rights Day.[294]
Liturgical commemorations
King is remembered as a martyr by the Episcopal Church in the United States of America with an annual feast day on the anniversary of his death, April 4.[295] The Evangelical Lutheran Church in America commemorates King liturgically on the anniversary of his birth, January 15.[296]
UK legacy and The Martin Luther King Peace Committee
In the United Kingdom, The Northumbria and Newcastle Universities Martin Luther King Peace Committee[297] exists to honour King's legacy, as represented by his final visit to the UK to receive an honorary degree from Newcastle University in 1967.[298] The Peace Committee operates out of the chaplaincies of the city's two universities, Northumbria and Newcastle, both of which remain centres for the study of Martin Luther King and the US Civil Rights Movement. Inspired by King's vision, it undertakes a range of activities across the UK as it seeks to "build cultures of peace."
Awards and recognition




Martin Luther King, Jr., showing his medallion received from Mayor Wagner






Statue of King in Birmingham's Kelly Ingram Park






Dexter Avenue Baptist Church, where King ministered, was renamed Dexter Avenue King Memorial Baptist Church in 1978.


King was awarded at least fifty honorary degrees from colleges and universities.[299] On October 14, 1964, King became the youngest recipient of the Nobel Peace Prize, which was awarded to him for leading nonviolent resistance to racial prejudice in the U.S.[300] In 1965, he was awarded the American Liberties Medallion by the American Jewish Committee for his "exceptional advancement of the principles of human liberty".[299][301] In his acceptance remarks, King said, "Freedom is one thing. You have it all or you are not free."[302]
In 1957, he was awarded the Spingarn Medal from the NAACP.[303] Two years later, he won the Anisfield-Wolf Book Award for his book Stride Toward Freedom: The Montgomery Story.[304] In 1966, the Planned Parenthood Federation of America awarded King the Margaret Sanger Award for "his courageous resistance to bigotry and his lifelong dedication to the advancement of social justice and human dignity".[305] Also in 1966, King was elected as a fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences.[306] In November 1967 he made a 24 hour trip to the United Kingdom to receive an honorary degree from Newcastle University, being the first African American to be so honoured by Newcastle.[307] In a moving impromptu acceptance speech,[308] he said

There are three urgent and indeed great problems that we face not only in the United States of America but all over the world today. That is the problem of racism, the problem of poverty and the problem of war.

In 1971 he was posthumously awarded a Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album for his Why I Oppose the War in Vietnam.[309]
In 1977, the Presidential Medal of Freedom was posthumously awarded to King by President Jimmy Carter. The citation read:

Martin Luther King, Jr., was the conscience of his generation. He gazed upon the great wall of segregation and saw that the power of love could bring it down. From the pain and exhaustion of his fight to fulfill the promises of our founding fathers for our humblest citizens, he wrung his eloquent statement of his dream for America. He made our nation stronger because he made it better. His dream sustains us yet.[310]

King and his wife were also awarded the Congressional Gold Medal in 2004.[311]
King was second in Gallup's List of Most Widely Admired People of the 20th Century.[312] In 1963, he was named Time Person of the Year, and in 2000, he was voted sixth in an online "Person of the Century" poll by the same magazine.[313] King placed third in the Greatest American contest conducted by the Discovery Channel and AOL.[314]
Memorials and eponymous places and buildings




Martin Luther King Jr. Street at Liberty Bell Park in Jerusalem, Israel






Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial in Yerba Buena Gardens


There are numerous memorials to King in the United States, including:

More than 730 cities in the United States have streets named after King.[315]
King County, Washington, rededicated its name in his honor in 1986, and changed its logo to an image of his face in 2007.[316]
The city government center in Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, is named in honor of King.[317]
In 1980, the U.S. Department of the Interior designated King's boyhood home in Atlanta and several nearby buildings the Martin Luther King, Jr. National Historic Site.[318]
A bust of Dr. King was added to the "gallery of notables" in the United States Capitol in 1986, portraying him in a "restful, nonspeaking pose."[319]
The beginning words of King's "I Have a Dream" speech are etched on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial, at the place where King stood during that speech.[320] These words from the speech—"five short lines of text carved into the granite on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial"—were etched in 2003, on the 40th anniversary of the march to Washington, by stone carver Andy Del Gallo, after a law was passed by Congress providing authorization for the inscription.[320]
In 1996, Congress authorized the Alpha Phi Alpha fraternity, of which King is still a member, to establish a foundation to manage fund raising and design of a national Martin Luther King, Jr. Memorial on the National Mall in Washington, D.C.[321] King was the first African American and the fourth non-president honored with his own memorial in the National Mall area.[322] The memorial opened in August 2011[323] and is administered by the National Park Service.[324] The address of the monument, 1964 Independence Avenue, S.W., commemorates the year that the Civil Rights Act of 1964 became law.[325]
The Landmark for Peace Memorial in Indianapolis, Indiana[318]
The Homage to King sculpture in Atlanta, Georgia[318]
The Dream sculpture in Portland, Oregon
The National Civil Rights Museum, at the Lorraine Motel in Memphis, Tennessee, where King died[318]
Brown Chapel A.M.E. Church in Selma, Alabama[318]
On October 11, 2015, the Atlanta Journal-Constitution reported a proposed "Freedom Bell" may be installed atop Stone Mountain honoring King and his I Have A Dream speech, specifically the line "Let freedom ring from Stone Mountain of Georgia."[326]

Numerous other memorials honor him around the world, including:

The Reverend Martin Luther King, Jr. Church in Debrecen, Hungary[318]
The King-Luthuli Transformation Center in Johannesburg, South Africa[318]
The Rev. Martin Luther King, Jr. Forest in Israel's Southern Galilee region (along with the Coretta Scott King Forest in Biriya Forest, Israel)[318]
The Martin Luther King, Jr. School in Accra, Ghana[318]
The Gandhi-King Plaza (garden), at the India International Center in New Delhi, India

Bibliography

Stride Toward Freedom: The Montgomery Story (1958) ISBN 978-0-06-250490-6
The Measure of a Man (1959) ISBN 978-0-8006-0877-4
Strength to Love (1963) ISBN 978-0-8006-9740-2
Why We Can't Wait (1964) ISBN 978-0-8070-0112-7
Where Do We Go from Here: Chaos or Community? (1967) ISBN 978-0-8070-0571-2
The Trumpet of Conscience (1968) ISBN 978-0-8070-0170-7
A Testament of Hope: The Essential Writings and Speeches of Martin Luther King, Jr. (1986) ISBN 978-0-06-250931-4
The Autobiography of Martin Luther King, Jr. (1998), ed. Clayborne Carson ISBN 978-0-446-67650-2
"All Labor Has Dignity" (2011) ed. Michael Honey ISBN 978-0-8070-8600-1
"Thou, Dear God": Prayers That Open Hearts and Spirits Collection of Dr. King's prayers. (2011), ed. Dr. Lewis Baldwin ISBN 978-0-8070-8603-2
MLK: A Celebration in Word and Image Photographed by Bob Adelman, introduced by Charles Johnson ISBN 978-0-8070-0316-9

See also




African American portal



Atlanta portal



Biography portal



Saints portal



Social movements portal




Martin Luther King, Jr. authorship issues
Sermons and speeches of Martin Luther King, Jr.
The Meeting

Concepts

Equality before the law
Violence begets violence

General

List of American philosophers
List of civil rights leaders
List of peace activists

After Martin Luther King

Post–Civil Rights era in African-American history

References
Notes


^ Though commonly attributed to King, this expression originated with 19th-century abolitionist Theodore Parker.[146]


Citations


^ Ogletree, Charles J. (2004). All Deliberate Speed: Reflections on the First Half Century of Brown v. Board of Education. W W Norton &amp; Co. p.&#160;138. ISBN&#160;0-393-05897-2.&#160;
^ "Upbringing &amp; Studies". The King Center. Archived from the original on January 9, 2013. Retrieved September 2, 2012.&#160;
^ Mohn, Tanya (January 12, 2012). "Martin Luther King Jr.: The German Connection and How He Got His Name". Forbes.com. Retrieved January 16, 2012.&#160;
^ "Martin Luther King Jr. name change". German-way.com. Retrieved July 9, 2013.&#160;
^ "King, James Albert".&#160;
^ Nsenga, Burton. "AfricanAncestry.com Reveals Roots of MLK and Marcus Garvey".&#160;
^ King 1992, p.&#160;76.
^ Katznelson, Ira (2005). When Affirmative Action was White: An Untold History of Racial Inequality in Twentieth-Century America. WW Norton &amp; Co. p.&#160;5. ISBN&#160;0-393-05213-3.&#160;
^ Millender, Dharathula H. (1986). Martin Luther King Jr.: Young Man with a Dream. Aladdin. pp.&#160;45–46. ISBN&#160;978-0-02-042010-1.&#160;
^ Frady, Marshall (2005). Martin Luther King, Jr: A Life. pp.&#160;12–15. ISBN&#160;978-0-14-303648-7.&#160;
^ Pierce, Alan (2004). Assassination of Martin Luther King Jr. Abdo Pub Co. p.&#160;14. ISBN&#160;978-1-59197-727-8.&#160;
^ Blake, John. "How MLK became an angry black man".&#160;
^ Carson, Clayborn. "Martin Luther King Jr.".&#160;
^ a b "King's God: The Unknown Faith of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr". Tikkun. November 2, 2001. Retrieved February 8, 2010.&#160;
^ King 1998, p.&#160;6.
^ a b c Fleming, Alice (2008). Martin Luther King Jr.: A Dream of Hope. Sterling. p.&#160;9. ISBN&#160;978-1-4027-4439-6.&#160;
^ King, Martin Luther (1992). The Papers of Martin Luther King, Jr, Volume 1. University of California Press. p.&#160;82. ISBN&#160;978-0-520-07950-2.&#160;
^ Ching, Jacqueline (2002). The Assassination of Martin Luther King, Jr. Rosen Publishing. p.&#160;18. ISBN&#160;0-8239-3543-4.&#160;
^ Frady, p. 18.
^ Downing, Frederick L. (1986). To See the Promised Land: The Faith Pilgrimage of Martin Luther King, Jr. Mercer University Press. p.&#160;150. ISBN&#160;0-86554-207-4.&#160;
^ Nojeim, Michael J. (2004). Gandhi and King: The Power of Nonviolent Resistance. Greenwood Publishing Group. p.&#160;179. ISBN&#160;0-275-96574-0.&#160;
^ Farris, Christine King (2009). Through It All: Reflections on My Life, My Family, and My Faith. Atria Books. pp.&#160;44–47. ISBN&#160;978-1-4165-4881-2.&#160;
^ a b c Frady, pp.&#160;20–22.
^ L. Lewis, David (2013). King: A Biography. University of Illinois Press. p.&#160;27.&#160;
^ "Coretta Scott King". The Daily Telegraph. February 1, 2006. Archived from the original on January 9, 2013. Retrieved September 8, 2008.&#160;
^ Warren, Mervyn A. (2001). King Came Preaching: The Pulpit Power of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. InterVarsity Press. p.&#160;35. ISBN&#160;0-8308-2658-0.&#160;
^ Civil Rights History from the Ground Up: Local Struggles, a National Movement. University of Georgia Press. p.&#160;410.&#160;
^ Radin, Charles A. (October 11, 1991). "Panel Confirms Plagiarism by King at BU". The Boston Globe. p.&#160;1.&#160;
^ "Martin Luther King". Snopes. Retrieved March 14, 2011.&#160;
^ "Boston U. Panel Finds Plagiarism by Dr. King". The New York Times. October 11, 1991. Archived from the original on November 13, 2013. Retrieved November 13, 2013.&#160;
^ "King's Ph.D. dissertation, with attached note" (PDF). Retrieved November 7, 2014.&#160;
^ Fuller, Linda K. (2004). National Days, National Ways: Historical, Political, And Religious Celebrations around the World. Greenwood Publishing. p.&#160;314. ISBN&#160;0-275-97270-4.&#160;
^ "Martin Luther King Jr., Justice Without Violence- April 3, 1957". Mlk-kpp01.stanford.edu. Retrieved July 9, 2013.&#160;
^ The Martin Luther King Jr. Research and Education Institute. Why Jesus Called A Man A Fool. Delivered at Mount Pisgah Missionary Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois, on 27 August 1967.
^ The Huffington Post. 2013. 'A Gift Of Love': Martin Luther King's Sermons From Strength To Love (EXCERPT).
^ Farrell, James J. (1997). The Spirit of the Sixties: Making Postwar Radicalism. Routledge. p.&#160;90. ISBN&#160;0-415-91385-3.&#160;
^ a b "Wofford, Harris Llewellyn" King Encyclopedia
^ Kahlenberg, Richard D. (1997). "Book Review: Bayard Rustin: Troubles I've Seen". Washington Monthly. Retrieved June 12, 2008.&#160;
^ Enger, Mark and Paul. "When Martin Luther King Jr. gave up his guns".&#160;
^ Bennett, Scott H. (2003). Radical Pacifism: The War Resisters League and Gandhian Nonviolence in America, 1915–1963. Syracuse University Press. p.&#160;217. ISBN&#160;0-8156-3003-4.&#160;
^ "Stride Toward Freedom" King Encyclopedia
^ King Jr., Martin Luther; Clayborne Carson; et al. (2005). The Papers of Martin Luther King, Jr., Volume V: Threshold of a New Decade, January 1959&#160;– December 1960 (PDF). University of California Press. p.&#160;231. ISBN&#160;0-520-24239-4.&#160;
^ "India Trip (1959)" King Encyclopedia
^ King 1992, p.&#160;13.
^ Arsenault, Raymond (2006). Freedom Riders: 1961 and the Struggle for Racial Justice. Oxford University Press. p.&#160;62. ISBN&#160;0-19-513674-8.&#160;
^ Frady 2002, p.&#160;42.
^ De Leon, David (1994). Leaders from the 1960s: a biographical sourcebook of American activism. Greenwood Publishing. p.&#160;138. ISBN&#160;0-313-27414-2.&#160;
^ Dr. Martin Luther King (December 11, 1964). "Nobel Lecture by MLK". The King Center. p.&#160;12.&#160;
^ King 1992, pp.&#160;135–36.
^ King Jr., Martin Luther; Clayborne Carson; et al. (2005). The Papers of Martin Luther King, Jr., Volume V: Threshold of a New Decade, January 1959&#160;– December 1960. University of California Press. pp.&#160;149, 269, 248. ISBN&#160;0-520-24239-4.&#160;
^ King, M. L. Morehouse College (Chapter 2 of The Autobiography of Martin Luther King Jr.)
^ Reinhold Niebuhr and Contemporary Politics: God and Power
^ "Agape". Martin Luther King Jr. and the Global Freedom Struggle. The Martin Luther King Jr. Research and Education Institute. Retrieved January 19, 2015.&#160;
^ Wang, Lisa. "Martin Luther King Jr.'s Troubled Attitude toward Nonviolent Resistance" (PDF). Exposé. Harvard College Writing Program. Retrieved January 19, 2015.&#160;
^ "Nonviolence: The Only Road to Freedom - Teaching American History". teachingamericanhistory.org.&#160;
^ "Birmingham civil rights activist Colonel Stone Johnson has died (slideshow)". AL.com.&#160;
^ "Armed Resistance in the Civil Rights Movement: Charles E. Cobb and Danielle L. McGuire on Forgotten History". The American Prospect.&#160;
^ Lance Hill, The Deacons for Defense: Armed Resistance and the Civil Rights Movement (University of North Carolina Press, 2006), p.&#160;245–250
^ Oates, Stephen B. (December 13, 1993). Let the Trumpet Sound: A Life of Martin Luther King, Jr. HarperCollins. p.&#160;159. ISBN&#160;978-0-06-092473-7.&#160;
^ King Jr., Martin Luther (2000). Carson, Clayborne; Holloran, Peter; Luker, Ralph; Russell, Penny A., eds. The Papers of Martin Luther King, Jr: Symbol of the Movement, January 1957&#160;– December 1958. University of California Press. p.&#160;364. ISBN&#160;978-0-520-22231-1.&#160;
^ Merriner, James L. (March 9, 2003). "Illinois' liberal giant, Paul Douglas". Chicago Tribune. Retrieved May 17, 2015.&#160;
^ King Jr., Martin Luther (2000). Carson, Clayborne; Holloran, Peter; Luker, Ralph; Russell, Penny A., eds. The Papers of Martin Luther King, Jr: Symbol of the Movement, January 1957&#160;– December 1958. University of California Press. p.&#160;84. ISBN&#160;978-0-520-22231-1.&#160;
^ King Jr., Martin Luther (1992). Carson, Clayborne; Holloran, Peter; Luker, Ralph; Russell, Penny A., eds. The papers of Martin Luther King Jr. University of California Press. p.&#160;384. ISBN&#160;978-0-520-07951-9.&#160;
^ King Jr., Martin Luther; Carson, Clayborne (1998). The Autobiography of Martin Luther King Jr. Hachette Digital. p.&#160;187. ISBN&#160;978-0-446-52412-4.&#160;
^ "Mr. Conservative: Barry Goldwater's Opposition to the Civil Rights Act of 1964". September 18, 2006. Retrieved May 17, 2015.&#160;
^ Hendricks Jr., Obery M. "The Uncompromising Anti-Capitalism of Martin Luther King Jr.".&#160;
^ Washington 1991.
^ Washington 1991, pp.&#160;365–67.
^ Washington 1991, pp.&#160;367–68.
^ "Quotes". http://www.worldpopulationbalance.org/. Retrieved 9 July 2014.&#160;
^ "Family Planning - A Special and Urgent Concern". http://www.plannedparenthood.org/. Retrieved 9 July 2014.&#160;
^ Manheimer, Ann S. (2004). Martin Luther King Jr.: Dreaming of Equality. Twenty-First Century Books. p.&#160;103. ISBN&#160;1-57505-627-5.&#160;
^ "December 1, 1955: Rosa Parks arrested". CNN. March 11, 2003. Retrieved June 8, 2008.&#160;
^ Walsh, Frank (2003). The Montgomery Bus Boycott. Gareth Stevens. p.&#160;24. ISBN&#160;0-8368-5403-9.&#160;
^ McMahon, Thomas F. (2004). Ethical Leadership Through Transforming Justice. University Press of America. p.&#160;25. ISBN&#160;0-7618-2908-3.&#160;
^ Fisk, Larry J.; Schellenberg, John (1999). Patterns of Conflict, Paths to Peace. Broadview Press. p.&#160;115. ISBN&#160;1-55111-154-3.&#160;
^ King 1992, p.&#160;9.
^ a b Jackson 2006, p.&#160;53.
^ Frady 2002, p.&#160;52.
^ Miller, Steven P. (2009). Billy Graham and the Rise of the Republican South. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. p.&#160;92. ISBN&#160;978-0-8122-4151-8. Retrieved April 8, 2015.&#160;
^ Marable, Manning; Mullings, Leith (2000). Let Nobody Turn Us Around: Voices of Resistance, Reform, and Renewal: an African American Anthology. Rowman &amp; Littlefield. pp.&#160;391–2. ISBN&#160;0-8476-8346-X.&#160;
^ "Prayer Pilgrimage for Freedom". Civil Rights Digital Library. Retrieved October 25, 2013.&#160;
^ "Program from the SCLC's Tenth Annual Convention". The King Center. Retrieved 7 September 2015.&#160;
^ Pearson, Hugh (2002). When Harlem Nearly Killed King: The 1958 Stabbing of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Seven Stories Press. p. 37. ISBN 978-1-58322-614-8.
^ Graham, Renee (February 4, 2002). "'King' is a Deft Exploration of the Civil Rights Leader's Stabbing". The Boston Globe. &#160;–&#160;via&#160;HighBeam Research (subscription required). Retrieved January 20, 2013.&#160;
^ "Today in History, September 20". &#160;–&#160;via&#160;HighBeam Research (subscription required). Associated Press. September 19, 2012. Retrieved January 20, 2013.&#160;
^ "Measure of a Man, The (1959)". Martin Luther King Jr. and the Global Freedom Struggle. Stanford University. Archived from the original on January 24, 2013. Retrieved January 24, 2013.&#160;
^ "Martin Luther King Jr. and the Global Freedom Struggle: Gandhi Society for Human Rights". Stanford University.&#160;
^ Theoharis, Athan G.; Poveda, Tony G.; Powers, Richard Gid; Rosenfeld, Susan (1999). The FBI: A Comprehensive Reference Guide. Greenwood Publishing. p.&#160;148. ISBN&#160;0-89774-991-X.&#160;
^ Frum, David (2000). How We Got Here: The '70s. Basic Books. p.&#160;41. ISBN&#160;0-465-04195-7.&#160;
^ a b Theoharis, Athan G.; Poveda, Tony G.; Powers, Richard Gid; Rosenfeld, Susan (1999). The FBI: A Comprehensive Reference Guide. Greenwood Publishing Group. p.&#160;123. ISBN&#160;0-89774-991-X.&#160;
^ Wilson, Joseph; Marable, Manning; Ness, Immanuel (2006). Race and Labor Matters in the New U.S. Economy. Rowman &amp; Littlefield. p.&#160;47. ISBN&#160;0-7425-4691-8.&#160;
^ Schofield, Norman (2006). Architects of Political Change: Constitutional Quandaries and Social Choice Theory. Cambridge University Press. p.&#160;189. ISBN&#160;0-521-83202-0.&#160;
^ Shafritz, Jay M. (1998). International Encyclopedia of Public Policy and Administration. Westview Press. p.&#160;1242. ISBN&#160;0-8133-9974-2.&#160;
^ Loevy, Robert D.; Humphrey, Hubert H.; Stewart, John G. (1997). The Civil Rights Act of 1964: The Passage of the Law that Ended Racial Segregation. SUNY Press. p.&#160;337. ISBN&#160;0-7914-3361-7.&#160;
^ Glisson 2006, p.&#160;190.
^ Bobbitt, David (2007). The Rhetoric of Redemption: Kenneth Burke's Redemption Drama and Martin Luther King Jr.'s "I Have a Dream" Speech. Rowman &amp; Littlefield. p.&#160;105. ISBN&#160;0-7425-2928-2.&#160;
^ Ling, Peter J. (2002). Martin Luther King, Jr. Routledge. pp.&#160;250–1. ISBN&#160;0-415-21664-8.&#160;
^ Yeshitela, Omali. "Abbreviated Report from the International Tribunal on Reparations for Black People in the U.S.". African People's Socialist Party. Archived from the original on May 17, 2008. Retrieved June 15, 2008.&#160;
^ a b King, Martin Luther. The Autobiography of Martin Luther King Jr. Hatchette Digital. 2001. Accessed January 4, 2013.
^ King, Martin Luther (1990). A Testament of Hope: The Essential Writings and Speeches of Martin Luther King Jr. Harper Collins. p.&#160;105. ISBN&#160;978-0-06-064691-2.&#160;
^ King Center:Billy Graham Accessed September 15, 2014
^ Glisson 2006, pp.&#160;190–93.
^ "Albany, GA Movement". Civil Rights Movement Veterans. Retrieved September 8, 2008.&#160;
^ Frady 2002, p.&#160;96.
^ Garrow, (1986) p.&#160;246.
^ McWhorter, Diane (2001). "Two Mayors and a King". Carry Me Home: Birmingham, Alabama: The Climactic Battle of the Civil Rights Revolution. Simon and Schuster. ISBN&#160;978-0-7432-2648-6.&#160;
^ a b Harrell, David Edwin; Gaustad, Edwin S.; Miller, Randall M.; Boles, John B.; Woods, Randall Bennett; Griffith, Sally Foreman (2005). Unto a Good Land: A History of the American People, Volume 2. Wm B Eerdmans Publishing. p.&#160;1055. ISBN&#160;0-8028-2945-7.&#160;
^ "Birmingham USA: Look at Them Run". Newsweek: &#160;27. May 13, 1963.&#160;
^ Frady 2002, pp.&#160;113–14.
^ "Integration: Connor and King". Newsweek: &#160;28,&#160;33. April 22, 1963.&#160;
^ King, Coretta Scott. "The Meaning of The King Holiday". The King Center. Archived from the original on January 9, 2013. Retrieved August 22, 2012.&#160;
^ a b c King, Martin Luther (April 16, 1963). "Letter from Birmingham Jail". The Martin Luther King Jr. Research and Education Institute. Archived from the original on January 9, 2013. Retrieved August 22, 2012.&#160; King began writing the letter on newspaper margins and continued on bits of paper brought by friends.
^ Augustine.com - "Black History: Dr. Robert B. Hayling"&#160;; David J. Garrow, Bearing the Cross: Martin Luther King Jr. and the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (Harper Collins, 1987) p&#160;316–318
^ "We Shall Overcome—Lincolnville Historic District". nps.gov.&#160;
^ Jones, Maxine D.; McCarthy, Kevin M. (1993). African Americans in Florida: An Illustrated History. Pineapple Press. pp.&#160;113–5. ISBN&#160;1-56164-031-X.&#160;
^ "St. Augustine Movement". King Online Encyclopedia. Martin Luther King, Jr., Research and Education Institute. Archived from the original on January 9, 2013. Retrieved August 22, 2012.&#160;
^ Haley, Alex (January 1965). "Martin Luther King". Interview (Playboy). Archived from the original on January 9, 2013. Retrieved June 10, 2012.&#160;
^ "The Selma Injunction". Civil Rights Movement Veterans. Archived from the original on January 9, 2013. Retrieved September 8, 2008.&#160;
^ El Naggar, Mona (August 22, 2013). "Found After Decades, a Forgotten Tape of King 'Thinking on His Feet'". The New York Times. Retrieved August 31, 2013.&#160;
^ Gates, Henry Louis; Appiah, Anthony (1999). Africana: The Encyclopedia of the African and African American Experience. Basic Civitas Books. p.&#160;1251. ISBN&#160;0-465-00071-1.&#160;
^ Cashman, Sean Dennis (1991). African-Americans and the Quest for Civil Rights, 1900–1990. NYU Press. p.&#160;162. ISBN&#160;0-8147-1441-2.&#160;
^ Schlesinger Jr., Arthur M. (2002) [1978]. Robert Kennedy and His Times. Houghton Mifflin Books. p.&#160;351. ISBN&#160;0-618-21928-5.&#160;
^ Marable, Manning (1991). Race, Reform, and Rebellion: The Second Reconstruction in Black America, 1945–1990. Univ. Press of Mississippi. p.&#160;74. ISBN&#160;0-87805-493-6.&#160;
^ Rosenberg, Jonathan; Karabell, Zachary (2003). Kennedy, Johnson, and the Quest for Justice: The Civil Rights Tapes. WW Norton &amp; Co. p.&#160;130. ISBN&#160;0-393-05122-6.&#160;
^ Schlesinger, Jr., Arthur M. (2002) [1978]. Robert Kennedy and His Times. Houghton Mifflin Books. pp.&#160;350, 351. ISBN&#160;0-618-21928-5.&#160;
^ a b Boggs, Grace Lee (1998). Living for Change: An Autobiography. U of Minnesota Press. p.&#160;127. ISBN&#160;0-8166-2955-2.&#160;
^ Aron, Paul (2005). Mysteries in History: From Prehistory to the Present. ABC-CLIO. p.&#160;399. ISBN&#160;1-85109-899-2.&#160;
^ Singleton, Carl; Wildin, Rowena (1999). The Sixties in America. Salem Press. p.&#160;454. ISBN&#160;0-89356-982-8.&#160;
^ Bennett, Scott H. (2003). Radical Pacifism: The War Resisters League and Gandhian Nonviolence in America, 1915–1963. Syracuse University Press. p.&#160;225. ISBN&#160;0-8156-3003-4.&#160;
^ Davis, Danny (January 16, 2007). "Celebrating the Birthday and Public Holiday for Martin Luther King, Jr". Congressional Record (Library of Congress). Archived from the original on January 9, 2013. Retrieved July 11, 2011.&#160;
^ a b Powers, Roger S.; Vogele, William B.; Kruegler, Christopher; McCarthy, Ronald M. (1997). Protest, power, and change: an encyclopedia of nonviolent action from ACT-UP to Women's Suffrage. Taylor &amp; Francis. p.&#160;313. ISBN&#160;0-8153-0913-9.&#160;
^ Younge, Gary (August 21, 2003). "I have a dream". The Guardian. Archived from the original on January 9, 2013. Retrieved January 9, 2013.&#160;
^ Hansen, Drew (2005). The Dream: Martin Luther King, Jr., and the Speech that Inspired a Nation. HarperCollins. p.&#160;98. ISBN&#160;978-0-06-008477-6.&#160;
^ King, Martin Luther; King, Coretta Scott (2008). The Words of Martin Luther King Jr.: Second Edition. Newmarket Press. p.&#160;95. ISBN&#160;978-1-55704-815-8.&#160;
^ Moore, Lucinda (August 1, 2003). "Dream Assignment". Smithsonian. Retrieved August 27, 2008.&#160;
^ James T. Patterson, Grand Expectations: The United States, 1945–1974 (Oxford University Press 1996) pp 482–85, 542–46
^ Harvard Sitkoff, The Struggle for Black Equality (Hill and Wang; 2008) pp 152–53
^ Patrick, Alvin. "Guardian of history: MLK's "I have a dream speech" lives on". CBS News. CBS Interactive Inc. Retrieved August 31, 2013.&#160;
^ King 1998.
^ King 1998, pp.&#160;276–79.
^ Jackson 2006, pp.&#160;222–23.
^ Jackson 2006, p.&#160;223.
^ Isserman, Maurice; Kazin, Michael (2000). America Divided: The Civil War of the 1960s. Oxford University Pressk. p.&#160;175. ISBN&#160;0-19-509190-6.&#160;
^ Azbell, Joe (1968). The Riotmakers. Oak Tree Books. p.&#160;176.&#160;
^ a b "Theodore Parker And The 'Moral Universe'". National Public Radio. September 2, 2010. Archived from the original on January 24, 2013. Retrieved January 24, 2013.&#160;
^ Leeman, Richard W. (1996). African-American Orators: A Bio-critical Sourcebook. Greenwood Publishing. p.&#160;220. ISBN&#160;0-313-29014-8.&#160;
^ "North Lawndale". Encyclopedia. Chicago History. Archived from the original on January 9, 2013. Retrieved September 8, 2008.&#160;
^ Cohen 2000, pp.&#160;360–62.
^ a b Ralph, James (1993). Northern Protest: Martin Luther King, Jr., Chicago, and the Civil Rights Movement. Harvard University Press. p.&#160;1. ISBN&#160;0-674-62687-7.&#160;
^ Cohen 2000, p.&#160;347.
^ Cohen 2000, p.&#160;416.
^ Fairclough, Adam (1987). To Redeem the Soul of America: The Southern Christian Leadership Conference &amp; Martin Luther King, Jr. University of Georgia Press. p.&#160;299. ISBN&#160;0-8203-2346-2.&#160;
^ Baty, Chris (2004). Chicago: City Guide. Lonely Planet. p.&#160;52. ISBN&#160;1-74104-032-9.&#160;
^ Stone, Eddie (1988). Jesse Jackson. Holloway House Publishing. pp.&#160;59–60. ISBN&#160;0-87067-840-X.&#160;
^ Lentz, Richard (1990). Symbols, the News Magazines, and Martin Luther King. LSU Press. p.&#160;230. ISBN&#160;0-8071-2524-5.&#160;
^ Isserman, Maurice; Kazin, Michael (2000). America Divided: The Civil War of the 1960s. Oxford University Press. p.&#160;200. ISBN&#160;0-19-509190-6.&#160; See also: Miller, Keith D. (1998). Voice of Deliverance: The Language of Martin Luther King, Jr., and Its Sources. University of Georgia Press. p.&#160;139. ISBN&#160;0-8203-2013-7.&#160;
^ Mis, Melody S. (2008). Meet Martin Luther King, Jr. Rosen Publishing Group. p.&#160;20. ISBN&#160;1-4042-4209-0.&#160;
^ Slessarev, Helene (1997). The Betrayal of the Urban Poor. Temple University Press. p.&#160;140. ISBN&#160;1-56639-543-7.&#160;
^ a b c Peter Braunstein (2004). The Sixties Chronicle. Legacy Publishing. p.&#160;311. ISBN&#160;1-4127-1009-X.&#160;
^ a b c Alexander Remington (December 24, 2008). "The Rev. James L. Bevel dies at 72; civil rights activist and top lieutenant to King". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved September 15, 2014.&#160;
^ Krenn, Michael L. (1998). The African American Voice in U.S. Foreign Policy Since World War II. Taylor &amp; Francis. p.&#160;29. ISBN&#160;0-8153-3418-4.&#160;
^ Robbins 2007, p.&#160;107.
^ Robbins 2007, p.&#160;102.
^ a b c Robbins 2007, p.&#160;109.
^ Robbins 2007, p.&#160;106.
^ Baldwin, Lewis V. (1992). To Make the Wounded Whole: The Cultural Legacy of Martin Luther King, Jr. Fortress Press. p.&#160;273. ISBN&#160;0-8006-2543-9.&#160;
^ Long, Michael G. (2002). Against Us, But for Us: Martin Luther King Jr. and the State. Mercer University Press. p.&#160;199. ISBN&#160;0-86554-768-8.&#160;
^ "A Prince of War Exposed". counterpunch.org.&#160;
^ a b Dyson, Michael Eric (2008). "Facing Death". April 4, 1968: Martin Luther King Jr.'s death and how it changed America. Basic Civitas Books. ISBN&#160;978-0-465-00212-2.&#160;
^ David J. Garrow, Bearing the Cross (1986), pp. 440, 445.
^ a b Pierre, Robert E. (October 16, 2011). "Martin Luther King Jr. made our nation uncomfortable". The Washington Post. Retrieved August 17, 2012.&#160;
^ Lawson 2006, p.&#160;148.
^ Harding, James M.; Rosenthal, Cindy (2006). Restaging the Sixties: Radical Theaters and Their Legacies. University of Michigan Press. p.&#160;297. ISBN&#160;0-472-06954-3.&#160;
^ Lentz, Richard (1990). Symbols, the News Magazines, and Martin Luther King. LSU Press. p.&#160;64. ISBN&#160;0-8071-2524-5.&#160;
^ Ling, Peter J. (2002). Martin Luther King, Jr. Routledge. p.&#160;277. ISBN&#160;0-415-21664-8.&#160;
^ Sturm, Douglas. "Martin Luther King, Jr., as Democratic Socialist." The Journal of Religious Ethics, 18, no. 2 (1990): 79-105. Retrieved March 11, 2014.
^ Martin Luther King Jr (2015). Cornel West, ed. The Radical King. Beacon Press. ISBN&#160;0-8070-1282-3.&#160;
^ Obery M. Hendricks, Jr., Ph.D. (January 20, 2014). The Uncompromising Anti-Capitalism of Martin Luther King Jr. The Huffington Post. Retrieved January 21, 2014.
^ Franklin, Robert Michael (1990). Liberating Visions: Human Fulfillment and Social Justice in African-American Thought. Fortress Press. p.&#160;125. ISBN&#160;0-8006-2392-4.&#160;
^ King, Jr., Martin Luther; King, Coretta Scott; King, Dexter Scott (1998). The Martin Luther King Jr. Companion: Quotations from the Speeches, Essays, and Books of Martin Luther King, Jr. St. Martin's Press. p.&#160;39. ISBN&#160;0-312-19990-2.&#160;
^ a b c Zinn, Howard (2002). The Power of Nonviolence: Writings by Advocates of Peace. Beacon Press. pp.&#160;122–123. ISBN&#160;0-8070-1407-9.&#160;
^ "1967 Year In Review". United Press International. Archived from the original on January 4, 2013. Retrieved November 30, 2010.&#160;
^ a b Martin L. King on hippies, A Testament of Hope: The Essential Writings and Speeches of Martin Luther King, Jr., Accessed September 15, 2014
^ a b Kurlansky, Mark (2004). 1968. Jonathan Cape (Random House). p.&#160;46. ISBN&#160;0-224-06251-4.&#160;
^ a b Robinson, Douglas (January 13, 1968). "Dr. King Calls for Antiwar Rally in Capital February 5–6". The New York Times. p.&#160;4. Retrieved April 22, 2010.&#160;
^ Vigil, Ernesto B. (1999). The Crusade for Justice: Chicano Militancy and the Government's War on Dissent. University of Wisconsin Press. p.&#160;54. ISBN&#160;0-299-16224-9.&#160;
^ a b Kick, Russell (2001). You are Being Lied to: The Disinformation Guide to Media Distortion, Historical Whitewashes and Cultural Myths. The Disinformation Campaign. p.&#160;1991. ISBN&#160;0-9664100-7-6.&#160;
^ Sullivan, Dan. "Where Was Martin Luther King Heading?". http://savingcommunities.org/. Retrieved January 20, 2015.&#160;
^ "Martin Luther King — Final Advice". The Progress Report. January 9, 2007. Retrieved February 4, 2015.&#160;
^ Yglesias, Matthew (August 28, 2013). "Martin Luther King's Case for a Guaranteed Basic Income". Slate. Retrieved January 20, 2015.&#160;
^ Lawson 2006, p.&#160;148–49.
^ Isserman, Maurice (2001). The Other American: The Life of Michael Harrington. Public Affairs. p.&#160;281. ISBN&#160;1-58648-036-7.&#160;
^ McKnight, Gerald D. (1998). "'The Poor People Are Coming!' 'The Poor People Are Coming!'". The last crusade: Martin Luther King, Jr., the FBI, and the poor people's campaign. Westview Press. ISBN&#160;0-8133-3384-9.&#160;
^ Engler, Mark (January 15, 2010). "Dr. Martin Luther King's Economics: Through Jobs, Freedom". The Nation. Archived from the original on January 9, 2013. Retrieved July 19, 2012.&#160;
^ "1,300 Members Participate in Memphis Garbage Strike". AFSCME. February 1968. Archived from the original on November 2, 2006. Retrieved January 16, 2012.&#160;
^ "Memphis Strikers Stand Firm". AFSCME. March 1968. Archived from the original on November 2, 2006. Retrieved January 16, 2012.&#160;
^ Davis, Townsend (1998). Weary Feet, Rested Souls: A Guided History of the Civil Rights Movement. WW Norton &amp; Co. p.&#160;364. ISBN&#160;0-393-31819-2.&#160;
^ Thomas, Evan (November 19, 2007). "The Worst Week of 1968". Newsweek. p.&#160;2. Retrieved August 27, 2008.&#160;
^ Montefiore, Simon Sebag (2006). Speeches that Changed the World: The Stories and Transcripts of the Moments that Made History. Quercus. p.&#160;155. ISBN&#160;1-905204-16-7.&#160;
^ "King V. Jowers Conspiracy Allegations". United States Department of Justice Investigation of Recent Allegations Regarding the Assassination of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. U.S. Department of Justice. June 2000. Retrieved July 11, 2011.&#160;
^ Pilkington, Ed (April 3, 2008). "40 years after King's death, Jackson hails first steps into promised land". The Guardian. Retrieved June 11, 2008.&#160;
^ Garner, Joe; Cronkite, Walter; Kurtis, Bill (2002). We Interrupt This Broadcast: The Events that Stopped Our Lives&#160;... from the Hindenburg Explosion to the Attacks of September 11. Sourcebooks. p.&#160;62. ISBN&#160;1-57071-974-8.&#160;
^ Pepper, William (2003). An Act of State: The Execution of Martin Luther King. Verso. p.&#160;159. ISBN&#160;1-85984-695-5.&#160;
^ Frady 2005, pp.&#160;204–05.
^ Purnick, Joyce (April 18, 1988). "Koch Says Jackson Lied About Actions After Dr. King Was Slain". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 4, 2013. Retrieved June 11, 2008.&#160;
^ Lokos, Lionel (1968). House Divided: The Life and Legacy of Martin Luther King. Arlington House. p.&#160;48.&#160;
^ "Citizen King Transcript". PBS. Archived from the original on January 4, 2013. Retrieved June 12, 2008.&#160;
^ "1968: Martin Luther King shot dead". On this Day (BBC (2006)). April 4, 1968. Retrieved August 27, 2008.&#160;
^ Risen, Clay (2009). A Nation on Fire: America in the Wake of the King Assassination. John Wiley &amp; Sons. ISBN&#160;0-470-17710-1.&#160;
^ Klein, Joe (2006). Politics Lost: How American Democracy was Trivialized by People Who Think You're Stupid. New York: Doubleday. p. 6. ISBN 978-0-385-51027-1
^ a b "1968 Year In Review". United Press International. Archived from the original on January 9, 2013. Retrieved November 30, 2010.&#160;
^ "AFSCME Wins in Memphis". AFSCME The Public Employee. April 1968. Archived from the original on November 2, 2006. Retrieved January 16, 2012.&#160;
^ Manheimer, Ann S. (2004). Martin Luther King Jr.: Dreaming of Equality. Twenty-First Century Books. p.&#160;97. ISBN&#160;1-57505-627-5.&#160;
^ Dickerson, James (1998). Dixie's Dirty Secret: The True Story of how the Government, the Media, and the Mob Conspired to Combat Immigration and the Vietnam Antiwar Movement. ME Sharpe. p.&#160;169. ISBN&#160;0-7656-0340-3.&#160;
^ Hatch, Jane M.; Douglas, George William (1978). The American Book of Days. Wilson. p.&#160;321.&#160;
^ King, Jr., Martin Luther (2007). Dream: The Words and Inspiration of Martin Luther King, Jr. Blue Mountain Arts. p.&#160;26. ISBN&#160;1-59842-240-5.&#160;
^ Werner, Craig (2006). A Change is Gonna Come: Music, Race &amp; the Soul of America. University of Michigan Press. p.&#160;9. ISBN&#160;0-472-03147-3.&#160;
^ Ling, Peter J. (2002). Martin Luther King, Jr. Routledge. p.&#160;296. ISBN&#160;0-415-21664-8.&#160;
^ a b Flowers, R. Barri; Flowers, H. Loraine (2004). Murders in the United States: Crimes, Killers And Victims Of The Twentieth Century. McFarland. p.&#160;38. ISBN&#160;0-7864-2075-8.&#160;
^ a b c d "James Earl Ray Dead At 70". CBS. April 23, 1998. Archived from the original on January 9, 2013. Retrieved June 12, 2008.&#160;
^ House Select Committee on Assassinations (2001). Compilation of the Statements of James Earl Ray: Staff Report. The Minerva Group. p.&#160;17. ISBN&#160;0-89875-297-3.&#160;
^ a b Davis, Lee (1995). Assassination: 20 Assassinations that Changed the World. JG Press. p.&#160;105. ISBN&#160;1-57215-235-4.&#160;
^ "From small-time criminal to notorious assassin". CNN. 1998. Archived from the original on January 9, 2013. Retrieved September 17, 2006.&#160;
^ Knight, Peter (2003). Conspiracy Theories in American History: An Encyclopedia. ABC-CLIO. p.&#160;402. ISBN&#160;1-57607-812-4.&#160;
^ a b c d James Polk (December 29, 2008). "The case against James Earl Ray". CNN. Retrieved July 12, 2014.&#160;
^ "Questions left hanging by James Earl Ray's death". BBC. April 23, 1998. Retrieved August 27, 2008.&#160;
^ Frank, Gerold (1972). An American Death: The True Story of the Assassination of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., and the Greatest Manhunt of our Time. Doubleday. p.&#160;283.&#160;
^ "James Earl Ray, convicted King assassin, dies". CNN. April 23, 1998. Retrieved September 17, 2006.&#160;
^ "Trial Transcript Volume XIV". The King Center. Archived from the original on May 6, 2008. Retrieved August 27, 2008.&#160;
^ Sack, Kevin; Yellin, Emily (December 10, 1999). "Dr. King's Slaying Finally Draws A Jury Verdict, but to Little Effect". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 20, 2013. Retrieved January 20, 2013.&#160;
^ Smith, Robert Charles; Seltzer, Richard (2000). Contemporary Controversies and the American Racial Divide. Rowman &amp; Littlefield. p.&#160;97. ISBN&#160;0-7425-0025-X.&#160;
^ "Overview". United States Department of Justice Investigation of Recent Allegations Regarding the Assassination of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. U.S. Department of Justice. June 2000. Archived from the original on January 9, 2013. Retrieved July 11, 2011.&#160;
^ "Washingtonpost.com: Martin Luther King Jr.: The Legacy". The Washington Post. January 30, 1999.&#160;
^ "Loyd Jowers, 73, Who Claimed A Role in the Killing of Dr. King". The New York Times. May 23, 2000.&#160;
^ Canedy, Dana (April 5, 2002). "A Minister Says His Father, Now Dead, Killed Dr. King". The New York Times.&#160;
^ Sargent, Frederic O. (2004). The Civil Rights Revolution: Events and Leaders, 1955–1968. McFarland. p.&#160;129. ISBN&#160;0-7864-1914-8.&#160;
^ Pepper, William (2003). An Act of State: The Execution of Martin Luther King. Verso. p.&#160;182. ISBN&#160;1-85984-695-5.&#160;
^ Branch, Taylor (2006). At Canaan's Edge: America in the King Years, 1965–68. Simon &amp; Schuster. p.&#160;770. ISBN&#160;978-0-684-85712-1.&#160;
^ Goodman, Amy; Gonzalez, Juan (January 15, 2004). "Jesse Jackson On 'Mad Dean Disease', the 2000 Elections and Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King". Democracy Now!. Retrieved September 18, 2006.&#160;
^ a b Honey, Michael K. (2007). "Standing at the Crossroads". Going down Jericho Road the Memphis strike, Martin Luther King's last campaign (1 ed.). Norton. ISBN&#160;978-0-393-04339-6. Hoover developed a round-the-clock surveillance campaign aimed at destroying King.&#160;
^ a b c d Church, Frank (April 23, 1976), "Church Committee Book III", Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., Case Study (Church Committee)&#160;
^ Garrow, David J. (July–August 2002). "The FBI and Martin Luther King". The Atlantic Monthly.&#160;
^ a b Ryskind, Allan H. (February 27, 2006). "JFK and RFK Were Right to Wiretap MLK". Human Events. Retrieved August 27, 2008.&#160;
^ Kotz 2005.
^ Herst 2007, p.&#160;372.
^ Herst 2007, pp.&#160;372–74.
^ a b c d Christensen, Jen (April 7, 2008). "FBI tracked King's every move". CNN. Retrieved June 14, 2008.&#160;
^ Glick, Brian (1989). War at Home: Covert Action Against U.S. Activists and What We Can Do About It. South End Press. p.&#160;77. ISBN&#160;978-0-89608-349-3.&#160;
^ a b The Guardian, September 26, 2013, "Declassified NSA Files Show Agency Spied on Muhammad Ali and MLK Operation Minaret Set Up in 1960s to Monitor Anti-Vietnam Critics, Branded 'Disreputable If Not Outright Illegal' by NSA Itself," The Guardian
^ Downing, Frederick L. (1986). To See the Promised Land: The Faith Pilgrimage of Martin Luther King, Jr. Mercer University Press. pp.&#160;246–7. ISBN&#160;0-86554-207-4.&#160;
^ Kotz 2005, p.&#160;233.
^ Kotz 2005, pp.&#160;70–74.
^ Woods, Jeff (2004). Black Struggle, Red Scare: Segregation and Anti-communism in the South, 1948–1968. LSU Press. p.&#160;126. ISBN&#160;0-8071-2926-7.&#160; See also: Wannall, Ray (2000). The Real J. Edgar Hoover: For the Record. Turner Publishing. p.&#160;87. ISBN&#160;1-56311-553-0.&#160;
^ Washington 1991, p.&#160;362.
^ Bruns, Roger (2006). Martin Luther King Jr.: A Biography. Greenwood Publishing. p.&#160;67. ISBN&#160;0-313-33686-5.&#160;
^ Kotz 2005, p.&#160;83.
^ Gilbert, Alan (1990). Democratic Individuality: A Theory of Moral Progress. Cambridge University Press. p.&#160;435. ISBN&#160;0-521-38709-4.&#160;
^ Washington 1991, p.&#160;363.
^ Sidey, Hugh (February 10, 1975). "L.B.J., Hoover and Domestic Spying". Time. Archived from the original on September 21, 2011. Retrieved June 14, 2008.&#160;
^ Abernathy, Ralph (1989). And the walls came tumbling down: an autobiography. Harper &amp; Row. p.&#160;471. ISBN&#160;978-0-06-016192-7.&#160;
^ a b c d Abernathy, Ralph David (October 29, 1989). "And the Walls Came Tumbling Down". Booknotes. Archived from the original on December 11, 2007. Retrieved June 14, 2008.&#160;
^ Bearing the Cross: Martin Luther King Jr. and the Southern Christian Leadership Conference. William Morrow &amp; Co. 1986. pp.&#160;375–6.&#160;
^ Frady 2002, p.&#160;67.
^ Raines, Howell (November 30, 1986). "Driven to Martyrdom". The New York Times. Retrieved July 12, 2013.&#160;
^ Burnett, Thom (2005). Conspiracy Encyclopedia. Collins &amp; Brown. p.&#160;58. ISBN&#160;1-84340-287-4.&#160;
^ Thragens, William C. (1988). Popular Images of American Presidents. Greenwood Publishing. p.&#160;532. ISBN&#160;0-313-22899-X.&#160;
^ Gage, Beverly (November 11, 2014). "What an Uncensored Letter to M.L.K. Reveals". The New York Times. Retrieved January 9, 2015.&#160;
^ Kotz 2005, p.&#160;247.
^ Frady 2002, pp.&#160;158–159.
^ Wilson, Sondra K. (1999). In Search of Democracy: The NAACP Writings of James Weldon Johnson, Walter White, and Roy Wilkins (1920–1977). Oxford University Press. p.&#160;466. ISBN&#160;0-19-511633-X.&#160;
^ Phillips, Geraldine N. (Summer 1997). "Documenting the Struggle for Racial Equality in the Decade of the Sixties". Prologue (The National Archives and Records Administration). Retrieved June 15, 2008.&#160;
^ "Eyewitness to Murder: The King Assassination Featured Individuals". Black in America. CNN. Archived from the original on September 6, 2012. Retrieved June 16, 2008.&#160;
^ McKnight, Gerald (1998). The Last Crusade: Martin Luther King, Jr., the FBI, and the Poor People's Crusade. Westview Press. p.&#160;76. ISBN&#160;0-8133-3384-9.&#160;
^ Martin Luther King Jr.: The FBI Files. Filiquarian Publishing. 2007. pp.&#160;40–2. ISBN&#160;1-59986-253-0.&#160; See also: Polk, James (April 7, 2008). "King conspiracy theories still thrive 40 years later". CNN. Retrieved June 16, 2008.&#160; and "King's FBI file Part 1 of 2" (PDF). FBI. Retrieved January 16, 2012.&#160; and "King's FBI file Part 2 of 2" (PDF). FBI. Retrieved January 16, 2012.&#160;
^ Knight, Peter (2003). Conspiracy Theories in American History: An Encyclopedia. ABC-CLIO. pp.&#160;408–9. ISBN&#160;1-57607-812-4.&#160;
^ a b "The History of Fair Housing". U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. Retrieved April 19, 2012.&#160;
^ Ansell, Gwen (2005). Soweto Blues: Jazz, Popular Music, and Politics in South Africa. Continuum International Publishing Group. p.&#160;139. ISBN&#160;0-8264-1753-1.&#160;
^ Clinton, Hillary Rodham (2007). It Takes a Village: And Other Lessons Children Teach Us. Simon &amp; Schuster. p.&#160;137. ISBN&#160;1-4165-4064-4.&#160;
^ King 1992, pp.&#160;307–08.
^ Peters, William. "A Class Divided: One Friday in April, 1968". Frontline. PBS. Retrieved June 15, 2008.&#160;
^ Krugman, Paul R. (2009). The Conscience of a Liberal. W. W. Norton &amp; Company. p.&#160;84. ISBN&#160;978-0-393-33313-8.&#160;
^ "The King Center's Mission". The King Center. Archived from the original on April 12, 2008. Retrieved June 15, 2008.&#160;
^ Copeland, Larry (February 1, 2006). "Future of Atlanta's King Center in limbo". USA Today. Retrieved August 27, 2008.&#160;
^ "Chairman's Message: Introduction to the King Center and its Mission". The King Center. Archived from the original on January 18, 2008. Retrieved June 15, 2008.&#160;
^ "Welcome". Higher Ground Productions. Retrieved June 15, 2008.&#160;
^ "The Triple Evils". The King Center. Archived from the original on August 3, 2008. Retrieved August 27, 2008.&#160;
^ Williams, Brandt (January 16, 2005). "What would Martin Luther King do?". Minnesota Public Radio. Retrieved August 27, 2008.&#160;
^ "IBM advertisement". The Dallas Morning News. January 14, 1985. p.&#160;13A.&#160;
^ Joseph Leahy, "St. Louis Remains A Stronghold For Dr. King's Dream", News for St. Louis, St. Louis Public Radio, January 20, 2014
^ "Proclamation 6401&#160;– Martin Luther King, Jr., Federal Holiday". The American Presidency Project. 1992. Retrieved September 8, 2008.&#160;
^ "Martin Luther King Day". U.S. Department of State. Archived from the original on March 28, 2008. Retrieved June 15, 2008.&#160;
^ Goldberg, Carey (May 26, 1999). "Contrarian New Hampshire To Honor Dr. King, at Last". The New York Times. Retrieved June 15, 2008.&#160;
^ "The History of Martin Luther King Day". Infoplease. 2007. Retrieved July 4, 2011.&#160;
^ "Martin Luther King Day Weekend 2012" (PDF). Episcopal Church. Archived from the original on January 4, 2013. Retrieved January 4, 2013.&#160;
^ "Church Year and Calendar". St. Bartholomew Lutheran Church. Archived from the original on January 10, 2013. Retrieved January 10, 2013.&#160;
^ "Martin Luther King Peace Committee; Martin Luther King Peace Committee; Newcastle University". ncl.ac.uk.&#160;
^ Ncl.ac.uk; see also Ward, Brian. "A King in Newcastle; Martin Luther King Jr. And British Race Relations, 1967–1968." The Gerogia Historical Quarterly 79, no. 3 (1995): 599-632.
^ a b Warren, Mervyn A. (2001). King Came Preaching: The Pulpit Power of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. InterVarsity Press. p.&#160;79. ISBN&#160;0-8308-2658-0.&#160;
^ Wintle, Justin (2001). Makers of Modern Culture: Makers of Culture. Routledge. p.&#160;272. ISBN&#160;0-415-26583-5.&#160;
^ Engel, Irving M. "Commemorating Martin Luther King Jr.: Presentation of American Liberties Medallion". American Jewish Committee. Retrieved June 13, 2008.&#160;
^ King, Jr., Martin Luther. "Commemorating Martin Luther King Jr.: Response to Award of American Liberties Medallion". American Jewish Committee. Retrieved June 13, 2008.&#160;
^ "Spingarn Medal Winners: 1915 to Today". NAACP. Retrieved January 16, 2013.&#160;
^ "Martin Luther King Jr.". Anisfield-Wolf Book Awards. Retrieved October 2, 2011.&#160;
^ "The Reverend Martin Luther King Jr. upon accepting The Planned Parenthood Federation Of America Margaret Sanger Award". PPFA. Archived from the original on February 24, 2008. Retrieved August 27, 2008.&#160;
^ "SCLC Press Release". SCLC via the King Center. May 16, 1966. Archived from the original on January 9, 2013. Retrieved August 31, 2012.&#160;
^ Ward, Brian. "A King in Newcastle; Martin Luther King Jr. And British Race Relations, 1967–1968." The Georgia Historical Quarterly 79, no. 3 (1995): 599-632.
^ "Martin Luther King Honorary Ceremony - Congregations - Newcastle University". ncl.ac.uk.&#160;
^ Gates, Henry Louis; Appiah, Anthony (1999). Africana: The Encyclopedia of the African and African American Experience. Basic Civitas Books. p.&#160;1348. ISBN&#160;0-465-00071-1.&#160;
^ Carter, Jimmy (July 11, 1977). "Presidential Medal of Freedom Remarks on Presenting the Medal to Dr. Jonas E. Salk and to Martin Luther King, Jr.". The American Presidency Project. Archived from the original on January 4, 2013. Retrieved January 4, 2013.&#160;
^ "Congressional Gold Medal Recipients (1776 to Present)". Office of the Clerk: U.S. House of Representatives. Retrieved June 16, 2008.&#160;
^ Gallup, George; Gallup, Jr., Alec (2000). The Gallup Poll: Public Opinion 1999. Rowman &amp; Littlefield. p.&#160;249. ISBN&#160;0-8420-2699-1.&#160;
^ Harpaz, Beth J. (December 27, 1999). "Time Names Einstein as Person of the Century". &#160;–&#160;via&#160;HighBeam Research (subscription required). Associated Press. Retrieved January 20, 2013.&#160;
^ "Reagan voted 'greatest American'". BBC. June 28, 2005. Retrieved August 27, 2008.&#160;
^ Alderman, Derek H. (February 13, 2006). "Naming Streets for Martin Luther King, Jr.: No Easy Road" (PDF). Landscape and Race in the United States. Routledge Press. Retrieved July 4, 2011.&#160;[dead link]
^ "King County Was Rededicated For MLK". The Seattle Times. January 18, 1998. Retrieved June 13, 2008.&#160; See also: "New logo is an image of civil rights leader". King County. Retrieved June 13, 2008.&#160;
^ "Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Essay Competition Winners Announced". City of Harrisburg. January 19, 2003. Archived from the original on December 7, 2007. Retrieved August 27, 2008.&#160;
^ a b c d e f g h i Wax, Emily (2011-08-23). "Martin Luther King Jr. sites across the globe". The Washington Post. Lifestyle: Full Coverage: The Martin Luther King, Jr. Memorial. Retrieved October 20, 2011.&#160;
^ Trescott, Jacqueline (2011-08-23). "Across D.C., statues honor African Americans". The Washington Post. Retrieved January 19, 2012.&#160;
^ a b Ramanathan, Levanya, "Pieces of Black History", Washington Post, January 27, 2012. Retrieved January 27, 2012.
^ "Washington, DC Martin Luther King Jr. National Memorial Project Foundation Breaks Ground On Historic $100 Million Memorial On The National Mall In Washington, D.C.". Washington, DC Martin Luther King Jr. National Memorial Project Foundation. November 6, 2006. Archived from the original on September 8, 2012. Retrieved August 27, 2008.&#160;
^ Tobias, Randall L. (January 18, 2007). "Celebrating the Birthday of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.". U.S. Department of State. Archived from the original on November 15, 2007. Retrieved January 16, 2012.&#160;
^ Tavernise, Sabrina (August 23, 2011). "A Dream Fulfilled, Martin Luther King Memorial Opens". New York Times. Archived from the original on January 4, 2013.&#160;
^ "Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial". National Park Service. Archived from the original on January 4, 2013. Retrieved January 4, 2013.&#160;
^ Guevara, Brittni (July 26, 2011). "FYIDC: Paying Tribute To Dr. King". Washington Life. Retrieved January 20, 2013.&#160;
^ http://politics.blog.ajc.com/2015/10/11/a-monument-to-mlk-will-crown-stone-mountain/


Sources


Abernathy, Ralph (1989). And the Walls Came Tumbling Down: An Autobiography. Harper &amp; Row. ISBN&#160;0-06-016192-2.&#160;
Branch, Taylor (2006). At Canaan's Edge: America In the King Years, 1965–1968. Simon &amp; Schuster. ISBN&#160;0-684-85712-X.&#160;
Cohen, Adam Seth; Taylor, Elizabeth (2000). Pharaoh: Mayor Richard J. Daley: His Battle for Chicago and the Nation. Back Bay. ISBN&#160;0-316-83489-0.&#160;
Frady, Marshall (2002). Martin Luther King Jr.: A Life. Penguin. ISBN&#160;978-0-14-303648-7.&#160;
Garrow, David J. (1981). The FBI and Martin Luther King, Jr. Penguin Books. ISBN&#160;0-14-006486-9.&#160;
Garrow, David. Bearing the Cross: Martin Luther King, Jr., and the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (1989). Pulitzer Prize. ISBN 978-0-06-056692-0
"James L. Bevel, The Strategist of the 1960s Civil Rights Movement", a 1984 paper by Randall Kryn, published with a 1988 addendum by Kryn in Prof. David Garrow's We Shall Overcome, Volume II (Carlson Publishing Company, 1989).
Glisson, Susan M. (2006). The Human Tradition in the Civil Rights Movement. Rowman &amp; Littlefield. ISBN&#160;0-7425-4409-5.&#160;
Herst, Burton (2007). Bobby and J. Edger. Carroll &amp; Graf. ISBN&#160;0-7867-1982-6.&#160;
Jackson, Thomas F. (2006). From Civil Rights to Human Rights: Martin Luther King, Jr., and the Struggle for Economic Justice. University of Pennsylvania Press. ISBN&#160;978-0-8122-3969-0.&#160;
King Jr., Martin Luther (1998). Carson, Clayborne, ed. Autobiography. Warner Books. p.&#160;6. ISBN&#160;0-446-52412-3.&#160;
King Jr., Martin Luther; Carson, Clayborne; Holloran, Peter; Luker, Ralph; Russell, Penny A. (1992). The papers of Martin Luther King, Jr. University of California Press. ISBN&#160;0-520-07950-7.&#160;
Kotz, Nick (2005). Judgment Days: Lyndon Baines Johnson, Martin Luther King, Jr., and the Laws that Changed America. Houghton Mifflin Books. ISBN&#160;0-618-08825-3.&#160;
Lawson, Steven F.; Payne, Charles M.; Patterson, James T. (2006). Debating the Civil Rights Movement, 1945–1968. Rowman &amp; Littlefield. ISBN&#160;0-7425-5109-1.&#160;
Robbins, Mary Susannah (2007). Against the Vietnam War: Writings by Activists. Rowman &amp; Littlefield. ISBN&#160;0-7425-5914-9.&#160;
Washington, James M. (1991). A Testament of Hope: The Essential Writings and Speeches of Martin Luther King, Jr. HarperCollins. ISBN&#160;0-06-064691-8.&#160;


Further reading


Ayton, Mel (2005). A Racial Crime: James Earl Ray And The Murder Of Martin Luther King Jr. Archebooks Publishing. ISBN&#160;1-59507-075-3.&#160;
Branch, Taylor (1988). Parting the Waters: America in the King Years, 1954–1963. Simon &amp; Schuster. ISBN&#160;0-671-46097-8.&#160;
Branch, Taylor (1998). Pillar of Fire: America in the King Years, 1963–1965. Simon &amp; Schuster. ISBN&#160;0-684-80819-6.&#160;
King, Coretta Scott (1993) [1969]. My Life with Martin Luther King, Jr. Henry Holth &amp; Co. ISBN&#160;0-8050-2445-X.&#160;
King Jr., Martin Luther (2015). Cornel West, ed. The Radical King. Beacon Press. ISBN&#160;0-8070-1282-3.&#160;
Kirk, John A., ed. Martin Luther King Jr. and the Civil Rights Movement: Controversies and Debates (2007). pp.&#160;224
Schulke, Flip; McPhee, Penelope. King Remembered, Foreword by Jesse Jackson (1986). ISBN 978-1-4039-9654-1
Waldschmidt-Nelson, Britta. Dreams and Nightmares: Martin Luther King Jr. Malcolm X, and the Struggle for Black Equality. Gainesville, FL: University Press of Florida, 2012. ISBN 0-8130-3723-9.


External links



Find more about
Martin Luther King, Jr.
at Wikipedia's sister projects




Media from Commons



Quotations from Wikiquote



Source texts from Wikisource



Learning resources from Wikiversity



Data from Wikidata





Wikilivres has original media or text related to this article:
Martin Luther King, Jr.








This article's use of external links may not follow Wikipedia's policies or guidelines. Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links, and converting useful links where appropriate into footnote references. (July 2015)


General

Martin Luther King, Jr. at DMOZ
The King Center
"Martin Luther King, Jr. Collection", Morehouse College, RWWL
The Martin Luther King, Jr. Papers Project
FBI file on Martin Luther King, Jr.
FBI letter sent MLK to convince him to kill himself Vox, 2015.
Martin Luther King, Jr.'s Nobel Peace Prize, Civil Rights Digital Library
Works by Martin Luther King, Jr. at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about Martin Luther King, Jr. at Internet Archive
Westminster Abbey: Martin Luther King, Jr.
Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. at Buffalo, digital collection of Dr. King's visit and speech in Buffalo, New York on November 9, 1967, from the University at Buffalo Libraries

Speeches and interviews

Audio from April 1961 King, "The Church on the Frontier of Racial Tensions", speech at Southern Seminary
"Martin Luther King, Jr. Historic Speeches and Interviews"
The New Negro, King interviewed by J. Waites Waring
"Interview with Dr. Kenneth Clark", PBS
"Beyond Vietnam" speech text and audio
King Institute Encyclopedia multimedia
"Why I Am Opposed to the War in Vietnam", sermon at the Ebenezer Baptist Church on April 30, 1967 (audio of speech with video 23:31)
"Walk to Freedom", Detroit, June 23, 1963. Walter P. Reuther Library of Labor and Urban Affairs. Wayne State University.
Chiastic outline of Martin Luther King, Jr.'s "I Have a Dream" speech
Digitized images of Jim Curtis photograph collection on Civil Rights in Kentucky, 1964. March on Frankfort led by Martin Luther King, Jr. and Jackie Robinson. Housed at the University of Kentucky Special Collections Research Center



Awards and achievements


Preceded&#160;by
International Committee of the Red Cross
and
League of Red Cross Societies
Nobel Peace Prize Laureate
1964
Succeeded&#160;by
UNICEF










v
t
e


Martin Luther King, Jr.










&#160;
Speeches, movements, and protests











Speeches




"Give Us the Ballot"
"I Have a Dream"
"How Long, Not Long"
"Beyond Vietnam: A Time to Break Silence"
"I've Been to the Mountaintop"









Writings




Stride Toward Freedom: The Montgomery Story
The Measure of a Man

"What Is Man?"


"Second Emancipation Proclamation"
Strength to Love
Letter from Birmingham Jail
Why We Can't Wait
Conscience for Change (The Trumpet of Conscience)
Where Do We Go from Here: Chaos or Community?









Movements
and protests




Montgomery Bus Boycott (1955–1956)
Albany Movement (1961–1962)
Birmingham campaign (1963)
March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom (1963)
St. Augustine movement (1963–1964)
Selma Voting Rights Movement (1965)
Chicago Open Housing Movement (1966)
Mississippi March Against Fear (1966)
Anti-Vietnam War Movement (1967)
Memphis Sanitation Strike (1968)
Poor People's Campaign (1968)


















&#160;
People











Family




Martin Luther King, Sr. (father)
Alberta Williams King (mother)
Christine King Farris (sister)
A. D. King (brother)
Coretta Scott King (wife)
Yolanda King (daughter)
Martin Luther King III (son)
Dexter Scott King (son)
Bernice King (daughter)
Alveda King (niece)









Other
leaders




Ralph Abernathy (colleague)
Ella Baker (colleague)
James Bevel (strategist / colleague)
Dorothy Cotton (colleague)
Bernard Lafayette (colleague)
James Lawson (colleague)
Joseph Lowery (colleague)
John Lewis (colleague)
Jesse Jackson (protégé)
Benjamin Mays (mentor)
Diane Nash (colleague)
James Orange (colleague)
Bayard Rustin (advisor)
Fred Shuttlesworth (colleague)
C. T. Vivian (colleague)
Wyatt Walker (colleague)
Hosea Williams (colleague)
Andrew Young (colleague)


















&#160;
Assassination









James Earl Ray
Lorraine Motel (now National Civil Rights Museum)
Funeral
MLK Records Act
Riots
Loyd Jowers trial















&#160;
Media











Film




King: A Filmed Record... Montgomery to Memphis (1970 documentary)
Our Friend, Martin (1999 animated)
Boycott (2001 film)
The Witness: From the Balcony of Room 306 (2008 documentary)
Alpha Man: The Brotherhood of MLK (2011 documentary)
Selma (2014 film)









Television




King (1978 miniseries)
"The First Store" (The Jeffersons episode, 1980)
"Great X-Pectations" (A Different World episode, 1993)
"The Promised Land" (New York Undercover episode, 1997)
"Return of the King" (The Boondocks episode, 2006)









Plays




The Meeting (1987)
The Mountaintop (2009)
I Dream (2010)
All the Way (2012)









Illustrated




Martin Luther King and the Montgomery Story (1957 comic book)









Music




"Abraham, Martin and John" (Dion)
"March! For Martin Luther King" (John Fahey)
"Martin Luther King's Dream" (Strawbs)
"Happy Birthday" (Stevie Wonder)
"Pride (In the Name of Love)" (U2)
"MLK" (U2)
"King Holiday" (King Dream Chorus and Holiday Crew)
"By The Time I Get To Arizona" (Public Enemy)
"Shed a Little Light" (James Taylor)
"Up to the Mountain" (Patti Griffin)
"Never Alone Martin" (Jason Upton)
"Symphony Of Brotherhood" (Miri Ben-Ari)
Joseph Schwantner: New Morning for the World; Nicolas Flagello: The Passion of Martin Luther King (1995 album)
"A Dream" (Common featuring Will.i.am)
"Glory" (Common and John Legend)


















&#160;
Related topics









Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC)
Martin Luther King, Jr. Day
Martin Luther King, Jr. Memorial, Washington D.C.
National Historic Site
King Center for Nonviolent Social Change
Dexter Avenue Baptist Church
National Civil Rights Museum
Authorship issues
Alpha Phi Alpha fraternity
Season for Nonviolence
U.S. Capitol Rotunda sculpture
Homage to King sculpture, Atlanta
Martin Luther King, Jr. Memorial, San Francisco
Landmark for Peace Memorial, Indianapolis
Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. statue, Milwaukee
The Dream sculpture, Portland, Oregon
Eponymous streets
America in the King Years
Civil Rights Movement in popular culture
Lee–Jackson–King Day



















v
t
e


Presidents of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference









Martin Luther King, Jr. (1957-68)
Ralph Abernathy (1968-77)
Joseph Lowery (1977-97)
Martin Luther King III (1997-2004)
Fred Shuttlesworth (2004)
Charles Steele, Jr. (2004-09)
Howard W. Creecy, Jr. (2009-11)
Charles Steele, Jr. (2012-present)
















v
t
e


African-American Civil Rights Movement (1954–68)






Events
(timeline)



Brown v. Board of Education

Bolling v. Sharpe
Briggs v. Elliott
Davis v. County School Board of Prince Edward County
Gebhart v. Belton


Sarah Keys v. Carolina Coach Company
Emmett Till
Montgomery Bus Boycott

Browder v. Gayle
Dexter Avenue Baptist Church
Holt Street Baptist Church
Montgomery Improvement Association


Mansfield school desegregation
1957 Prayer Pilgrimage for Freedom
Royal Ice Cream Sit-in
Little Rock Nine

National Guard blockade


Kissing Case
Biloxi Wade-Ins
Greensboro sit-ins
Nashville sit-ins
Gomillion v. Lightfoot
Boynton v. Virginia
Freedom Rides

attacks


Garner v. Louisiana
Albany Movement
University of Chicago sit-ins
"Second Emancipation Proclamation"
Meredith enrollment, Ole Miss riot
Mississippi Movement

Freedom Schools
COFO
workers' murders


1963 Birmingham Movement and Children's Crusade

Letter from Birmingham Jail
16th Street Baptist Church
Kelly Ingram Park
Birmingham riot
16th Street Baptist Church bombing


University of Alabama integration
John F. Kennedy's Civil Rights Address
March on Washington

"I Have a Dream"
"Big Six"


Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party
St. Augustine movement
Twenty-fourth Amendment
1965 Selma to Montgomery marches

Brown Chapel
Edmund Pettus Bridge
"How Long, Not Long"
Voting Rights Act of 1965
SCOPE


Chicago Freedom/Open Housing Movement
Harper v. Virginia Board of Elections
March Against Fear
Black Power
White House Conference on Civil Rights
Memphis Sanitation Strike
King assassination

funeral
riots


Poor People's Campaign
Civil Rights Acts

1957
1960
1964
1965
1968










Related



Jim Crow laws
Plessy v. Ferguson

Separate but equal


Buchanan v. Warley
Hocutt v. Wilson
Sweatt v. Painter
Heart of Atlanta Motel, Inc. v. United States
Katzenbach v. McClung
Loving v. Virginia
Fifth Circuit Four
Massive resistance
March on Washington Movement
African-American churches attacked
Journey of Reconciliation
Freedom Songs

"Ain't Gonna Let Nobody Turn Me Around"
"I Love Everybody"
"Kumbaya"
"Keep Your Eyes on the Prize"
"Oh, Freedom"
"This Little Light of Mine"
"We Shall Not Be Moved"
"We Shall Overcome"


Spring Mobilization Committee to End the War in Vietnam

"Beyond Vietnam: A Time to Break Silence"


Watts riots
Voter Education Project
1960s counterculture
In popular culture
Museums

King Memorial










Activist
groups



Alabama Christian Movement for Human Rights
Atlanta Student Movement
Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters
Congress of Racial Equality (CORE)
Council for United Civil Rights Leadership
Deacons for Defense and Justice
Georgia Council on Human Relations
Highlander Folk School
Leadership Conference on Civil Rights
Nashville Student Movement
NAACP

Youth Council


Northern Student Movement
National Council of Negro Women
National Urban League
Operation Breadbasket
Regional Council of Negro Leadership
Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC)
Southern Regional Council
Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC)
The Freedom Singers
Wednesdays in Mississippi
Women's Political Council








Activists



Ralph Abernathy
Victoria Gray Adams
Zev Aelony
Mathew Ahmann
William G. Anderson
Gwendolyn Armstrong
Arnold Aronson
Ella Baker
Marion Barry
Daisy Bates
Harry Belafonte
James Bevel
Claude Black
Gloria Blackwell
Randolph Blackwell
Unita Blackwell
Ezell Blair Jr.
Joanne Bland
Julian Bond
Joseph E. Boone
William Holmes Borders
Amelia Boynton
Raylawni Branch
Ruby Bridges
Aurelia Browder
H. Rap Brown
Guy Carawan
Stokely Carmichael
Johnnie Carr
James Chaney
J. L. Chestnut
Colia Lafayette Clark
Ramsey Clark
Septima Clark
Xernona Clayton
Eldridge Cleaver
Kathleen Neal Cleaver
Charles E. Cobb Jr.
Annie Lee Cooper
Dorothy Cotton
Claudette Colvin
Vernon Dahmer
Jonathan Daniels
Joseph DeLaine
Annie Devine
Patricia Stephens Due
Charles Evers
Medgar Evers
Myrlie Evers-Williams
Chuck Fager
James Farmer
Walter E. Fauntroy
James Forman
Marie Foster
Golden Frinks
Andrew Goodman
Fred Gray
Jack Greenberg
Dick Gregory
Lawrence Guyot
Prathia Hall
Fannie Lou Hamer
William E. Harbour
Vincent Harding
Dorothy Height
Lola Hendricks
Aaron Henry
Oliver Hill
Donald L. Hollowell
James Hood
Myles Horton
Zilphia Horton
T. R. M. Howard
Ruby Hurley
Jesse Jackson
Jimmie Lee Jackson
Richie Jean Jackson
T. J. Jemison
Esau Jenkins
Barbara Rose Johns
Vernon Johns
Frank Minis Johnson
Lyndon Johnson
Clarence Jones
Matthew Jones
Vernon Jordan
Tom Kahn
Clyde Kennard
A. D. King
Coretta Scott King
Martin Luther King, Jr.
Martin Luther King, Sr.
Bernard Lafayette
James Lawson
Bernard Lee
Sanford R. Leigh
Jim Letherer
Stanley Levison
John Lewis
Viola Liuzzo
Z. Alexander Looby
Joseph Lowery
Clara Luper
Malcolm X
Mae Mallory
Vivian Malone
Thurgood Marshall
Franklin McCain
Charles McDew
Ralph McGill
Floyd McKissick
Joseph McNeil
James Meredith
William Ming
Jack Minnis
Amzie Moore
Douglas E. Moore
William Lewis Moore
Irene Morgan
Bob Moses
William Moyer
Diane Nash
Charles Neblett
Edgar Nixon
Jack O'Dell
James Orange
Rosa Parks
James Peck
Charles Person
Homer Plessy
Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.
Fay Bellamy Powell
Al Raby
Lincoln Ragsdale
A. Philip Randolph
George Raymond Jr.
Bernice Johnson Reagon
Cordell Reagon
James Reeb
Frederick D. Reese
Gloria Richardson
David Richmond
Jo Ann Robinson
Bayard Rustin
Bernie Sanders
Michael Schwerner
Cleveland Sellers
Charles Sherrod
Alexander D. Shimkin
Fred Shuttlesworth
Modjeska Monteith Simkins
A. Maceo Smith
Kelly Miller Smith
Mary Louise Smith
Ruby Doris Smith-Robinson
Charles Kenzie Steele
Dorothy Tillman
A. P. Tureaud
C. T. Vivian
Wyatt Tee Walker
Hollis Watkins
Walter Francis White
Roy Wilkins
Hosea Williams
Kale Williams
Robert F. Williams
Andrew Young
Whitney Young
Sammy Younge Jr.
James Zwerg








Influences



Nonviolence

Padayatra


Jesus

Sermon on the Mount


Mohandas K. Gandhi

Ahimsa
Satyagraha


Leo Tolstoy

The Kingdom of God is Within You


Frederick Douglass
W. E. B. Du Bois








Noted
historians



Taylor Branch
Clayborne Carson
John Dittmer
Michael Eric Dyson
Chuck Fager
Adam Fairclough
David Garrow
David Halberstam
Vincent Harding
Steven F. Lawson
Doug McAdam
Diane McWhorter
Charles M. Payne
Timothy Tyson
Akinyele Umoja
Movement photographers
















v
t
e


African American topics






History



Atlantic slave trade
Maafa
Slavery in the United States
Reconstruction Era
Military history of African Americans
Jim Crow laws
Redlining
Great Migration
Civil Rights Movement 1865-1895&#160;/ 1896–1954&#160;/ 1954–1968
Second Great Migration
Afrocentrism
New Great Migration
Post-Civil Rights era
Inauguration of Barack Obama 2009&#160;/ Inauguration of Barack Obama 2013








Culture



African-American studies
Art
African-American names
Black mecca
Black colleges and universities
Black schools
Dance
Juneteenth
Kwanzaa
Literature
Museums
Music
Neighborhoods
Sexual orientation
Soul food








Religion



Black church
Black liberation theology
Black theology
Doctrine of Father Divine
American Society of Muslims
Nation of Islam
Black Hebrew Israelites








Political movements



Pan-Africanism
Nationalism
Black Power
Black fist
Anarchism
Capitalism
Conservatism
Populism
Leftism
Garveyism









Civic and economic
groups




National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP)
Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC)
Congress of Racial Equality (CORE)
Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC)
Black Panther Party
National Urban League (NUL)
Rights organizations
Association for the Study of African American Life and History (ASALH)
Thurgood Marshall College Fund
United Negro College Fund (UNCF)
National Black Chamber of Commerce (NBCC)
National Pan-Hellenic Council (NPHC)
The Links
National Council of Negro Women (NCNW)








Sports







Negro league baseball

Baseball color line


Black players in American professional football
African Americans in the Canadian Football League
Black players in ice hockey









Athletic associations
and conferences




Central (CIAA)
Southern (SIAC)
Mid-Eastern (MEAC)
Southwestern (SWAC)











Ethnic subdivisions



Black Indians
Gullah
Fula
Igbo
Yoruba








Languages



English

American English
African American Vernacular English


Gullah
Louisiana Creole French








Diaspora



Caribbean history
Ghana
Liberia
Nova Scotia
Sierra Leone
France
Haiti
Back-to-Africa movement








Lists



African Americans

visual artists
Republicans
US senators


African-American firsts

mayors
US state firsts


Neighborhoods
Landmark African-American legislation
African American-related articles
Topics related to the African diaspora











Category
Portal
















v
t
e


Coretta Scott King







April 27, 1927 – January 30, 2006






Life



Childhood and education
Civil Rights Movement
1967 San Francisco anti-war march
King Center for Nonviolent Social Change
2004 Gandhi Peace Prize
Death and funeral








Books



My Life with Martin Luther King, Jr. (1969 autobiography)








Other



Martin Luther King, Jr. Day








Reaction



Recognition and tributes








Namesakes



Coretta Scott King Award
Coretta Scott King Young Women's Leadership Academy








Family



Martin Luther King, Jr. (husband)
Yolanda King (daughter)
Martin Luther King III (son)
Dexter Scott King (son)
Bernice King (daughter)
Edythe Scott Bagley (sister)








Cultural depictions



King (1978 miniseries)
Our Friend, Martin (1999 animated)
Selma (2014 film)
Betty and Coretta (2013 film)











 Commons
 Wikiquote
















v
t
e


Mahatma Gandhi






Life events
and movements



Indian Ambulance Corps
Civil rights movement in South Africa
Bardoli Satyagraha
Champaran and Kheda Satyagraha
Indian independence movement

Gandhi cap


Non-cooperation Movement
Chauri Chaura incident
Purna Swaraj

flag


Salt March
Dharasana Satyagraha
Vaikom Satyagraha
Aundh Experiment
Gandhi–Irwin Pact

Second Round Table Conference


Padayatra
Poona Pact
Natal Indian Congress
Quit India

speech


Gujarat Vidyapith University
Harijan Sevak Sangh
Ashrams (Kochrab
Tolstoy Farm
Sabarmati
Sevagram)
List of fasts
Assassination








Philosophy



Gandhism
Economics

trusteeship


Education
Sarvodaya
Satyagraha
Swadeshi
Swaraj








Publications



Harijan
Hind Swaraj (Indian Home Rule)
Indian Opinion
The Story of My Experiments with Truth
Young India
Seven Social Sins
(Gandhi Heritage Portal)








Influences



A Letter to a Hindu
Ahimsa

nonviolence


Bhagavad Gita
Henry David Thoreau
Civil Disobedience (essay)
Civil disobedience
Fasting
Harishchandra
Hinduism
John Ruskin
Leo Tolstoy
The Kingdom of God Is Within You
The Masque of Anarchy
Muhammad
Pacifism
Sermon on the Mount
Shravan
Shrimad Rajchandra
Henry Stephens Salt
Unto This Last
"Vaishnava Jana To"
Vegetarianism








Associates



Swami Anand
C. F. Andrews
Jamnalal Bajaj
Shankarlal Banker
Sarla Behn
Vinoba Bhave
Brij Krishna Chandiwala
Sudhakar Chaturvedi
Jugatram Dave
Mahadev Desai
Dada Dharmadhikari
Kanu Gandhi
Shiv Prasad Gupta
Umar Hajee Ahmed Jhaveri
J. C. Kumarappa
Hermann Kallenbach
Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan
Acharya Kripalani
Mirabehn
Mohanlal Pandya
Vallabhbhai Patel
Narhari Parikh
Chakravarti Rajagopalachari
Bibi Amtus Salam
Sonja Schlesin
Anugrah Narayan Sinha
Sri Krishna Sinha
Rettamalai Srinivasan
V. A. Sundaram
Abbas Tyabji
Ravi Shankar Vyas








Legacy



Artistic depictions
Gandhigiri
Gandhi Peace Award
Gandhi Peace Prize
Mahatma Gandhi Kashi Vidyapith
Indian currency








Family



Kasturba (wife)
Harilal (son)
Manilal (son)
Ramdas (son)
Devdas (son)
Maganlal (cousin)
Samaldas (nephew)
Arun (grandson)
Ela (granddaughter)
Rajmohan (grandson)
Gopalkrishna (grandson)
Ramchandra (grandson)
Kanu (grandnephew)
Tushar (great-grandson)
Leela (great-granddaughter)








Influenced



James Bevel
Steve Biko
14th Dalai Lama
Gopaldas Ambaidas Desai
Morarji Desai
Eknath Easwaran
Maria Lacerda de Moura
James Lawson
Martin Luther King, Jr.
Nelson Mandela
Brajkishore Prasad
Rajendra Prasad
Ramjee Singh
Aung San Suu Kyi
Lanza del Vasto
Abhay Bang
Sane Guruji








Memorials





Physical




Aga Khan Palace
Gandhi Bhawan
Gandhi Mandapam
Gandhi Promenade
Gandhi Smriti
Gandhi Memorial
Gandhi Memorial Museum, Madurai
Kaba Gandhi No Delo
Kirti Mandir
Mahatma Gandhi College
Mohandas Gandhi High School
National Gandhi Museum
Pietermaritzburg
Raj Ghat
Sabarmati Ashram
Satyagraha House
Roads named for Gandhi









Observances




Gandhi Jayanti
International Day of Non-Violence
Martyrs' Day
Season for Nonviolence














 Category
 Commons
 Wikiquotes
 Wikisource texts
















v
t
e


Leo Tolstoy









Bibliography








Novels and
novellas



Childhood (1852)
Boyhood (1854)
Youth (1856)
Family Happiness (1859)
The Cossacks (1863)
War and Peace (1869)
Anna Karenina (1877)
The Death of Ivan Ilyich (1886)
The Kreutzer Sonata (1889)
Resurrection (1899)
The Forged Coupon (1911)
Hadji Murat (1912)








Short stories



"The Raid" (1852)
"The Wood-Felling" (1855)
"Sevastopol in December 1854" (1855)
"Sevastopol in May 1855" (1855)
"Sevastopol in August 1855" (1856)
"A Billiard-Marker's Notes" (1855)
"The Snowstorm" (1856)
"Two Hussars" (1856)
"A Landlord's Morning" (1856)
"Meeting a Moscow Acquaintance in the Detachment" (1856)
"Lucerne" (1857)
"Albert" (1858)
"Three Deaths" (1859)
"The Porcelain Doll" (1863)
"Polikúshka" (1863)
"God Sees the Truth, But Waits" (1872)
"The Prisoner in the Caucasus" (1872)
"The Bear-Hunt" (1872)
"What Men Live By" (1881)
"Memoirs of a Madman" (1884)
"Quench the Spark" (1885)
"Two Old Men" (1885)
"Where Love Is, God Is" (1885)
"Ivan the Fool" (1885)
"Evil Allures, But Good Endures" (1885)
"Wisdom of Children" (1885)
"Ilyás" (1885)
"The Three Hermits" (1886)
"Promoting a Devil" (1886)
"How Much Land Does a Man Need?" (1886)
"The Grain" (1886)
"The Godson" (1886)
"Repentance" (1886)
"Croesus and Fate" (1886)
"Kholstomer" (1886)
"A Lost Opportunity" (1889)
"The Empty Drum" (1891)
"Françoise" (1892)
"Mikhaïl" (1893)
"A Talk Among Leisured People" (1893)
"Walk in the Light While There is Light" (1893)
"The Coffee-House of Surrat" (1893)
"Master and Man" (1895)
"Too Dear!" (1897)
"Father Sergius" (1898)
"Esarhaddon, King of Assyria" (1903)
"Work, Death, and Sickness" (1903)
"Three Questions" (1903)
"After the Ball" (1903)
"Feodor Kuzmich" (1905)
"Alyosha the Pot" (1905)
"What For?" (1906)
"The Devil" (1911)








Plays



The Power of Darkness (1886)
The First Distiller (1886)
The Light Shines in the Darkness (1890)
The Fruits of Enlightenment (1891)
The Living Corpse (1900)
The Cause of it All (1910)
The Light Shines in Darkness








Non-fiction



A Confession (1882)
What I Believe (1884)
What Is to Be Done? (1886)
On Life (1887)
The Kingdom of God Is Within You (1894)
The Gospel in Brief (1896)
What Is Art? (1897)
What Is Religion? (1902)
"A Letter to a Hindu" (1908)
A Calendar of Wisdom (1910)








Family



Sophia (wife)
Alexandra (daughter)
Ilya (son)
Lev Lvovich (son)
Tatyana (daughter)








Life and legacy



Yasnaya Polyana
Tolstoyan movement
Christian anarchism
Departure of a Grand Old Man (1912 film)
The Last Station (1990 novel
2009 film)











 Category
















v
t
e


Laureates of the Nobel Peace Prize






1901–1925



1901 Henry Dunant&#160;/ Frédéric Passy
1902 Élie Ducommun&#160;/ Charles Gobat
1903 Randal Cremer
1904 Institut de Droit International
1905 Bertha von Suttner
1906 Theodore Roosevelt
1907 Ernesto Moneta&#160;/ Louis Renault
1908 Klas Arnoldson&#160;/ Fredrik Bajer
1909 A. M. F. Beernaert&#160;/ Paul Estournelles de Constant
1910 International Peace Bureau
1911 Tobias Asser&#160;/ Alfred Fried
1912 Elihu Root
1913 Henri La Fontaine
1914
1915
1916
1917 International Committee of the Red Cross
1918
1919 Woodrow Wilson
1920 Léon Bourgeois
1921 Hjalmar Branting&#160;/ Christian Lange
1922 Fridtjof Nansen
1923
1924
1925 Austen Chamberlain&#160;/ Charles Dawes








1926–1950



1926 Aristide Briand&#160;/ Gustav Stresemann
1927 Ferdinand Buisson&#160;/ Ludwig Quidde
1928
1929 Frank B. Kellogg
1930 Nathan Söderblom
1931 Jane Addams&#160;/ Nicholas Butler
1932
1933 Norman Angell
1934 Arthur Henderson
1935 Carl von Ossietzky
1936 Carlos Saavedra Lamas
1937 Robert Cecil
1938 Nansen International Office for Refugees
1939
1940
1941
1942
1943
1944 International Committee of the Red Cross
1945 Cordell Hull
1946 Emily Balch&#160;/ John Mott
1947 Friends Service Council&#160;/ American Friends Service Committee
1948
1949 John Boyd Orr
1950 Ralph Bunche








1951–1975



1951 Léon Jouhaux
1952 Albert Schweitzer
1953 George Marshall
1954 United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
1955
1956
1957 Lester B. Pearson
1958 Georges Pire
1959 Philip Noel-Baker
1960 Albert Lutuli
1961 Dag Hammarskjöld
1962 Linus Pauling
1963 International Committee of the Red Cross&#160;/ League of Red Cross Societies
1964 Martin Luther King, Jr.
1965 UNICEF
1966
1967
1968 René Cassin
1969 International Labour Organization
1970 Norman Borlaug
1971 Willy Brandt
1972
1973 Lê Đức Thọ&#160;(declined award)&#160;/ Henry Kissinger
1974 Seán MacBride&#160;/ Eisaku Satō
1975 Andrei Sakharov








1976–2000



1976 Betty Williams&#160;/ Mairead Corrigan
1977 Amnesty International
1978 Anwar Sadat&#160;/ Menachem Begin
1979 Mother Teresa
1980 Adolfo Pérez Esquivel
1981 United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
1982 Alva Myrdal&#160;/ Alfonso García Robles
1983 Lech Wałęsa
1984 Desmond Tutu
1985 International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War
1986 Elie Wiesel
1987 Óscar Arias
1988 UN Peacekeeping Forces
1989 Tenzin Gyatso (14th Dalai Lama)
1990 Mikhail Gorbachev
1991 Aung San Suu Kyi
1992 Rigoberta Menchú
1993 Nelson Mandela&#160;/ F. W. de Klerk
1994 Shimon Peres&#160;/ Yitzhak Rabin&#160;/ Yasser Arafat
1995 Pugwash Conferences&#160;/ Joseph Rotblat
1996 Carlos Belo&#160;/ José Ramos-Horta
1997 International Campaign to Ban Landmines&#160;/ Jody Williams
1998 John Hume&#160;/ David Trimble
1999 Médecins Sans Frontières
2000 Kim Dae-jung








2001–present



2001 Kofi Annan&#160;/ United Nations
2002 Jimmy Carter
2003 Shirin Ebadi
2004 Wangari Maathai
2005 International Atomic Energy Agency&#160;/ Mohamed ElBaradei
2006 Grameen Bank&#160;/ Muhammad Yunus
2007 Al Gore&#160;/ Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
2008 Martti Ahtisaari
2009 Barack Obama
2010 Liu Xiaobo
2011 Ellen Johnson Sirleaf&#160;/ Leymah Gbowee&#160;/ Tawakkol Karman
2012 European Union
2013 Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
2014 Kailash Satyarthi&#160;/ Malala Yousafzai
2015 Tunisian National Dialogue Quartet
















v
t
e


Time Persons of the Year









Mohammad Mosaddegh (1951)
Elizabeth II (1952)
Konrad Adenauer (1953)
John Foster Dulles (1954)
Harlow Curtice (1955)
Hungarian Freedom Fighter (1956)
Nikita Khrushchev (1957)
Charles de Gaulle (1958)
Dwight D. Eisenhower (1959)
U.S. Scientists (1960)
John F. Kennedy (1961)
Pope John XXIII (1962)
Martin Luther King, Jr. (1963)
Lyndon B. Johnson (1964)
William Westmoreland (1965)
"The Inheritors" (1966)
Lyndon B. Johnson (1967)
The Apollo 8 Astronauts: William Anders / Frank Borman / Jim Lovell (1968)
The Middle Americans (1969)
Willy Brandt (1970)
Richard Nixon (1971)
Henry Kissinger / Richard Nixon (1972)
John Sirica (1973)
King Faisal (1974)
American Women (1975)











Complete roster
1927–1950
1951–1975
1976–2000
2001–present
















v
t
e


Pacem in Terris Peace and Freedom Award laureates






1960s



1964 John Howard Griffin&#160;/ John F. Kennedy
1965 Martin Luther King, Jr.
1966 R. Sargent Shriver
1967 A. Philip Randolph
1968 James Groppi
1969 Saul Alinsky








1970s



1971 Dorothy Day
1974 Harold Hughes
1975 Hélder Câmara
1976 Mother Teresa
1979 Thomas Gumbleton








1980s



1980 Crystal Lee Sutton&#160;/ Ernest Leo Unterkoefler
1982 George F. Kennan
1983 Helen Caldicott
1985 Joseph Bernardin
1986 Maurice John Dingman
1987 Desmond Tutu
1989 Eileen Egan








1990s



1990 Mairead Maguire
1991 María Julia Hernández
1992 César Chávez
1993 Daniel Berrigan
1995 Jim Wallis
1996 Samuel Ruiz
1997 Jim and Shelley Douglass








2000s



2000 George G. Higgins
2001 Lech Wałęsa
2002 Gwen Hennessey&#160;/ Dorothy Hennessey
2004 Arthur Simon
2005 Donald Mosley
2007 Salim Ghazal
2008 Marvin Mottet
2009 Hildegard Goss-Mayr








2010s



2010 John Dear
2011 Álvaro Leonel Ramazzini Imeri
2012 Kim Bobo
2013 Jean Vanier
2014 Simone Campbell
2015 Thích Nhất Hạnh
















v
t
e


Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album (1970s)









1970
Art Linkletter, Diane Linkletter - We Love You Call Collect
1971
Martin Luther King, Jr. - Why I Oppose the War in Vietnam
1972
Les Crane - Desiderata
1973
Bruce Botnick (producer) - Lenny performed by the original Broadway cast
1974
Richard Harris - Jonathan Livingston Seagull
1975
Peter Cook, Dudley Moore - Good Evening
1976
James Whitmore - Give 'em Hell, Harry!
1977
Henry Fonda, Helen Hayes, James Earl Jones, Orson Welles - Great American Documents
1978
Julie Harris - The Belle of Amherst
1979
Orson Welles - Citizen Kane Original Motion Picture Soundtrack












Complete list
(1959 &amp; 1960s)
(1970s)
(1980s)
(1990s)
(2000s)
(2010s)














Authority control



WorldCat
VIAF: 100170140
LCCN: n79084324
ISNI: 0000 0001 2145 0746
GND: 118562215
SELIBR: 201480
SUDOC: 026949814
BNF: cb11909768k (data)
MusicBrainz: 80f23097-a035-4409-84d7-7caa855f53a8
NLA: 35116159
NDL: 00469568
NKC: jn20000700891
NARA: 1358262
BNE: XX879954















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Martin_Luther_King,_Jr.&amp;oldid=690958127"					
				Categories: Martin Luther King, Jr.1929 births1968 deaths20th-century African-American activists20th-century American writers20th-century Baptist ministersAfrican-American Baptist ministersActivists for African-American civil rightsAmerican anti–Vietnam War activistsAmerican Christian pacifistsAmerican Christian socialistsAmerican humanitariansAmerican Nobel laureatesAmerican people of Irish descentAmerican prisoners and detaineesAmerican Christian theologiansAnglican saintsAnti-racism activistsAssassinated American civil rights activistsAssassinated religious leadersBaptist ministers from the United StatesBaptist writersBoston University School of Theology alumniBurials in Georgia (U.S. state)Christian radicalsCOINTELPRO targetsCommunity organizingCongressional Gold Medal recipientsCounterculture of the 1960sDeaths by firearm in TennesseeDemocratic socialistsFellows of the American Academy of Arts and SciencesGandhiansGrammy Award winnersInternational opponents of apartheid in South AfricaMorehouse College alumniMurdered African-American peopleNobel Peace Prize laureatesNonviolence advocatesPeople celebrated in the Lutheran liturgical calendarPeople from Atlanta, GeorgiaPeople from Montgomery, AlabamaPeople murdered in TennesseePresidential Medal of Freedom recipientsPrisoners and detainees of AlabamaPrisoners and detainees of FloridaPrisoners and detainees of Georgia (U.S. state)Revolutionary martyrsAmerican social democratsSpingarn Medal winnersStabbing survivorsJawaharlal Nehru Award laureatesHidden categories: Subscription required using viaPages containing links to subscription-only contentAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from September 2013Wikipedia semi-protected pagesGood articlesUse mdy dates from February 2015Biography with signatureArticles with hCardsArticles with hAudio microformatsArticles with Wikilivres linksWikipedia external links cleanup from July 2015Wikipedia spam cleanup from July 2015Articles with DMOZ linksWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with MusicBrainz identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiers				
							
		
		
			