


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Marxism
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				|the political ideology commonly associated with states governed by Communist parties|Marxism–Leninism}}


Part of a series on


Marxism







Theoretical works




Economic and Philosophic
Manuscripts of 1844

Theses on Feuerbach
The German Ideology
The Communist Manifesto

The Eighteenth Brumaire of
Louis Napoleon


Grundrisse der Kritik
der Politischen Ökonomie


A Contribution to the
Critique of Political Economy

Das Kapital
Dialectics of Nature









Concepts



Dialectical materialism
Historical materialism


Marx's method
Scientific socialism
Socialism
Communist society


Proletariat
Bourgeoisie









Economics



Capital (accumulation)
Asiatic mode of production
Capitalist mode of production
Crisis theory
Commodity
Exploitation
Mode of production
Law of value
Socialist mode of production
Surplus product
Surplus value
Value-form
Wage labor









Sociology



Alienation
Base and superstructure
Bourgeoisie
Class
Class consciousness
Class struggle
Commodity fetishism
Cultural hegemony
Exploitation
Human nature
Ideology
Immiseration
Proletariat
Private property
Relations of production
Reification
Working class









History



Historical materialism
Historical determinism
Anarchism and Marxism
Dictatorship of the proletariat
Primitive capital accumulation
Proletarian revolution
Proletarian internationalism
World revolution
Stateless communism









Philosophy



Marxist geography
Marxist humanism
Marxist literary criticism
Marxist philosophy of nature
Philosophy in the Soviet Union



Young Marx
Open Marxism












Variants



Classical
Orthodox
Trotskyism
Marxism–Leninism
Marxism–Leninism–Maoism
Feminist
Western
Autonomism
Analytical
Libertarian
Neo-Marxism
Post-Marxism
Instrumental
Structural









Movements



Anti-Revisionism
Situationist International
De Leonism
Impossibilism









People



Karl Marx
Friedrich Engels


Karl Kautsky
Eduard Bernstein


James Connolly
Georgi Plekhanov


Rosa Luxemburg
Vladimir Lenin


Leon Trotsky
Chen Duxiu


Che Guevara
Mao Zedong


Louis Althusser
György Lukács


Karl Korsch
Antonio Gramsci


Antonie Pannekoek


Rudolf Hilferding
Guy Debord


Fredy Perlman
more...









 Socialism portal
 Communism portal
 Philosophy portal







v
t
e





Marxism is a method of socioeconomic analysis, originating from the mid-to-late 19th century works of German philosophers Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, that analyzes class relations and societal conflict using a materialist interpretation of historical development and a dialectical view of social transformation.
Marxist methodology originally used economic and sociopolitical inquiry to analyze and critique the development of capitalism and the role of class struggle in systemic economic change. According to Marxist analysis, class conflict within capitalism arises due to intensifying contradictions between highly productive mechanized and socialized production performed by the proletariat, and private ownership and appropriation of the surplus product in the form of surplus value (profit) by a small minority of private owners called the bourgeoisie. As the contradiction becomes apparent to the proletariat, social unrest between the two antagonistic classes intensifies, culminating in a social revolution. The eventual long-term outcome of this revolution would be the establishment of socialism – a socioeconomic system based on social ownership of the means of production, distribution based on one's contribution, and production organized directly for use. As the productive forces and technology continued to advance, Marx hypothesized that socialism would eventually give way to a communist stage of social development, which would be a classless, stateless, humane society erected on common ownership and the principle of "From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs".
Marxism has since developed into different branches and schools of thought, and there is now no single definitive Marxist theory.[1] Different schools place a greater emphasis on certain aspects of classical Marxism while de-emphasizing or rejecting other aspects, and sometimes combine Marxist analysis with non-Marxian concepts. As a result, different schools of Marxism might reach contradictory conclusions from one another.[2]
Marxist analyses and methodologies have influenced multiple political ideologies and social movements, and Marxist understandings of history and society have been adopted by academics in the disciplines of archaeology, anthropology,[3] media studies,[4] political science, theater, history, sociology, art history and theory, cultural studies, education, economics, geography, literary criticism, aesthetics, critical psychology, and philosophy.[5]



Contents


1 Overview
2 Concepts

2.1 Historical Materialism
2.2 Criticism of capitalism
2.3 Social classes
2.4 Revolution, socialism, and communism


3 Classical Marxism

3.1 Criticism


4 Academic Marxism
5 Etymology
6 History

6.1 Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels
6.2 Late 20th century

6.2.1 Political Marxism


6.3 21st century

6.3.1 Political Marxism




7 Criticisms

7.1 Socialist critiques
7.2 Anarchist and libertarian critiques
7.3 Economic critiques


8 See also
9 References

9.1 Footnotes
9.2 Bibliography


10 External links

10.1 General resources
10.2 Introductory articles





Overview[edit]




Karl Marx


The Marxian analysis begins with an analysis of material conditions and the economic activities required to satisfy society's material needs. It is understood that the form of economic organization, or mode of production, gives rise to, or at least directly influences, most other social phenomena&#160;– including social relations, political and legal systems, morality and ideology. The economic system and these social relations form a base and superstructure. As forces of production, most notably technology, improve, existing forms of social organization become inefficient and stifle further progress. As Karl Marx observed: "At a certain stage of development, the material productive forces of society come into conflict with the existing relations of production or this merely expresses the same thing in legal terms with the property relations within the framework of which they have operated hitherto. From forms of development of the productive forces these relations turn into their fetters. Then begins an era of social revolution."[6]
These inefficiencies manifest themselves as social contradictions in society in the form of class struggle.[7] Under the capitalist mode of production, this struggle materializes between the minority (the bourgeoisie) who own the means of production, and the vast majority of the population (the proletariat) who produce goods and services. Taking the idea that social change occurs because of the struggle between different classes within society who are under contradiction against each other, leads the Marxist analysis to the conclusion that capitalism exploits and oppresses the proletariat, which leads to a proletarian revolution.
Capitalism (according to Marxist theory) can no longer sustain the living standards of the population due to its need to compensate for falling rates of profit by driving down wages, cutting social benefits and pursuing military aggression. The socialist system would succeed capitalism as humanity's mode of production through workers' revolution. According to Marxism, especially arising from crisis theory, socialism is a historical necessity (but not an inevitability).[8]
In a socialist society private property in the means of production would be superseded by co-operative ownership. A socialist economy would not base production on the creation of private profits, but on the criteria of satisfying human needs – that is, production would be carried out directly for use. As Engels observed: "Then the capitalist mode of appropriation in which the product enslaves first the producer, and then appropriator, is replaced by the mode of appropriation of the product that is based upon the nature of the modern means of production; upon the one hand, direct social appropriation, as means to the maintenance and extension of production on the other, direct individual appropriation, as means of subsistence and of enjoyment."'[9]
Concepts[edit]
Historical Materialism[edit]
Main article: Historical materialism



"The discovery of the materialist conception of history, or rather, the consistent continuation and extension of materialism into the domain of social phenomenon, removed two chief defects of earlier historical theories. In the first place, they at best examined only the ideological motives of the historical activity of human beings, without grasping the objective laws governing the development of the system of social relations&#160;... in the second place, the earlier theories did not cover the activities of the masses of the population, whereas historical materialism made it possible for the first time to study with the accuracy of the natural sciences the social conditions of the life of the masses and the changes in these conditions."


Russian Marxist theoretician and revolutionary Vladimir Lenin, 1913.[10]


"Society does not consist of individuals, but expresses the sum of interrelations, the relations within which these individuals stand."
— &#160;Karl Marx, Grundrisse, 1858[11]

The historical materialist theory of history[12] dialectically analyses the underlying causes of societal development and change in the collective ways humans make their living. All constituent features of a society (social classes, political pyramid, ideologies) stem from economic activity, an idea often conveyed with the metaphor of the base and superstructure.
The base and superstructure metaphor explains that the totality of social relations in and by which humans product and re-product their social existence, forms a society's economic base. From this base rises a superstructure of political and legal institutions, i.e., ruling class. The base corresponds to the social consciousness (politics, religion, philosophy, etc.), and it conditions the superstructure and the dominant ideology. A conflict between the development of material productive forces and the relations of production provokes social revolutions, thus, the resultant changes to the economic base will lead to the transformation of the superstructure.[13] This relationship is reflexive; At first the base gives rise to the superstructure and remains the foundation of a form of social organization. Hence, that formed social organization can act again upon both parts of the base and superstructure, whose relationship is not unilinear but dialectic, namely a relationship driven by conflicts and contradictions. As Friedrich Engels clarified: "The history of all hitherto existing society is the history of class struggles. Freeman and slave, patrician and plebeian, lord and serf, guild-master and journeyman, in a word, oppressor and oppressed, stood in constant opposition to one another, carried on uninterrupted, now hidden, now open fight, a fight that each time ended, either in a revolutionary reconstitution of society at large, or in the common ruin of the contending classes."'[14]
Marx considered these socio-economic conflicts as the driving force of human history since these recurring conflicts have manifested themselves as distinct transitional stages of development in Western Europe. Accordingly, Marx designates human history as encompassing four stages of development in relations of production.[15]

Primitive Communism: as in co-operative tribal societies.
Slave Society: a development of tribal to city-state; aristocracy is born.
Feudalism: aristocrats are the ruling class; merchants evolve into capitalists.
Capitalism: capitalists are the ruling class, who create and employ the proletariat.

Criticism of capitalism[edit]

"We are, in Marx's terms, ‘an ensemble of social relations' and we live our lives at the core of the intersection of a number of unequal social relations based on hierarchically interrelated structures which, together, define the historical specificity of the capitalist modes of production and reproduction and underlay their observable manifestations."
— Martha E. Gimenez, Marxism and Class, Gender and Race: Rethinking the Trilogy[16]

According to the Marxist theoretician and revolutionary Vladimir Lenin, "the principal content of Marxism" was "Marx's economic doctrine".[17] Marx believed that the capitalist bourgeois and their economists were promoting what he saw as the lie that "The interests of the capitalist and those of the worker are&#160;... one and the same"; he believed that they did this by purporting the concept that "the fastest possible growth of productive capital" was best not only for the wealthy capitalists but also for the workers because it provided them with employment.[18]
Exploitation is a matter of surplus labour&#160;– the amount of labour one performs beyond what one receives in goods. Exploitation has been a socio-economic feature of every class society, and is one of the principal features distinguishing the social classes. The power of one social class to control the means of production enables its exploitation of the other classes.
In capitalism, the labour theory of value is the operative concern; the value of a commodity equals the socially necessary labour time required to produce it. Under that condition, surplus value (the difference between the value produced and the value received by a labourer) is synonymous with the term "surplus labour"; thus, capitalist exploitation is realised as deriving surplus value from the worker.
In pre-capitalist economies, exploitation of the worker was achieved via physical coercion. In the capitalist mode of production, that result is more subtly achieved; because the worker does not own the means of production, he or she must voluntarily enter into an exploitive work relationship with a capitalist in order to earn the necessities of life. The worker's entry into such employment is voluntary in that he or she chooses which capitalist to work for. However, the worker must work or starve. Thus, exploitation is inevitable, and the "voluntary" nature of a worker participating in a capitalist society is illusory.
Alienation is the estrangement of people from their humanity (German: Gattungswesen, "species-essence", "species-being"), which is a systematic result of capitalism. Under capitalism, the fruits of production belong to the employers, who expropriate the surplus created by others, and so generate alienated labourers.[19] In Marx's view, alienation is an objective characterization of the worker's situation in capitalism&#160;– his or her self-awareness of this condition is not prerequisite.
Social classes[edit]
The identity of a social class derives from its relationship to the means of production; Marx describes the social classes in capitalist societies:

Proletariat: "the class of modern wage labourers who, having no means of production of their own, are reduced to selling their labour power in order to live".[20] As Andrei Platonov expressed "The working class is my home country and my future is linked with the proletariat."[21] The capitalist mode of production establishes the conditions enabling the bourgeoisie to exploit the proletariat because the workers' labour generates a surplus value greater than the workers' wages.
Bourgeoisie: those who "own the means of production" and buy labour power from the proletariat, thus exploiting the proletariat; they subdivide as bourgeoisie and the petit bourgeoisie.

Petit bourgeoisie are those who work and can afford to buy little labour power i.e. small business owners, peasant landlords, trade workers et al. Marxism predicts that the continual reinvention of the means of production eventually would destroy the petit bourgeoisie, degrading them from the middle class to the proletariat.


Lumpenproletariat: The outcasts of society such as criminals, vagabonds, beggars, prostitutes, et al., who have no stake in the economy and no mind of their own and so are decoyed by every bidder.
Landlords: an historically important social class who retain some wealth and power.
Peasantry and farmers: a scattered class incapable of organizing and effecting socio-economic change, most of whom would enter the proletariat, and some become landlords.

Class consciousness denotes the awareness&#160;– of itself and the social world&#160;– that a social class possesses, and its capacity to rationally act in their best interests; hence, class consciousness is required before they can effect a successful revolution.
Without defining ideology,[22] Marx used the term to denote the production of images of social reality; according to Engels, "ideology is a process accomplished by the so-called thinker consciously, it is true, but with a false consciousness. The real motive forces impelling him remain unknown to him; otherwise it simply would not be an ideological process. Hence he imagines false or seeming motive forces".[23] Because the ruling class controls the society's means of production, the superstructure of society, the ruling social ideas are determined by the best interests of the said ruling class. In The German Ideology, "the ideas of the ruling class are in every epoch the ruling ideas, i.e. the class which is the ruling material force of society, is, at the same time, its ruling intellectual force".[24]
The term "political economy" originally denoted the study of the conditions under which economic production was organised in the capitalist system. In Marxism, political economy studies the means of production, specifically of capital, and how that manifests as economic activity.



"Marxism taught me what society was. I was like a blindfolded man in a forest, who doesn't even know where north or south is. If you don't eventually come to truly understand the history of the class struggle, or at least have a clear idea that society is divided between the rich and the poor, and that some people subjugate and exploit other people, you're lost in a forest, not knowing anything."


Cuban revolutionary and Marxist-Leninist politician Fidel Castro on discovering Marxism, 2009.[25]

Revolution, socialism, and communism[edit]
Marxists believe that the transition from capitalism to socialism is an inevitable part of the development of human society; as Lenin stated, "it is evident that Marx deduces the inevitability of the transformation of capitalist society [into a socialist society] wholly and exclusively from the economic law of motion of contemporary society."[26]
Marxists believe that a socialist society will be far better for the majority of the populace than its capitalist counterpart, for instance, prior to the Russian revolution of 1917, Lenin wrote that "The socialization of production is bound to lead to the conversion of the means of production into the property of society&#160;... This conversion will directly result in an immense increase in productivity of labour, a reduction of working hours, and the replacement of the remnants, the ruins of small-scale, primitive, disunited production by collective and improved labour."[27]
The failure of 1905 revolution and the socialist movements failure to resist the outbreak of the first World War led to renewed theoretical effort and valuable contributions from Lenin and Rosa Luxemburg towards an appreciation of Marx's Crisis theory and efforts to formulate a Theory of Imperialism[28]
Classical Marxism[edit]
Main article: Classical Marxism
The term Classical Marxism denotes the collection of socio-eco-political theories expounded by Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels. "Marxism," as Ernest Mandel remarked, "is always open, always critical, always self-critical." As such, Classical Marxism distinguishes between "Marxism" as broadly perceived, and "what Marx believed;" thus, in 1883, Marx wrote to the French labour leader Jules Guesde and to Paul Lafargue (Marx's son-in-law)&#160;– both of whom claimed to represent Marxist principles&#160;– accusing them of "revolutionary phrase-mongering" and of denying the value of reformist struggle; from Marx's letter derives the paraphrase: "If that is Marxism, then I am not a Marxist."[29][30] American Marxist scholar Hal Draper responded to this comment by saying, "there are few thinkers in modern history whose thought has been so badly misrepresented, by Marxists and anti-Marxists alike".[31]
Criticism[edit]
Some Marxists have criticised the academic institutionalisation of Marxism for being too shallow and detached from political action. For instance, Zimbabwean Trotskyist Alex Callinicos, himself a professional academic, stated that "Its practitioners remind one of Narcissus, who in the Greek legend fell in love with his own reflection&#160;... Sometimes it is necessary to devote time to clarifying and developing the concepts that we use, but indeed for Western Marxists this has become an end in itself. The result is a body of writings incomprehensible to all but a tiny minority of highly qualified scholars."[32]
Academic Marxism[edit]




One of the 20th century's most prominent Marxist academics; the Australian archaeologist V. Gordon Childe


Marxism has been adopted by a large number of academics and other scholars working in various disciplines.
The theoretical development of Marxist archaeology was first developed in the Soviet Union in 1929, when a young archaeologist named Vladislav I. Ravdonikas (1894–1976) published a report entitled "For a Soviet history of material culture". Within this work, the very discipline of archaeology as it then stood was criticised as being inherently bourgeoisie and therefore anti-socialist, and so, as a part of the academic reforms instituted in the Soviet Union under the administration of Premier Joseph Stalin, a great emphasis was placed on the adoption of Marxist archaeology throughout the country.[33] These theoretical developments were subsequently adopted by archaeologists working in capitalist states outside of the Leninist bloc, most notably by the Australian academic V. Gordon Childe (1892–1957), who used Marxist theory in his understandings of the development of human society.[34]
Etymology[edit]
The term "Marxism" was popularized by Karl Kautsky who considered himself an "orthodox" Marxist during the dispute between the orthodox and revisionist followers of Marx.[35] Kautsky's revisionist rival Eduard Bernstein also later adopted use of the term.[35] Engels did not support the use of the term "Marxism" to describe either Marx's or his views.[36] Engels claimed that the term was being abusively used as a rhetorical qualifier by those attempting to cast themselves as "real" followers of Marx while casting others in different terms, such as "Lassallians".[36] In 1882, Engels claimed that Marx had criticized self-proclaimed "Marxist" Paul Lafargue, by saying that if Lafargue's views were considered "Marxist", then "[o]ne thing is certain and that is that I am not a Marxist".[36]
History[edit]
Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels[edit]
Main articles: Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels
Karl Marx (5 May 1818&#160;– 14 March 1883) was a German philosopher, political economist, and socialist revolutionary, who addressed the matters of alienation and exploitation of the working class, the capitalist mode of production, and historical materialism. He is famous for analysing history in terms of class struggle, summarised in the initial line introducing the Communist Manifesto (1848): "The history of all hitherto existing society is the history of class struggles".
Friedrich Engels (28 November 1820&#160;– 5 August 1895) was a German political philosopher and Karl Marx's co-developer of communist theory. Marx and Engels met in September 1844; discovering that they shared like views of philosophy and socialism, they collaborated and wrote works such as Die heilige Familie (The Holy Family). After Marx was deported from France in January 1845, Engels and Marx moved to Belgium, which then permitted greater freedom of expression than other European countries; in January 1846, they returned to Brussels to establish the Communist Correspondence Committee.
In 1847, they began writing The Communist Manifesto (1848), based on Engels' The Principles of Communism; six weeks later, they published the 12,000-word pamphlet in February 1848. In March, Belgium expelled them, and they moved to Cologne, where they published the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, a politically radical newspaper. Again, by 1849, they had to leave Cologne for London. The Prussian authorities pressured the British government to expel Marx and Engels, but Prime Minister Lord John Russell refused.
After Karl Marx's death in 1883, Friedrich Engels became the editor and translator of Marx's writings. With his Origins of the Family, Private Property, and the State (1884)&#160;– analysing monogamous marriage as guaranteeing male social domination of women, a concept analogous, in communist theory, to the capitalist class's economic domination of the working class&#160;– Engels made intellectually significant contributions to feminist theory and Marxist feminism.
Late 20th century[edit]
Political Marxism[edit]
In 1959, the Cuban Revolution led to the victory of anti-imperialist Fidel Castro (1926–) and his July 26 Movement. Although the revolution had not been explicitly socialist, upon victory Castro ascended to the position of Prime Minister and eventually adopted the Leninist model of socialist development, forging an alliance with the Soviet Union.[37] One of the leaders of the revolution, the Argentine Marxist revolutionary Che Guevara (1928–1967), subsequently went on to aid revolutionary socialist movements in Congo-Kinshasa and Bolivia, eventually being killed by the Bolivian government, possibly on the orders of the CIA, though the CIA agent sent to search for Guevara, Felix Rodriguez expressed a desire to keep him alive as a possible bargaining tool with the Cuban government; he would posthumously go on to become an internationally recognised icon.
In the People's Republic of China, the Maoist government undertook the Cultural Revolution from 1966 through to 1976 in order to purge capitalist elements from Chinese society and entrench socialism. However, upon Mao's death, his rivals seized political power and under the Premiership of Deng Xiaoping (1978–1992), many of Mao's Cultural Revolution era policies were revised or abandoned and much of the state sector privatised.
The late 1980s and early 1990s saw the collapse of most of those socialist states that had professed a Marxist–Leninist ideology. In the late 1970s and 1980s, the emergence of the New Right and neoliberal capitalism as the dominant ideological trends in western politics – championed by U.S. President Ronald Reagan and U.K. Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher – led the west to take a more aggressive stand against the Soviet Union and its Leninist allies. Meanwhile, in the Soviet Union, the reformist Mikhael Gorbachev (1931–) became Premier in March 1985, and began to move away from Leninist-based models of development towards social democracy. Ultimately, Gorbachev's reforms, coupled with rising levels of popular ethnic nationalism in the Soviet Union, led to the state's dissolution in late 1991 into a series of constituent nations, all of which abandoned Marxist–Leninist models for socialism, with most converting to capitalist economies.
21st century[edit]
Political Marxism[edit]
At the turn of the 21st century, China, Cuba, Laos and Vietnam remained the only officially Marxist–Leninist states remaining, although a Maoist government led by Prachanda (1954–) was elected into power in Nepal in 2008 following a long guerrilla struggle. The early 21st century also saw the election of socialist and anti-imperialist governments in several Latin American nations, in what has come to be known as the "Pink tide". Dominated by the Venezuelan government of Hugo Chávez, this trend also saw the election of Evo Morales in Bolivia, Rafael Correa in Ecuador and Daniel Ortega in Nicaragua; forging political and economic alliances through international organisations like the Bolivarian Alliance for the Americas, these socialist governments allied themselves with Marxist–Leninist Cuba, and although none of them espoused a Leninist path directly, most admitted to being significantly influenced by Marxist theory. For Italian Marxist Gianni Vattimo in his 2011 book Hermeneutic Communism "this new weak communism differs substantially from its previous Soviet (and current Chinese) realization, because the South American countries follow democratic electoral procedures and also manage to decentralize the state bureaucratic system through the misiones (social missions for community projects). In sum, if weakened communism is felt as a specter in the West, it is not only because of media distortions but also for the alternative it represents through the same democratic procedures that the West constantly professes to cherish but is hesitant to apply"[38]
Criticisms[edit]
Main article: Criticisms of Marxism
Criticisms of Marxism have come from various political ideologies. Additionally, there are intellectual critiques of Marxism that contest certain assumptions prevalent in Marx's thought and Marxism after him, without exactly rejecting Marxist politics.[39] Other, contemporary supporters of Marxism argue that many aspects of Marxist thought are viable, but that the corpus is incomplete or outdated in regards to certain aspects of economic, political or social theory. They may therefore combine some Marxist concepts with the ideas of other theorists such as Max Weber: the Frankfurt school is one example.
Socialist critiques[edit]
Democratic socialists and social democrats reject the idea that socialism can be accomplished only through extra-legal class conflict and a proletarian revolution. The relationship between Marx and other socialist thinkers and organizations—rooted in Marxism's "scientific" and anti-utopian socialism, among other factors—has divided Marxists from other socialists since Marx's life. After Marx's death, and with the emergence of Marxism, there have additionally been dissensions within Marxism itself—the splitting of the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party into Bolsheviks and Mensheviks is a notable example. Orthodox Marxism became counterposed to a less dogmatic, more innovative, or even revisionist Marxism.[clarification needed]
Anarchist and libertarian critiques[edit]
Main articles: Anarchism and Marxism and Libertarian socialism
Anarchism has had a strained relationship with Marxism since Marx's life. Anarchists and libertarian socialists reject the need for a transitory state phase, claiming that socialism can only be established through decentralized, non-coercive organization. Individualist anarchists, who are often neither socialists nor capitalists, reject Marxism as a statist ideology. Anarchist Mikhail Bakunin criticized Marx for his authoritarian bent.[40] The phrase "barracks socialism" became a shorthand for this critique, evoking the image of citizens' lives being as regimented as the lives of conscripts in a barracks.[41]
Economic critiques[edit]
Other critiques come from an economic standpoint. Economists such as Friedrich Hayek have criticized Marxism for allocating resources inefficiently.
V. K. Dmitriev, writing in 1898,[42] Ladislaus von Bortkiewicz, writing in 1906–07,[43] and subsequent critics have alleged that Marx's value theory and law of the tendency of the rate of profit to fall are internally inconsistent. In other words, the critics allege that Marx drew conclusions that actually do not follow from his theoretical premises. Once these alleged errors are corrected, his conclusion that aggregate price and profit are determined by, and equal to, aggregate value and surplus value no longer holds true. This result calls into question his theory that the exploitation of workers is the sole source of profit.[44]
Both Marxism and socialism have received considerable critical analysis from multiple generations of Austrian economists in terms of scientific methodology, economic theory, and political implications.[45][46] During the marginal revolution, subjective value theory was rediscovered by Carl Menger, a development which undermined the British cost theories of value fundamentally. The restoration of subjectivism and praxeological methodology previously used by classical economic scientists including Richard Cantillon, Anne-Robert-Jacques Turgot, Jean-Baptiste Say, and Frédéric Bastiat led Menger to criticise historicist methodology in general. Second-generation Austrian economist Eugen Böhm von Bawerk used praxeological and subjectivist methodology to attack the law of value fundamentally. Non-Marxist economists have regarded his criticism as definitive, with Gottfried Haberler arguing that Böhm-Bawerk's critique of Marx's economics was so thorough and devastating that as of the 1960s no Marxian scholar had conclusively refuted it.[47] Third-generation Austrian Ludwig von Mises sparked the economic calculation debate by identifying that without price signals in capital goods, all other aspects of the market economy are irrational. This led him to declare "...&#160;that rational economic activity is impossible in a socialist commonwealth."[48] Mises then elaborated on every form of socialism more completely in his 1922 book Socialism, an Economic and Sociological Analysis. Contemporary Austrian critics include Murray Rothbard, David Gordon, Yuri Maltsev, Gary North, and Joseph Salerno.
See also[edit]





This section may be in need of reorganization to comply with Wikipedia's layout guidelines. Please help by editing the article to make improvements to the overall structure. (June 2013)








Analytical Marxism
Austromarxism
Criticisms of Marxism
Democracy in Marxism
Freudo-Marxism
Instrumental Marxism
Karl Marx House
Karl Marx in film
Karl Marx's Theory of History
Legal Marxism
Libertarian Marxism
Living Marxism
Marxian Class Theory
Marxism and religion
Marxism and Freedom






Marxism and the U.S.A.
Marxism Today
Marxist film theory
Marxist hip hop
Marxist international relations theory
Marxist Workers' League (US)
Marxists Internet Archive
Marx Memorial Library






Marx's notebooks on technology
Marx's theory of human nature
Neo-Marxism
Open Marxism
Post-Marxism
Pre-Marx socialists
Reification (Marxism)
Rethinking Marxism
Revolutionary Marxist League
Specters of Marx
The Marxism of Che Guevara






References[edit]
Footnotes[edit]


^ Wolff and Resnick, Richard and Stephen (August 1987). Economics: Marxian versus Neoclassical. The Johns Hopkins University Press. p.&#160;130. ISBN&#160;0-8018-3480-5. The German Marxists extended the theory to groups and issues Marx had barely touched. Marxian analyses of the legal system, of the social role of women, of foreign trade, of international rivalries among capitalist nations, and the role of parliamentary democracy in the transition to socialism drew animated debates&#160;... Marxian theory (singular) gave way to Marxian theories (plural).&#160;
^ O'Hara, Phillip (September 2003). Encyclopedia of Political Economy, Volume 2. Routledge. p.&#160;107. ISBN&#160;0-415-24187-1. Marxist political economists differ over their definitions of capitalism, socialism and communism. These differences are so fundamental, the arguments among differently persuaded Marxist political economists have sometimes been as intense as their oppositions to political economies that celebrate capitalism.&#160;
^ Bridget O'Laughlin (1975) Marxist Approaches in Anthropology Annual Review of Anthropology Vol. 4: pp. 341–70 (October 1975) doi:10.1146/annurev.an.04.100175.002013.
William Roseberry (1997) Marx and Anthropology Annual Review of Anthropology, Vol. 26: pp. 25–46 (October 1997) doi:10.1146/annurev.anthro.26.1.25
^ S. L. Becker (1984) "Marxist Approaches to Media Studies: The British Experience", Critical Studies in Mass Communication, 1(1): pp. 66–80.
^ See Manuel Alvarado, Robin Gutch, and Tana Wollen (1987) Learning the Media: Introduction to Media Teaching, Palgrave Macmillan.
^ A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy, Introduction 1859
^ Comparing Economic Systems in the Twenty-First Century, 2003, by Gregory and Stuart. P.62, Marx's Theory of Change. ISBN 0-618-26181-8.
^ Free will, non-predestination and non-determinism are emphasized in Marx's famous quote "Men make their own history&#160;..." The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte, Karl Marx 1852.
^ Socialism, Utopian and Scientific, Chapter three 1882
^ Lenin 1967 (1913). p. 15.
^ Grundrisse: Foundations of the Critique of Political Economy, by Karl Marx &amp; Martin Nicolaus, Penguin Classics, 1993, ISBN 0-14-044575-7, pg 265
^ Evans, p. 53; Marx's account of the theory is the Preface to A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy (1859). [1]. Another exposition of the theory is in The German Ideology. It, too, is available online from marxists.org.
^ See A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy (1859), Preface, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1977, with some notes by R. Rojas, and Engels: Anti-Dühring (1877), Introduction General
^ Communist manifesto, chapter one 1847
^ Marx does not claim to have produced a master-key to history. Historical materialism is not "an historico-philosophic theory of the marche generale, imposed by fate upon every people, whatever the historic circumstances in which it finds itself", K. Marx, Letter to editor of the Russian newspaper paper Otetchestvennye Zapiskym, 1877. He explains that his ideas are based upon a concrete study of the actual conditions in Europe.
^ Marxism and Class, Gender and Race: Rethinking the Trilogy, by Martha E. Gimenez, Published (2001) in Race, Gender and Class, Vol. 8, No. 2, pp. 23–33.
^ Lenin 1967 (1913). p. 07.
^ Marx 1849.
^ "Alienation" entry, A Dictionary of Sociology
^ Engels, Friedrich (1888). Manifesto of the Communist Party. London. pp.&#160;Footnote. Retrieved 15 March 2015.&#160;
^ Andrei Platonov, the 20th-century Russian writer
^ Joseph McCarney: Ideology and False Consciousness, April 2005
^ Engels: Letter to Franz Mehring, (London 14 July 1893), Donna Torr, translator, in Marx and Engels Correspondence, International Publishers, 1968
^ "Karl Marx, The German Ideology".&#160;
^ Castro and Ramonet 2009. p. 100.
^ Lenin 1967 (1913). p. 35.
^ Lenin 1967 (1913). p. 35–36.
^ https://www.marxists.org/archive/kuruma/crisis-intro.htm
^ "Accusing Guesde and Lafargue of 'revolutionary phrase-mongering' and of denying the value of reformist struggles, Marx made his famous remark that, if their politics represented Marxism, 'ce qu'il y a de certain c'est que moi, je ne suis pas Marxiste' ('what is certain is that I myself am not a Marxist')." See: http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1880/05/parti-ouvrier.htm
^ Hall, Stuart; Dave Morely; Kuan-Hsing Chen (1996). Stuart Hall: Critical Dialogues in Cultural Studies. London: Routledge. p.&#160;418. ISBN&#160;978-0-415-08803-9. Retrieved 4 March 2013. I have no hesitation in saying that this represents a gigantic crudification and simplification of Marx's work – the kind of simplification and reductionism which once led him, in despair, to say "if that is marxism, then I am not a marxist"&#160;
^ Not found in search function at Draper Arkiv
^ Callinicos 2010. p. 12.
^ Trigger 2007. p. 326–340.
^ Green 1981. p. 79.
^ a b Georges Haupt, Peter Fawcett, Eric Hobsbawm. Aspects of International Socialism, 1871–1914: Essays by Georges Haupt. Paperback Edition. Cambridge, England, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2010. pp. 18–19.
^ a b c Georges Haupt, Peter Fawcett, Eric Hobsbawm. Aspects of International Socialism, 1871–1914: Essays by Georges Haupt. Paperback Edition. Cambridge, England, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2010. Pp. 12.
^ See Coltman 2003 and Bourne 1986.
^ Gianni Vattimo and Santiago Zabala. Hermeneutic Communism: From Heidegger to Marx Columbia University Press. 2011. p. 122
^ For example, Baudrillard, Jean (1973). The Mirror of Production.&#160;
^ Bakunin, Mikhail (October 5, 1872), Letter to La Liberté, quoted in Bakunin on Anarchy, translated and edited by Sam Dolgoff, 1971&#160;
^ Sperber, Jonathan (2013), Karl Marx: A Nineteenth-Century Life, W.W. Norton &amp; Co.&#160;
^ V. K. Dmitriev, 1974 (1898), Economic Essays on Value, Competition and Utility. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press
^ Ladislaus von Bortkiewicz, 1952 (1906–1907), "Value and Price in the Marxian System", International Economic Papers 2, 5–60; Ladislaus von Bortkiewicz, 1984 (1907), "On the Correction of Marx's Fundamental Theoretical Construction in the Third Volume of Capital". In Eugen von Böhm-Bawerk 1984 (1896), Karl Marx and the Close of his System, Philadelphia: Orion Editions.
^ M. C. Howard and J. E. King. (1992) A History of Marxian Economics: Volume II, 1929–1990, chapter 12, sect. III. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press.
^ [2] What We Can Know About The World. Hans F. Sennholz.
^ [3] Omnipotent Government. Ludwig Von Mises
^ Gottfried Haberler in Milorad M. Drachkovitch (ed.), Marxist Ideology in the Contemporary World– Its Appeals and Paradoxes (New York: Praeger, 1966), p. 124
^ Von Mises, Ludwig (1990). Economic calculation in the Socialist Commonwealth (PDF). Ludwig von Mises Institute. Retrieved 2008-09-08.&#160;


Bibliography[edit]


Bourne, Peter G. (1986). Fidel: A Biography of Fidel Castro. New York: Dodd, Mead &amp; Company.&#160;
Callinicos, Alex (2010) [1983]. The Revolutionary Ideas of Karl Marx. Bloomsbury, London: Bookmarks. ISBN&#160;978-1-905192-68-7.&#160;
Castro, Fidel; Ramonet, Ignacio (interviewer) (2009). My Life: A Spoken Autobiography. New York: Scribner. ISBN&#160;978-1-4165-6233-7.&#160;
Coltman, Leycester (2003). The Real Fidel Castro. New Haven and London: Yale University Press. ISBN&#160;978-0-300-10760-9.&#160;
Green, Sally (1981). Prehistorian: A Biography of V. Gordon Childe. Bradford-on-Avon, Wiltshire: Moonraker Press. ISBN&#160;0-239-00206-7.&#160;
Lenin, Vladimir (1967) [1913]. Karl Marx: A Brief Biographical Sketch with an Exposition of Marxism. Peking: Foreign Languages Press. Retrieved 2014-06-17.&#160;
Marx, Karl (1849). Wage Labour and Capital. Germany: Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Retrieved 2014-06-17.&#160;
Trigger, Bruce G. (2007). A History of Archaeological Thought (2nd ed.). New York: Cambridge University Press. ISBN&#160;978-0-521-60049-1.&#160;



Avineri, Shlomo (1968). The Social and Political Thought of Karl Marx. Cambridge University Press.&#160;
Dahrendorf, Ralf (1959). Class and Class Conflict in Industrial Society. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.&#160;
Jon Elster, An Introduction to Karl Marx. Cambridge, England, 1986.
Michael Evans, Karl Marx. London, 1975.
Stefan Gandler, Critical Marxism in Mexico: Adolfo Sánchez Vázquez and Bolívar Echeverría, Leiden/Boston, Brill Academic Press, 2015. 467 pages. ISBN 978-90-04-22428-5.
Kołakowski, Leszek (1976). Main Currents of Marxism. Oxford University Press.&#160;
Parkes, Henry Bamford (1939). Marxism: An Autopsy. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.&#160;
Prychitko, David L. (2008). "Marxism". In David R. Henderson (.). Concise Encyclopedia of Economics (2nd ed.). Library of Economics and Liberty. ISBN&#160;978-0-86597-665-8. OCLC&#160;237794267.&#160;
Robinson, Cedric J.: Black Marxism: The Making of the Black Radical Tradition, 1983, Reissue: Univ North Carolina Press, 2000
Rummel, R.J. (1977) Conflict In Perspective Chap. 5 Marxism, Class Conflict, and the Conflict Helix
Screpanti, E; S. Zamagna (1993). An Outline of the History of Economic Thought.&#160;
McLellan, David (2007). Marxism After Marx. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.&#160;

External links[edit]


Library resources about
Marxism





Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries







Wikimedia Commons has media related to Marxism.


General resources[edit]

Marxists Internet Archive (MIA)
Marxmail.org
Marx Myths &amp; Legends
Marxism Page
London Philosophy Study Guide on Marxism (offers many suggestions on what to read, depending on the student's familiarity with the subject)

Introductory articles[edit]

History of Economic Thought: Marxian School[dead link]
History of Economic Thought: Neo Marxian[dead link]









v
t
e


Communism






Concepts



Marxist philosophy
Marxian economics
Historical materialism
Dialectical materialism
Surplus value
Communist society
From each according to his ability, to each according to his need
Class struggle
Dictatorship of the proletariat
Classless society
Collective leadership
Common ownership
Class consciousness
Gift economy
Commune
Workers' self-management
Proletarian internationalism
World revolution











Aspects



Communist state
Communist party
Communist revolution
Communist symbolism
Communism and religion
History of communism








Variants



Marxism
Leninism
Marxism–Leninism
Trotskyism
Maoism
Juche
Anarchist communism
Socialism with Chinese characteristics
Luxemburgism
Titoism
Stalinism
Castroism
Guevarism
Hoxhaism
Khrushchevism
Indian Communism
Prachanda Path
Đilasism
Rankovićism
Left communism
Council communism
Religious communism

Christian communism


Eurocommunism
World communism
Stateless communism
National communism
Primitive communism
Scientific communism
Ho Chi Minh Thought
Harmonious Socialist Society
Scientific Outlook on Development
List of communist parties








Internationals



Communist League
First International
Second International
Third International
Fourth International








People



Karl Marx
Friedrich Engels
Rosa Luxemburg
Vladimir Lenin
Joseph Stalin
Leon Trotsky
Mao Zedong
Mikhail Bakunin
Emma Goldman
Peter Kropotkin








Related topics



Communist world
Post-communism
Anti-communism
Anti-fascism
Criticisms of communism
Criticisms of communist party rule
Anti-capitalism
Cold War
Democratic centralism
Left-wing politics
Communist parties with parliamentary representation
New Class
New Left
Workers of the world, unite!
Naxalite insurgency









Communism portal














v
t
e


Works by Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels






Marx





Capital




Capital, Volume I (1867)
Capital, Volume II (1885, posthumous)
Capital, Volume III (1894, posthumous)









Other works




Scorpion and Felix (1837)
Oulanem (1839)
The Difference Between the Democritean and Epicurean Philosophy of Nature (1841)
Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right (1843)
On the Jewish Question (1843)
Notes on James Mill (1844)
Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 (1844, published 1927)
Theses on Feuerbach (1845, published 1888)
The Poverty of Philosophy (1847)
Wage Labour and Capital (1847)
The Class Struggles in France, 1848–1850 (1850)
The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Napoleon (1852)
Grundrisse (1857, published 1939)
A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy (1859)
Theories of Surplus Value (three volumes, 1862)
Value, Price and Profit (1865)
The Belgian Massacres (1869)
The Civil War in France (1871)
Critique of the Gotha Program (1875)
Mathematical manuscripts of Karl Marx (1968)











Marx and Engels



The German Ideology (1845, published 1932)
The Holy Family (1845)
The Communist Manifesto (1848)
The Civil War in the United States (1861)
Marx/Engels Collected Works (1975-2004)








Engels



The Condition of the Working Class in England (1845)
The Peasant War in Germany (1850)
Anti-Dühring (1878)
Socialism: Utopian and Scientific (1880)
Dialectics of Nature (1883)
The Origin of the Family, Private Property, and the State (1884)
Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy (1886)
Revolution and Counter-Revolution in Germany (1896, posthumous)








See also



Tendency of the rate of profit to fall
















v
t
e


Marxist phraseology and terminology






Philosophy and politics
(Marxist)



Base and superstructure
Bourgeoisie
Bourgeois nationalism
Bourgeois socialism
Capitalist mode of production
Class struggle
Commodification
Socialist mode of production
Pure communism
Dictatorship of the proletariat
Imperialism
Liquidationism
Lumpenproletariat
Means of labor
Metabolic rift
Petite bourgeoisie
Primitive accumulation of capital
Proletarian internationalism
Proletarian revolution
Revolutionary wave
Scientific socialism
Super-imperialism
Historical materialism
Theoretician
Two Stage Theory
Wage slavery
World revolution
Dialectics








Economics and sociology
(Marxian)



Capital
Accumulation of capital
Capitalist mode of production
Crisis of capitalism
Commodity
Commodity production
Materialism
Means of production
Mode of production
Productive forces
Relations of production
Law of value
Surplus value
Use-value
Exchange value
Value
Socially necessary labour time
Socialization
Production for use
Socialist mode of production
Ruling class
Simple commodity production
Commanding heights of the economy








Marxist-Leninist



Cadre
Central Committee
Democratic centralism
Dual power
Enemy of the people
Foco
General line of the party
New class
Politburo
Political rehabilitation
Popular front
Revolutionary terror
United front
Vanguardism
Social fascism
Socialist accumulation
Real socialism
Revisionism
Soviet democracy
Socialism in one country
Social imperialism
People's democracy








Trotskyist



Deformed workers' state
Degenerated workers' state
Social revolution
New class
Permanent revolution
Bureaucratic collectivism








Maoist



Marxism–Leninism–Maoism
Antagonistic contradiction
Capitalist roader
Four Olds
Mass line
New Democracy
People's war
Revolutionary base area
Struggle session













Authority control



GND: 4037764-7















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Marxism&amp;oldid=692093030"					
				Categories: MarxismCommunismCriticism of religionEconomic ideologiesKarl MarxMaterialismNaturalism (philosophy)Philosophical movementsPhilosophical traditionsPolitical philosophy by politicianSociological paradigmsSocialismSocial theoriesTheories of historyHidden categories: Use British (Oxford) English from January 2014All Wikipedia articles written in British (Oxford) EnglishWikipedia articles needing clarification from October 2015Wikipedia articles needing reorganization from June 2013Commons category with local link same as on WikidataAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from September 2015Use dmy dates from May 2011Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers				
							
		
		
			