


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Neo-Confucianism
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				This article is about Neo-Confucianism of imperial China.  For Japan, see Edo Neo-Confucianism.  For a 20th century movement, see New Confucianism.



This article contains Chinese text. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Chinese characters.




Confucianism







History


Confucius
Mencius
Xunzi
Spring and Autumn Period
State of Lu








Fundamental concepts


Tian
Ren
Yi
Li
Xiao
Zhong








Schools


Neo-Confucianism


New Confucianism


Taigu school

Hermeneutic schools:

Old Texts


New Text Confucianism








Confucianism by country


Confucianism in Indonesia


Korean Confucianism


Japanese Confucianism








Confucian texts
Four Books

Analects
Doctrine of the Mean
Great Learning
Mencius

Five Classics

Classic of Poetry
Book of Documents
Book of Rites
I Ching
Spring and Autumn Annals








Organisation


Temple of Confucius

Confucian churches and sects:

Holy Church of Confucius


Indonesian Confucian Church


Universal Church of the Way and its Virtue


Phoenix churches
Xuanyuanism


Shengdao






Portal Confucianism





v
t
e





Neo-Confucianism (simplified Chinese: 宋明理学; traditional Chinese: 宋明理學; pinyin: Sòng-Míng Lǐxué often shortened to 理學) is a moral, ethical, and metaphysical Chinese philosophy influenced by Confucianism, and originated with Han Yu and Li Ao (772-841) in the Tang Dynasty, and became prominent during the Song and Ming dynasties.
Neo-Confucianism was an attempt to create a more rationalist and secular form of Confucianism by rejecting superstitious and mystical elements of Taoism and Buddhism that had influenced Confucianism during and after the Han Dynasty.[1] Although the Neo-Confucianists were critical of Taoism and Buddhism,[2] the two did have an influence on the philosophy, and the Neo-Confucianists borrowed terms and concepts from both. However, unlike the Buddhists and Taoists, who saw metaphysics as a catalyst for spiritual development, religious enlightenment, and immortality, the Neo-Confucianists used metaphysics as a guide for developing a rationalist ethical philosophy.[3]



Contents


1 Origins
2 Philosophy
3 Schools

3.1 Two-school model vs. three-school model
3.2 Cheng-Zhu school
3.3 Lu–Wang school


4 Neo-Confucianism in Korea
5 Bureaucratic examinations
6 Confucian canon
7 New Confucianism
8 Prominent neo-Confucian scholars

8.1 China
8.2 Korea
8.3 Japan
8.4 Vietnam


9 Notes
10 References
11 External links



Origins[edit]




Bronze statue of Zhou Dunyi(周敦颐) in White Deer Grotto Academy(白鹿洞書院)


Neo-Confucianism has its origins in the Tang Dynasty; the Confucianist scholars Han Yu and Li Ao are seen as forbears of the Neo-Confucianists of the Song Dynasty.[2] The Song Dynasty philosopher Zhou Dunyi (1017–1073) is seen as the first true "pioneer" of Neo-Confucianism, using Daoist metaphysics as a framework for his ethical philosophy.[3] Neo-Confucianism developed both as a renaissance of traditional Confucian ideas, and as a reaction to the ideas of Buddhism and religious Daoism. Although the Neo-Confucianists denounced Buddhist metaphysics, Neo-Confucianism did borrow Daoist and Buddhist terminology and concepts.[2]
One of the most important exponents of Neo-Confucianism was Zhu Xi (1130–1200). He was a rather prolific writer, maintaining and defending his Confucian beliefs of social harmony and proper personal conduct. One of his most remembered was the book Family Rituals, where he provided detailed advice on how to conduct weddings, funerals, family ceremonies, and the veneration of ancestors. Buddhist thought soon attracted him, and he began to argue in Confucian style for the Buddhist observance of high moral standards. He also believed that it was important to practical affairs that one should engage in both academic and philosophical pursuits, although his writings are concentrated more on issues of theoretical (as opposed to practical) significance. It is reputed that he wrote many essays attempting to explain how his ideas were not Buddhist or Taoist, and included some heated denunciations of Buddhism and Taoism.
After Zhu Xi, Wang Yangming (1472–1529) is commonly regarded as the most important Neo-Confucian thinker. Wang's interpretation of Confucianism denied the rationalist dualism of Zhu's orthodox philosophy.
There were many competing views within the Neo-Confucian community, but overall, a system emerged that resembled both Buddhist and Taoist (Daoist) thought of the time and some of the ideas expressed in the I Ching (Book of Changes) as well as other yin yang theories associated with the Taiji symbol (Taijitu). A well known Neo-Confucian motif is paintings of Confucius, Buddha, and Lao Tzu all drinking out of the same vinegar jar, paintings associated with the slogan "The three teachings are one!"
While Neo-Confucianism incorporated Buddhist and Taoist ideas, many Neo-Confucianists strongly oppose Buddhism and Taoism. Indeed, they rejected the Buddhist and Taoist religions. One of Han Yu's most famous essays decries the worship of Buddhist relics. Nonetheless, Neo-Confucian writings adapted Buddhist thoughts and beliefs to the Confucian interest. In China Neo-Confucianism was an officially-recognized creed from its development during the Song dynasty until the early twentieth century, and lands in the sphere of Song China (Vietnam and Japan) were all deeply influenced by Neo-Confucianism for more than half a millennium.
Philosophy[edit]
Neo-Confucianism is a social and ethical philosophy using metaphysical ideas, some borrowed from Taoism, as its framework. The philosophy can be characterized as humanistic and rationalistic, with the belief that the universe could be understood through human reason, and that it was up to humanity to create a harmonious relationship between the universe and the individual.[4]
The rationalism of Neo-Confucianism is in contrast to the mysticism of the previously dominant Chan Buddhism. Unlike the Buddhists, the Neo-Confucians believed that reality existed, and could be understood by humankind, even if the interpretations of reality were slightly different depending on the school of Neo-Confucianism.[4]

But the spirit of Neo-Confucian rationalism is diametrically opposed to that of Buddhist mysticism. Whereas Buddhism insisted on the unreality of things, Neo-Confucianism stressed their reality. Buddhism and Taoism asserted that existence came out of, and returned to, non-existence; Neo-Confucianism regarded reality as a gradual realization of the Great Ultimate... Buddhists, and to some degree, Taoists as well, relied on meditation and insight to achieve supreme reason; the Neo-Confucianists chose to follow Reason.[5]

The importance of li in Neo-Confucianism gave the movement its Chinese name, literally "The study of Li."
Schools[edit]
Neo-Confucianism was a heterogeneous philosophical tradition, and is generally categorized into two different schools.
Two-school model vs. three-school model[edit]
In medieval China, the mainstream of Neo-Confucian thought, dubbed the "Tao school", had long categorized a thinker named Lu Jiuyuan among the unorthodox, non-Confucian writers. However, in the 15th century, the esteemed philosopher Wang Yangming took sides with Lu and critiqued some of the foundations of the Tao school, albeit not rejecting the school entirely.[6] Objections arose to Yangming's philosophy within his lifetime, and shortly after his death, Chen Jian (1497-1567) grouped Wang together with Lu as unorthodox writers, dividing Neo-Confucianism into two schools.[7] As a result, Neo-Confucianism today is generally categorized into two different schools of thought. The school that remained dominant throughout the medieval and early modern periods is called the Cheng-Zhu school for the esteem it places in Cheng Yi, Cheng Hao, and Zhu Xi. The less dominant, opposing school was the Lu–Wang school, based on its esteem for Lu Jiuyuan and Wang Yangming.
In contrast to this two-branch model, the New Confucian Mou Zongsan argues that there existed a third branch of learning, the Hu-Liu school, based on the teachings of Hu Hong (Hu Wufeng, 1106–61) and Liu Zongzhou (Liu Jishan, 1578–1645). The significance of this third branch, according to Mou, was that they represented the direct lineage of the pioneers of Neo-Confucianism, Zhou Dunyi, Zhang Zai and Cheng Hao. Moreover, this third Hu-Liu school and the second Lu–Wang school, combined, form the true mainstream of Neo-Confucianism instead of the Cheng-Zhu school. The mainstream represented a return to the teachings of Confucius, Mengzi, the Doctrine of the Mean and the Commentaries of the Book of Changes. The Cheng-Zhu school was therefore only a minority branch based on the Great Learning and mistakenly emphasized intellectual studies over the study of sagehood.[8]
Cheng-Zhu school[edit]
Main article: Cheng-Zhu school
Zhu Xi's formulation of the Neo-Confucian world view is as follows. He believed that the Tao (Chinese: 道; pinyin: dào; literally: "way") of Tian (Chinese: 天; pinyin: tiān; literally: "heaven") is expressed in principle or li (Chinese: 理; pinyin: lǐ), but that it is sheathed in matter or qi (Chinese: 氣; pinyin: qì). In this, his system is based on Buddhist systems of the time that divided things into principle (again, li), and function (Chinese: 事; pinyin: shì). In the Neo-Confucian formulation, li in itself is pure and almost-perfect, but with the addition of qi, base emotions and conflicts arise. Human nature is originally good, the Neo-Confucians argued (following Mencius), but not pure unless action is taken to purify it. The imperative is then to purify one's li. However, in contrast to Buddhists and Taoists, neo-Confucians did not believe in an external world unconnected with the world of matter. In addition, Neo-Confucians in general rejected the idea of reincarnation and the associated idea of karma.
Different Neo-Confucians had differing ideas for how to do so. Zhu Xi believed in gewu (Chinese: 格物; pinyin: géwù), the Investigation of Things, essentially an academic form of observational science, based on the idea that li lies within the world.
Lu–Wang school[edit]
Main article: Lu–Wang school
Wang Yangming (Wang Shouren), probably the second most influential Neo-Confucian, came to another conclusion: namely, that if li is in all things, and li is in one's heart-mind, there is no better place to seek than within oneself. His preferred method of doing so was jingzuo (Chinese: 靜坐; pinyin: jìngzuò; literally: "quiet sitting"), a practice that strongly resembles zazen or Chan (Zen) meditation. Wang Yangming developed the idea of innate knowing, arguing that every person knows from birth the difference between good and evil. Such knowledge is intuitive and not rational. These revolutionizing ideas of Wang Yangming would later inspire prominent Japanese thinkers like Motoori Norinaga, who argued that because of the Shinto deities, Japanese people alone had the intuitive ability to distinguish good and evil without complex rationalization. Wang Yangming's school of thought (Ōyōmei-gaku in Japanese) also provided, in part, an ideological basis for some samurai who sought to pursue action based on intuition rather than scholasticism. As such, it also provided an intellectual foundation for the radical political actions of low ranking samurai in the decades prior to the Meiji Ishin (1868), in which the Tokugawa authority (1600–1868) was overthrown.
Neo-Confucianism in Korea[edit]





Part of a series on the


Culture of Korea


History




People


Demographics of South Korea&#160;/ Demographics of North Korea
Diaspora
South Korean nationality law&#160;/ Nationality Law(DPRK)








Languages


History
Dialects
North-South differences
Phonology
Grammar
Honorifics
Hangul








Traditions


Philosophy
Etiquette
Marriage
Funerals
Tea ceremony
Masks
Kisaeng
Hanjeungmak&#160;/ Jjimjilbang
Court music
Clothing








Mythology and folklore


Mythology
folklore








Cuisine


Gimbap
Patbingsu
Bibimbap
Seolleongtang
Kimchi
Korean fried chicken
Tteok
Banchan
Gochujang
Doenjang
Anju
Makgeolli
Soju








Festivals


Korean New Year
National Liberation Day
Chuseok








Religion


Shamanism
Taoism
Buddhism
Neo-Confucianism
Cheondoism
Christianity
Unification Church








Art


Calligraphy
Buddhist art
Paintings
Flower arrangements
Gardens
Jade carving
Knotting
Pottery and porcelain








Literature


Hyangga
Sijo
Chinese-language literature
Sinsoseol
North Korean literature&#160;/ South Korean literature
Manhwa
Poetry








Music and performing arts


Music
Performing&#160;arts








Media


Cinema
Internet censorship&#160;/ Internet censorship in North Korea
Cinema of South Korea&#160;/ Cinema of North Korea
Music of South Korea&#160;/ Music of North Korea
Chosun Ilbo&#160;/ Donga Ilbo&#160;/ JoongAng Ilbo&#160;/ Hankook Ilbo&#160;/ Kyunghyang Shinmun&#160;/ The Hankyoreh
KBS1&#160;/ KBS2&#160;/ MBC&#160;/ EBS&#160;/ SBS
Nate&#160;/ Naver&#160;/ Daum&#160;/ Cyworld
Propaganda
K-pop&#160;/ K-drama








Sport


Martial arts
Viedo games&#160;/ Esports








Monuments


World Heritage Sites
Architecture








Symbols


Flag
Coat of arms








Organisations


Ministry of Culture, Sports and Tourism
List of museums in North Korea









 Korea  portal







v
t
e





Further information: Korean Confucianism
Further information: Political factions in Joseon Dynasty
In Joseon Korea, neo-Confucianism was established as the state ideology. Neo-Confucianism was introduced to Korea by An Hyang during Goryeo dynasty (Buddhism was the dominant religion and affected most ideologies of that era). At the time that An Hyang introduced neo-Confucianism, the Goryeo dynasty was in the last century of its existence and influenced by the Mongol Yuan dynasty.
Many Korean scholars visited China during the Yuan dynasty and An Hyang was among them. In 1286, he happened to read a book of Zhu Xi in Yanjing. He was so moved by this book that he transcribed this book in its entirety and came back to Korea with his transcribed copy. It greatly inspired Korean intellectuals at the time and many, predominantly from the middle class and disillusioned with the excesses of organized religion (in the form of Buddhism) and the old nobility, embraced neo-Confucianism. The newly rising neo-Confucian intellectuals were leading groups aimed at the overthrow of the old (and increasingly foreign-influenced) Goryeo dynasty.




Portrait of Jo Gwang-jo


After the fall of the Goryeo dynasty and the establishment of the Joseon Dynasty by Yi Song-gye in 1392 AD, neo-Confucianism was installed as the new dynasty's state ideology. Buddhism, and organized religion in general was considered poisonous to the neo-Confucian order. Buddhism was accordingly restricted and occasionally persecuted by the new dynasty. As neo-Confucianism encouraged education, there were a number of neo-Confucian schools (서원 seowon and 향교 hyanggyo) founded throughout the country. Such schools produced many neo-Confucian scholars, including individuals such as Jo Gwang-jo (조광조, 趙光祖; 1482–1520), Yi Hwang (이황, 李滉; pen name Toegye 퇴계, 退溪; 1501–1570) and Yi I (이이, 李珥; 1536–1584).
In the early 16th century, Jo Gwang-jo attempted to transform Joseon into the ideal neo-Confucian society with a series of radical reforms until he was executed in 1520. Despite the failure of his attempted reforms, neo-Confucianism soon assumed an even greater role in the Joseon Dynasty. Soon Korean neo-Confucian scholars, no longer content to only to read and remember the Chinese original precepts, began to develop new neo-Confucian theories. Yi Hwang and Yi I were the most prominent of these new theorists. Yi Hwang's most prominent disciples were Kim Hak-pong （鹤峰 1538–1593), Yu Seong-ryong (柳成龍 1542–1607）and Jeong Gu (한강 정구, 寒岡 鄭逑, 1543—1620), known as the "three heroes". These were followed by a second generation of scholars which included Jang Hyungwang (轩张显光, 1554—1637) and Jang Heung-Hyo (敬堂张兴孝, 1564—1633), and by a third generation (including Heo Mok, Yun Hyu, Yun Seon-do, Song Si-yeol) which brought the school into the 18th century [9]
But neo-Confucianism in the Joseon Dynasty became so dogmatic in a relatively rapid time that it prevented much needed socio-economic development and change, and led to internal divisions and criticism of many new theories, regardless of their popular appeal. For instance, Wang Yangming's theories, which were popular in the Chinese Ming Dynasty, were regarded as heresy and severely condemned by Korean neo-Confucianists. Furthermore, any annotations on Confucian canon which are different from Zhu Xi were excluded. During the Joseon Dynasty, the newly emerging ruling class, called Sarim(사림, 士林), also became divided into political factions according to their diversity of neo-Confucian views on politics. There were two large factions and many subfactions.
During the Japanese invasions of Korea (1592–1598), many Korean neo-Confucian books and scholars were taken to Japan. They influenced Japanese scholars such as Fujiwara Seika and affected the development of Japanese neo-Confucianism.
Bureaucratic examinations[edit]
Neo-Confucianism became the interpretation of Confucianism whose mastery was necessary to pass the bureaucratic examinations by the Ming, and continued in this way through the Qing dynasty until the end of the Imperial examination system in 1905. However, many scholars such as Benjamin Elman have questioned the degree to which their role as the orthodox interpretation in state examinations reflects the degree to which both the bureaucrats and Chinese gentry actually believed those interpretations, and point out that there were very active schools such as Han learning which offered competing interpretations of Confucianism.
The competing school of Confucianism was called the Evidential School or Han Learning and argued that Neo-Confucianism had caused the teachings of Confucianism to be hopelessly contaminated with Buddhist thinking. This school also criticized Neo-Confucianism for being overly concerned with empty philosophical speculation that was unconnected with reality.
Confucian canon[edit]
The Confucian canon as it exists today was essentially compiled by Zhu Xi. Zhu codified the canon of Four Books (the Great Learning, the Doctrine of the Mean, the Analects of Confucius, and the Mencius) which in the subsequent Ming and Qing Dynasties were made the core of the official curriculum for the civil service examinations.
New Confucianism[edit]
In the 1920s, New Confucianism, also known as Modern Neo-Confucianism, started developing and absorbed the Western learning to seek a way to modernize Chinese culture based on the traditional Confucianism. It centers on four topics: The modern transformation of Chinese culture; Humanistic spirit of Chinese culture; Religious connotation in Chinese culture; Intuitive way of thinking, to go beyond the logic and to wipe out the concept of exclusion analysis. Adhering to the traditional Confucianism and the Neo-Confucianism, the Modern Neo-Confucianism contributes the nation's emerging from the predicament faced by the ancient Chinese traditional culture in the process of modernization; Furthermore, it also promotes the world culture of industrial civilization rather than the traditional personal senses.[10]
Prominent neo-Confucian scholars[edit]
China[edit]

Cheng Yi and Cheng Hao
Lu Xiangshan aka Lu Jiuyuan (1139–1193)
Ouyang Xiu (1007–1072)
Shao Yong (1011–1077)
Su Shi, aka Su Dongpo (1037–1101)
Wang Yangming aka Wang Shouren
Ye Shi (1150–1223)
Zhang Sanfeng[citation needed]
Zhang Shi (1133–1180)
Zhang Zai
Zhou Dunyi (1017–1073)
Zhu Xi (1130–1200)

Korea[edit]
See also: Korean Confucianism

An Hyang (1243–1306)
Yi Saek (1328–1396)
Jeong Mong-ju (1337–1392)
Jeong Dojeon (1342–1398)
Gil Jae (1353–1419)
Ha Ryun
Gwon Geun
Jeong Inji (1396–1478)
Kim Suk-ja
Kim Jong-jik (1431–1492)
Nam Hyo-on
Kim Goil-pil
Jo Gwang-jo (1482–1519)
Seo Gyeongdeok
Yi Eon-jeok
Yi Hwang (Pen name Toegye) (1501–1570)
Jo Sik (1501–1572)
Ryu Seongryong
Yi Hang
Kim Inhu
Ki Daeseung (1527-1572)
Song Ik-pil (1534-1599)
Seong Hon (1535–1598)
Yi I (Pen name Yulgok) (1536–1584)
Kim Jangsaeng (1548-1631)
Song Si-yeol (1607–1689)
Yi Gan (1677-1727)
Yi Ik (1681-1763)
Han Wonjin (1682-1751)
Hong Daeyong (1731-1783)
Park Jiwon (1737-1805)
Park Jega (1750-1815)
Jeong Yak-yong (1762-1836)

Japan[edit]
See also: Neo-Confucianism in Japan

Fujiwara Seika (1561–1619)
Hayashi Razan (1583–1657)
Nakae Tōju (1608–1648)
Yamazaki Ansai (1619–1682)
Kumazawa Banzan (1619–1691)
Yamaga Sokō (1622–1685)
Itō Jinsai (1627–1705)
Kaibara Ekken (aka Ekiken) (1630–1714)
Arai Hakuseki (1657–1725)
Ogyū Sorai (1666–1728)
Nakai Chikuzan (1730–1804)
Ōshio Heihachirō (1793–1837)

Vietnam[edit]

Chu Văn An
Lê Quý Đôn
Nguyễn Khuyến
Phan Đình Phùng
Tự Đức

Notes[edit]





This article includes a list of references, but its sources remain unclear because it has insufficient inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (August 2012)




^ Blocker, H. Gene; Starling, Christopher L. (2001). Japanese Philosophy. SUNY Press. p.&#160;64.&#160;
^ a b c Huang 1999, p.&#160;5.
^ a b Chan 2002, p.&#160;460.
^ a b Craig 1998, p.&#160;552.
^ Chan 1946, p.&#160;268
^ Wilson, Thomas A. (1995). Genealogy of the way: the construction and uses of the Confucian tradition in late imperial China. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford Univ. Press. pp.&#160;168–9. ISBN&#160;9780804724258.&#160;
^ Bary, Wm. Theodore de (1989). The message of the mind in Neo-Confucianism. New York: Columbia University Press. pp.&#160;94–5. ISBN&#160;0231068085.&#160;
^ Yao, Xinzhong (2000). An Introduction to Confucianism. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p.&#160;259. ISBN&#160;978-0-521-64430-3.&#160;
^ 【李甦平】 Lisu Ping, 论韩国儒学的特点和精神 "On the characteristics and spirit of Korean Confucianism", 《孔子研究》2008年1期 (Confucius Studies 2008.1). See also List of Korean philosophers.
^ http://baike.baidu.com/view/2053255.htm


References[edit]

Chan, Wing-tsit, A Sourcebook of Chinese Philosophy (Princeton, Princeton University Press, 1963)
Chan, Wing-tsit, trans. Instructions for Practical Living and Other Neo-Confucian Writings by Wang Yang-ming. New York: Columbia University Press, 1963.
Chan, Wing-tsit (1946), China. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.
Craig, Edward (1998), Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Volume 7, Taylor &amp; Francis, ISBN&#160;978-0-415-07310-3&#160;
Daehwan, Noh. "The Eclectic Development of Neo-Confucianism and Statecraft from the 18th to the 19th Century," Korea Journal (Winter 2003).
Huang, Siu-chi. Essentials of Neo-Confucianism: Eight Major Philosophers of the Song and Ming Periods Westport: Greenwood Press, 1999.
Tu Weiming. Neo-Confucian Thought in Action: Wang Yang-ming’s Youth (1472–1509). Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1976.
Tu Weiming. Confucian Thought: Selfhood As Creative Transformation. New York: State University of New York Press, 1985.

External links[edit]

Neo-Confucian Philosophy entry in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy
(English) (Chinese)Writings of the Orthodox School from the Song Dynasty









v
t
e


Chinese philosophy






Schools of Thought



Agriculturalism
Confucianism
Taoism
Han learning
Huang-Lao
Legalism
Mohism
Neo-Confucianism
Neo-Taoism
New Confucianism
Chinese Marxist Philosophy
School of Diplomacy
School of Names
School of Naturalists
Yangism

See also: Hundred Schools of Thought







Philosophers



Confucius
Gaozi
Gongsun Long
Han Feizi
Huang Zongxi
Jin Yuelin
Laozi
Li Si
Lu Jiuyuan
Mencius
Mozi
Shang Yang
Su Qin
Sunzi
Tu Weiming
Wang Fuzhi
Wang Yangming
Xu Xing
Xunzi
Yang Zhu
Zhang Yi
Zhu Xi
Zhuangzi
Zou Yan








Concepts



Dào: Way
Dé: Virtue
Fǎ: Model
Jiān ài: Universal Love
Jing: Reverence
Jìngzuo: Meditation
Lĭ: Ritual propriety
Li: Law
Mìng: Mandate or fate
Qì: Energy
Qing: Essence
Rén: Humaneness
Shén: Spirit
Si: Reflection
Tǐ: Substance
Tiān: Divine force
Wú wéi: Nonaction
Xiào: Filial piety
Xin: Disposition or intuition
Xing: Human nature
Yì: Righteousness
Yīnyáng: Interdependent opposites
Yòng: Function
Zhèngmíng: Rectification of names
Zhì: Intention or will; Wisdom or cleverness
Zìrán: Self-so or natural








Topics



Aesthetics
Epistemology
Ethics (Role ethics
State consequentialism)
Logic
Metaphysics
Political philosophy
Social philosophy
















v
t
e


Social and political philosophy






Philosophers



Alinsky
Aristotle
Augustine
Aurobindo
Aquinas
Averroes
Azurmendi
Badiou
Bakunin
Baudrillard
Benoist
Bentham
Berlin
Bonald
Bosanquet
Burke
Camus
Chanakya
Chomsky
Cicero
Comte
Confucius
Debord
Đilas
Durkheim
Engels
Foucault
Fourier
Gandhi
Gehlen
Gentile
Al-Ghazali
Gramsci
Grotius
Habermas
Han Fei
Hobbes
Hume
Kant
Kirk
Kropotkin
Le Bon
Le Play
Leibniz
Locke
Luxemburg
Machiavelli
Maistre
Malebranche
Marcuse
Maritain
Marsilius
Marx
Mencius
Michels
Mill
Montesquieu
Möser
Mozi
Muhammad
Negri
Nietzsche
Nozick
Oakeshott
Ortega
Pareto
Plamenatz
Plato
Popper
Rand
Rawls
Renan
Rousseau
Royce
Russell
Santayana
Sarkar
Sartre
Schmitt
Searle
Shang
Smith
Sombart
Spann
Spencer
Spirito
Stirner
Strauss
Taine
Taylor
Thoreau
Vivekananda
Walzer
Žižek








Social theories



Vaisheshika
Anarchism
Authoritarianism
Collectivism
Communism
Communitarianism
Conflict theories
Confucianism
Consensus theory
Conservatism
Contractualism
Culturalism
Gandhism
Individualism
Legalism
Liberalism
Libertarianism
Mohism
National liberalism
Social constructionism
Social constructivism
Social Darwinism
Social determinism
Socialism
Utilitarianism








Social concepts



Civil disobedience
Democracy
Four occupations
Justice
Law
Mandate of Heaven
Peace
Property
Revolution
Rights
Social contract
Society
War
more...








Related articles



Jurisprudence
Philosophy and economics
Philosophy of education
Philosophy of history
Philosophy of love
Philosophy of sex
Philosophy of social science
Social epistemology











Category
Portal
Task Force















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Neo-Confucianism&amp;oldid=689516033"					
				Categories: ConfucianismChinese philosophyKorean ConfucianismJapanese philosophyNeo-ConfucianismHidden categories: Articles containing simplified Chinese-language textArticles containing traditional Chinese-language textArticles containing Chinese-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from May 2010Articles lacking in-text citations from August 2012All articles lacking in-text citationsArticles with Chinese-language external links				
							
		
		
			