


		
		
		
			

							
						

			New Confucianism
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				This article is about a movement that emerged in the 20th century.  For a movement developed during the Song and Ming dynasties, see Neo-Confucianism.


Confucianism







History


Confucius
Mencius
Xunzi
Spring and Autumn Period
State of Lu








Fundamental concepts


Tian
Ren
Yi
Li
Xiao
Zhong








Schools


Neo-Confucianism


New Confucianism


Taigu school

Hermeneutic schools:

Old Texts


New Text Confucianism








Confucianism by country


Confucianism in Indonesia


Korean Confucianism


Japanese Confucianism








Confucian texts
Four Books

Analects
Doctrine of the Mean
Great Learning
Mencius

Five Classics

Classic of Poetry
Book of Documents
Book of Rites
I Ching
Spring and Autumn Annals








Organisation


Temple of Confucius

Confucian churches and sects:

Holy Church of Confucius


Indonesian Confucian Church


Universal Church of the Way and its Virtue


Phoenix churches
Xuanyuanism


Shengdao






Portal Confucianism





v
t
e





New Confucianism (Chinese: 新儒家; pinyin: xīn rú jiā; literally: "New Confucianism") is an intellectual movement of Confucianism that began in the early 20th century in Republican China, and further developed in post-Mao era contemporary China. It is deeply influenced by, but not identical with, the Neo-Confucianism of the Song and Ming dynasties. It is a neo-conservative movement of various Chinese traditions and has been regarded to contain religious overtones; it advocates for certain Confucianist elements of society - such social, ecological, and political harmony - to be applied in a contemporary context in synthesis with Western philosophies such as rationalism and humanism.[1] Its philosophies have emerged as a focal point of discussion between Confucian scholars in mainland China, Taiwan, Hong Kong, and the United States.



Contents


1 History
2 Terminology
3 Philosophy

3.1 First Generation

3.1.1 Xiong Shili


3.2 Second Generation

3.2.1 Mou Zongsan




4 New Confucian Manifesto
5 Harmonious Society
6 References



History[edit]
The first generation of New Confucians (1921–1949) came about as a response to the May Fourth movement and its iconoclastic stance against Confucianism. Confucianism was attacked as unscientific and contrary to the progress of a modern China. One notable figure during this time was Xiong Shili, who studied Buddhism in depth in his youth but later sought for a reformation of the Confucian philosophical framework. Borrowing from the school of Wang Yangming, Xiong developed a metaphysical system for the New Confucian movement and believed Chinese learning was superior to Western learning. Another figure, Feng Youlan, following the Neo-Confucian school of Zhu Xi, sought a revival of Chinese philosophy based on modern Western philosophy.
With the start of the communist regime in China in 1949, many of the leading intellectuals left the mainland to Taiwan, Hong Kong, and the United States. Notable figures of this second generation (1950–1979) include individuals like Tang Junyi, Mou Zongsan, and Xu Fuguan, all three students of Xiong Shili. Mou Zongsan, in particular, was well-versed in the ancient Chinese philosophical traditions and argued that Kant was, in many ways, a Western Confucius. These three, together with Zhang Junmai, issued in 1958 the New Confucian Manifesto consolidating their beliefs and drawing attention to their philosophical movement.
In the last few decades, the most vocal representatives of the New Confucian movement have been the students of Mou Zongsan. Perhaps one of the most prominent, Tu Wei-ming, has promoted the idea that Confucianism saw three epochs: the classical pre-Han Confucianism, Song-Ming Neo-Confucianism, and New Confucianism. This third generation has been instrumental in grounding Confucianism in non-Asian contexts, as can be seen through Boston Confucianism and other Western Confucians like Wm. Theodore de Bary.[2]
Terminology[edit]
Whereas the English rendering of the movement is generally New Confucianism, there is a variety of translations in the Chinese. Many Taiwan-based writers will tend to use the term Contemporary New Confucianism (simplified Chinese: 当代新儒家; traditional Chinese: 當代新儒家; pinyin: dāng dài xīn rú jiā or simplified Chinese: 当代新儒学; traditional Chinese: 當代新儒學; pinyin: dāng dài xīn rú xué) to emphasize the movement's continuity with the Song-Ming Neo-Confucianism. However, many within Mainland China prefer the term Modern New Confucianism (simplified Chinese: 现代新儒家; traditional Chinese: 現代新儒家; pinyin: xiàn dài xīn rú jiā or simplified Chinese: 现代新儒学; traditional Chinese: 現代新儒學; pinyin: xiàn dài xīn rú xué) with an emphasis on the period of modernization after May Fourth.[1]
Philosophy[edit]
New Confucianism is a school of Chinese philosophy influenced by Confucianism. After the events of the May Fourth Movement in 1919, in which Confucianism was blamed for China’s weakness and decline in the face of Western aggression, a major Chinese philosopher of the time, Xiong Shili (1885-1968), established and re-constructed Confucianism as a response.[3] New Confucianism is a political, ethical, and social philosophy using metaphysical ideas from both Western Philosophy and Eastern. It is categorized into three generations, starting with Xiong Shili and Feng Youlan as the first generation philosophers who set the basis. The second generation consists of Xiong's students, Mou Zongsan, Tang Junyi, and Xu Fuguan. The third generation is not determined via figures unlike previous generation but New Confucianism from 1980. Xiong and his follower's attempts to reconstruct Confucianism gave New Confucianism its Chinese name, xīn rú jiā.
First Generation[edit]
Xiong Shili[edit]
Main article: Xiong Shili
Xiong Shili (1885-1968) is widely regarded as the thinker who laid down the basis for the revival of Confucianism as New Confucianism in the twentieth century.[3] Much of the basis of New Confucianism comes from Xiong's New Doctrine. Proficient in Buddhist classics,[3] Xiong argued that classics of Eastern Philosophy must be integrated in contemporary Chinese philosophy for more solidity.[3] Xiong recognized Buddhism's dark view of the human nature, but also recognized that there are brighter sides to the human nature. For this very reason, he rejected the Buddhist learning of "daily decrease" which dictated that the practice to suppress one's dark nature was necessary.[3] He arrived to such conclusion after his examination of Classic Confucianism. While Confucianism also examines the negative aspect of human nature, thus the necessity to habituate oneself with ritual, the purpose of the practice of ritual and attainment of ren is not focused on restricting the darker aspects of human nature but developing the "fundamental goodness", i.e., the duan of human beings that Mencius writes of.
In order to incorporate Buddhism with Confucianism as a part of his contemporary Chinese philosophy encompassing various Eastern philosophies, Xiong proposed a correction of Buddhist learning of daily decrease. Xiong understood the basis behind "daily decrease" to be Buddhism's metaphysical belief of the "unbridgeable split between an absolute unchanging reality (Dharma-nature or fa-xing), and a constantly changing and conditional phenomenal world (Dharma-characters or fa-xing) (Xiong, 1994, pp. 69-77, 84-5, 111-12).[3] Jiyuan Yu, in his examination of Xiong, describes this as the "Separation theory." Meanwhile, Xiong's theory behind correcting the "daily decrease" rested heavily upon what Yu describes as the "Sameness Thesis." [3] Xiong, in his New Doctrine, calls this Dharma-nature ti and Dharma-characters yong. Xiong argues that unlike how Buddhism perceives these two worlds, these two worlds are a unity. Xiong's reasoning is shown in his 1985 version of New Doctrine.
"If they are separable, function will differ from original reality and exist independently, and in that way function will have its own original reality. We should not seek for some entity outside function and name it original reality. Furthermore, if original reality exists independent of function, it is a useless reality. In that case, if it is not a dead thing, it must be a dispensable thing. Thinking back and forth, I believe that original reality and function are not separable. This should be beyond doubt." (Xiong, 1985, p.&#160;434)
His view on this unity can be seen in his earlier works such as New Treatise on the Uniqueness of Consciousness. In New Treatise, he argues that the Reality is equal to the Mind. This Mind does not refer to one's individual mind but the universal presence in which there is a universality of mind amongst all beings, thus being the reality. Xiong incorporates the Confucian and Buddhist concept of self-mastery of one's desires, by arguing that failing to control one's desires and individual mind, one will be "a heap of dead matter". Xiong's view is that one should perceive objects of the world internally, since what is external is ultimately also internal and that they are one as both Mind and Reality.
Second Generation[edit]
Mou Zongsan[edit]
Main article: Mou Zongsan
Mou Zongsan is considered to be one of the more influential second generation philosophers. Mou's general philosophy on metaphysics stays in line with Xiong's. However, he embellishes upon Xiong's theories on Mind and Reality to apply it to a more socio-political aspect. Mou claims universality exists in all philosophical truth. Which suggests that political and social theories of the world can be connected in essence. Mou argues in his lectures that particularity exists because of the different systems that are established in different cultures. However, these different systems, after a series of philosophical reasoning and interpretation, arrive at a same philosophical truth. He believes that our physical limitations, i.e., our physical being, create these different systems and different cultures. However, being that our mind, i.e., form, is still manifested and exists within this physical world, we should not let these limitations prevent us from practicing philosophical reasoning.
Mou's political philosophy is more clearly showed as he discusses the historical necessity that follows the particularity of human beings. Different nations and different systems' existence can be explained mainly because of this historical necessity. Mou asserts that historical necessity exists neither because of logical necessity or metaphysical necessity but because of what he calls a development of the spirit, what he also labels as dialectical necessity. He claims that history however should be perceived and interpreted as something that has both historical necessity i.e., also dialectical necessity, and moral necessity. For there are two types of judgment: moral and historical. Mou states, that Greek or Chinese, these basic necessities behind history and fundamental human character are the same, and therefore universality in philosophical truth exists even behind politics and history.
New Confucian Manifesto[edit]
Main article: A Manifesto for a Re-appraisal of Sinology and Reconstruction of Chinese Culture
The term itself was first used as early as 1963 (in two articles in the Hong Kong journal Rensheng). However, it did not come into common use until the late 1970s. New Confucianism is often associated with the essay, "A Manifesto on Chinese Culture to the World," which was published in 1958 by Tang Junyi, Mou Zongsan, Xu Fuguan and Zhang Junmai. This work is often referred to as the "New Confucian Manifesto," although that phrase never occurs in it. The Manifesto presents a vision of Chinese culture as having a fundamental unity throughout history, of which Confucianism is the highest expression. The particular interpretation of Confucianism given by the Manifesto is deeply influenced by Neo-Confucianism, and in particular the version of Neo-Confucianism most associated with Lu Xiangshan and Wang Yangming (as opposed to that associated with Zhu Xi). In addition, the Manifesto argues that while China must learn from the West modern science and democracy, the West must learn from China (and the Confucian tradition in particular) "a more all-encompassing wisdom."[2]
Harmonious Society[edit]
Main article: Harmonious Society
The concept of a harmonious society (simplified Chinese: 和谐社会; traditional Chinese: 和諧社會; pinyin: héxié shèhuì) dates back to the time of Confucius. As a result, the philosophy has also been characterized as deriving from New Confucianism.[4][5][6][7][8][9] In modern times, it developed into a key feature of President Hu Jintao's signature ideology of the Scientific Development Concept developed in the mid-2000s, being re-introduced by the Hu–Wen Administration during the 2005 National People's Congress.
The philosophy is recognized as a response to the increasing social injustice and inequality emerging in mainland Chinese society as a result of unchecked economic growth, which has led to social conflict. The governing philosophy was therefore shifted around economic growth to overall societal balance and harmony.[10] Along with a moderately prosperous society, it was set to be one of the national goals for the ruling communist party .
The promotion of "Harmonious Society" demonstrated that Hu Jintao's ruling philosophy had departed from that of his predecessors.[11] Near the end of his tenure in 2011, Hu appeared to extend the ideology to an international dimension, with a focus on the international peace and cooperation, which is said to lead to a "harmonious world". The administration of Hu's successor, Xi Jinping, has used the philosophy more sparingly.
Some scholars, notably Yan Xuetong and Daniel A. Bell, advocate the restoration of meritocratic Confucian institutions such as the censorate in China and elsewhere as part of a New Confucian political program.
References[edit]


^ a b Makeham, John, ed. (2003). New Confucianism: A Critical Examination. New York: Palgrave. ISBN&#160;978-1-4039-6140-2.&#160;
^ a b Bresciani, Umberto (2001). Reinventing Confucianism: The New Confucian Movement. Taipei: Taipei Ricci Institute. ISBN&#160;978-957-9390-07-1.&#160;
^ a b c d e f g Yu, Jiyuan (2002). Contemporary Chinese Philosophy. Oxford: Blackwell. pp.&#160;127–146. ISBN&#160;0631217258.&#160;
^ Guo And Guo (15 August 2008). China in Search of a Harmonious Society. Lexington Books. ISBN&#160;978-0-7391-3042-1.&#160;
^ Ruiping Fan (11 March 2010). Reconstructionist Confucianism: Rethinking Morality after the West. Springer Science &amp; Business Media. ISBN&#160;978-90-481-3156-3.&#160;
^ http://www.nytimes.com/2006/09/14/opinion/14iht-edbell.2807200.html?_r=0
^ https://www.koreatimes.co.kr/www/news/opinon/2014/11/171_94973.html
^ http://www.academia.edu/5282393/Modern_Confucianism_and_the_Concept_of_Harmony
^ Arnold, Perris. “Music as Propaganda: Art at the Command of Doctrine in the People's Republic of China.” Ethnomusicology 27, no. 1 (1983): 1–28.
^ "China's Party Leadership Declares New Priority: 'Harmonious Society'". The Washington Post. October 12, 2006. Retrieved 2011-01-20.&#160;
^ Zhong, Wu. “China yearns for Hu's 'harmonious society'.” Asia Times. Last modified October 11, 2006.



Cheng, Chung-Ying; Bunnin, Nicholas, eds. (2002). Contemporary Chinese Philosophy. Malden, MA: Blackwell. ISBN&#160;978-0-631-21725-1.&#160;
"Manifesto For A Reappraisal Of Sinology And The Reconstruction Of Chinese Culture," in De Bary, Wm. Theodore; Lufrano, Richard (2000). Sources of Chinese Tradition. Vol 2. Columbia University Press. pp.&#160;550–555. ISBN&#160;978-0-231-11271-0.&#160;









v
t
e


Philosophy










&#160;
Branches










Traditional



Metaphysics
Epistemology
Logic
Ethics
Aesthetics








Philosophy of



Action
Art

Culture
Design
Music
Film


Being
Business
Dialogue
Education
Environment
Futility
Happiness
Healthcare
History
Human nature
Humor
Language
Literature
Mathematics
Mind

Pain
Psychology


Philosophy
Religion
Science

Physics
Chemistry
Biology
Geography


Sexuality
Social science

Economics
Justice
Law
Politics
Society


Space and time
Sport
Technology

Computer science
Engineering
Information


War


















&#160;
Schools of thought










By era



Ancient
Western

Medieval
Renaissance
Early modern
Modern
Contemporary










Ancient




Chinese



Agriculturalism
Confucianism
Legalism
Logicians
Mohism
Chinese naturalism
Neotaoism
Taoism
Yangism
Zen








Greco-Roman



Aristotelianism
Cynicism
Epicureanism
Hermeneutics
Neoplatonism
Peripatetic
Platonism
Presocratic
Pythagoreanism
Sophism
Stoicism








Indian



Buddhist
Cārvāka
Hindu
Jain








Persian



Mazdakism
Zoroastrianism
Zurvanism











Medieval
9th–16th
century





European



Christian philosophy
Scholasticism
Thomism
Renaissance humanism








East Asian



Korean Confucianism
Edo Neo-Confucianism
Neo-Confucianism








Indian



Navya-Nyāya
Vishishtadvaita
Dvaita








Islamic



Averroism
Avicennism
Persian Illuminationism
Ilm al-Kalam
Sufi








Jewish



Judeo-Islamic











Modern
17th–19th
century





people



Neo-Scholasticism
Cartesianism
Kantianism
Neo-Kantianism
Hegelianism
Marxism








Ideal&#160;/ Material



Idealism
Absolute idealism
Rationalism
Empiricism
Utilitarianism
Pragmatism








Other



Liberalism
Anarchism
Modernism
Phenomenology
Transcendentalism
Existentialism
Kokugaku
New Confucianism











Contemporary
20th–21st
century





Analytic



Analytic feminism
Consequentialism
Experimental philosophy
Internalism and Externalism
Falsificationism
Foundationalism&#160;/ Coherentism
Logical positivism
Legal positivism
Quinean Naturalism
Ordinary language philosophy
Quietism
Rawlsian
Reformed epistemology
Postanalytic philosophy
Contemporary utilitarianism
Neo-Aristotelian
Vienna Circle
Wittgensteinian








Continental



Critical theory
Deconstruction
Existentialism
Feminist
Frankfurt School
Postmodernism
Post-structuralism
Social constructionism
Structuralism








Other



Kyoto School
Objectivism
Russian cosmism
more...





















&#160;
Positions










Aesthetics



Formalism
Institutionalism
Aesthetic response








Ethics



Consequentialism
Deontology
Virtue








Free will



Compatibilism
Determinism
Libertarianism








Metaphysics



Atomism
Dualism
Monism
Naturalism








Epistemology



Constructivism
Empiricism
Idealism
Particularism
Fideism
Rationalism&#160;/ Reasonism
Skepticism
Solipsism








Mind



Behaviorism
Eliminativism
Epiphenomenalism
Functionalism
Objectivism
Subjectivism








Normativity



Absolutism
Particularism
Relativism
Nihilism
Skepticism
Universalism








Ontology



Action
Event
Process








Reality



Anti-realism
Conceptualism
Idealism
Materialism
Naturalism
Nominalism
Realism


















&#160;



Philosophy by region
Philosophy-related lists













By region



African
Ethiopian
Aztec
Native America
Eastern
Chinese
Egyptian
Czech
Indian
Indonesian
Iranian
Japanese
Korean
Vietnam
Pakistani
Western
American
British
Danish
French
German
Greek
Italian
Polish
Romanian
Russian
Slovene








Lists



Outline
Index
Years
Problems
Schools
Glossary
Philosophers
Movements
Publications

















Portal
Category
WikiProject
Changes
















v
t
e


Chinese philosophy






Schools of Thought



Agriculturalism
Confucianism
Taoism
Han learning
Huang-Lao
Legalism
Mohism
Neo-Confucianism
Neo-Taoism
New Confucianism
Chinese Marxist Philosophy
School of Diplomacy
School of Names
School of Naturalists
Yangism

See also: Hundred Schools of Thought







Philosophers



Confucius
Gaozi
Gongsun Long
Han Feizi
Huang Zongxi
Jin Yuelin
Laozi
Li Si
Lu Jiuyuan
Mencius
Mozi
Shang Yang
Su Qin
Sunzi
Tu Weiming
Wang Fuzhi
Wang Yangming
Xu Xing
Xunzi
Yang Zhu
Zhang Yi
Zhu Xi
Zhuangzi
Zou Yan








Concepts



Dào: Way
Dé: Virtue
Fǎ: Model
Jiān ài: Universal Love
Jing: Reverence
Jìngzuo: Meditation
Lĭ: Ritual propriety
Li: Law
Mìng: Mandate or fate
Qì: Energy
Qing: Essence
Rén: Humaneness
Shén: Spirit
Si: Reflection
Tǐ: Substance
Tiān: Divine force
Wú wéi: Nonaction
Xiào: Filial piety
Xin: Disposition or intuition
Xing: Human nature
Yì: Righteousness
Yīnyáng: Interdependent opposites
Yòng: Function
Zhèngmíng: Rectification of names
Zhì: Intention or will; Wisdom or cleverness
Zìrán: Self-so or natural








Topics



Aesthetics
Epistemology
Ethics (Role ethics
State consequentialism)
Logic
Metaphysics
Political philosophy
Social philosophy















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=New_Confucianism&amp;oldid=667766868"					
				Categories: Contemporary Chinese philosophyNew ConfucianismChinese ConfucianistsHidden categories: Articles containing Chinese-language textArticles containing simplified Chinese-language textArticles containing traditional Chinese-language text				
							
		
		
			