


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Nicholas of Cusa
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								  (Redirected from Nicolas of Cusa)
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				"Cusa" and "Cusanus" redirect here. For the lunar crater, see Cusanus (crater). For other uses, see CUSA (disambiguation).


Nicholas of Cusa



Nicholas of Cusa, by Master of the Life of the Virgin



Born
1401
Kues, Electorate of Trier,
Holy Roman Empire


Died
11 August 1464
Todi, Umbria,
Papal States


Other&#160;names
"Nicolaus Chrypffs", "Nicholas of Kues", "Nicolaus Cusanus"





Era
Medieval philosophy, Renaissance philosophy


Region
Western philosophy




Influences


Albertus Magnus, Thomas Aquinas, Bonaventure, Plato, Aristotle, Pythagoreanism, Meister Eckhart, Pseudo-Dionysius, Proclus, Plotinus, Johannes Scottus Eriugena, Ramon Llull








Influenced


Pico della Mirandola, Giordano Bruno, Leibniz, Mário Ferreira dos Santos, Roberto Mangabeira Unger, Karl Jaspers, Harry Mulisch






Nicholas of Kues (1401 – 11 August 1464), also referred to as Nicolaus Cusanus and Nicholas of Cusa, was a German philosopher, theologian, jurist, and astronomer. One of the first German proponents of Renaissance humanism, he made spiritual and political contributions in European history. A notable example of this is his mystical or spiritual writings on "learned ignorance," as well as his participation in power struggles between Rome and the German states of the Holy Roman Empire.
Papal legate to Germany from 1446, he was appointed cardinal for his merits by Pope Nicholas V in 1448 and Prince–Bishop of Brixen two years later. In 1459 he became vicar general in the Papal States.



Contents


1 Life
2 Philosophy
3 Science and mathematics
4 Politics
5 Nicholas and other religions
6 Works

6.1 Modern editions


7 See also
8 References
9 Further reading
10 External links



Life[edit]




Birthplace in Kues


Nicholas of Cusa or Kues (Latinized as "Cusa") was the second of four children of Johan Krebs (or Cryfftz) and Katherina Roemer. His father was "a prosperous boat owner and ferryman."[1] He entered the Faculty of Arts of the Heidelberg University in 1416 as "a cleric of the Diocese of Trier", studying the liberal arts. He seemed to have left Heidelberg soon afterwards, as he received his doctorate in canon law from the University of Padua in 1423. In Padua, he met with the later cardinals Julian Cesarini and Domenico Capranica and became friends with the mathematician Paolo dal Pozzo Toscanelli. Afterwards, he entered the University of Cologne in 1425 as "a doctor of canon law," which he appears to have both taught and practiced there. In Cologne, he made friends with the scholastic theologian Heymeric de Campo.
Following a brief period in Cologne, Nicholas returned to his hometown and became secretary to Otto of Ziegenhain, the Prince–Archbishop of Trier. Otto appointed him canon and dean at the stift of Saint Florinus in Koblenz affiliated with numerous prebends. In 1427 he was sent to Rome as an episcopal delegate. The next year he travelled to Paris to study the writings of Ramon Llull. At the same time he rejected a calling by the newly established University of Leuven. He acquired great knowledge in the research of ancient and mediæval manuscripts as well as in textual criticism and the examination of primary sources. In 1433 he identified the Donation of Constantine as a fake, confirmed by Lorenzo Valla a few years later, and revealed the forgery of the Pseudo-Isidorian Decretals. He made friends with the Austrian astronomer Georg von Peuerbach and advocated a reform of the Julian calendar and the Easter computus, which, however, was not realized until the introduction of the Gregorian calendar in 1582.
After the Archbishop Otto of Trier had died in 1430, Pope Martin V appointed the Speyer bishop Raban of Helmstatt his successor. Nevertheless the Electorate was contested by opposing parties, and in 1432 Nicholas attended the Council of Basel representing the Cologne dean Ulrich von Manderscheid, one of the claimants,[2] who hoped to prevail against the new Pope Eugene IV. Nicholas stressed the determining influence of the cathedral chapter and its given right to participate in the succession policy, which even places the pope under an obligation to seek a consent. His efforts were to no avail in regard to Ulrich's ambitions; however, Nicholas' pleadings earned him a great reputation as an intermediary and diplomat. While present at the council, he wrote his first work, De concordantia catholica (The Catholic Concordance), a synthesis of ideas on church and empire balancing hierarchy with consent. This work remained useful to critics of the papacy long after Nicholas left Basel.[3]
Initially as conciliarist, Nicholas approached to his university friend Cardinal Julian Cesarini, who had tried to reconcile pope and council, combining reform and hierarchic order. Nicholas supported transfer of the council to Italy to meet with the Greeks, who needed aid against the Ottoman Turks. He arbitrated in the conflict with the Hussites. Between the summer of 1437 and early 1438 he was a member of the delegation sent to Constantinople with the pope's approval to bring back the Byzantine emperor and his representatives to the papally summoned Council of Florence of 1439, which was attempting to bring the Eastern Orthodox Church into union with the Western Catholic Church. The reunion achieved at this conference turned out to be very brief. Nicholas would later claim (in the postfaced dedicatory letter of On Learned Ignorance, which Nicholas finished writing on 12 February 1440) that he had chosen to write on this metaphysical topic because of a shipboard experience of divine illumination while on the ship returning from this mission to Constantinople.
After a successful career as a papal envoy, he was made a cardinal by Pope Nicholas V in 1448 or 1449. In 1450 he was both named Bishop of Brixen, in Tyrol, and commissioned as a papal legate to the German lands to spread the message of reform. This latter role, his 'Great Legation' of 1450-2, involved travel of almost 3000 miles, preaching, teaching and reforming. He became known as the Hercules of the Eugenian cause.[4] His local councils enacted reforms, many of which were not successful. Pope Nicholas canceled some of Nicholas' decrees, and the effort to discourage pilgrimages to venerate the bleeding hosts of Wilsnack (the so-called Holy Blood of Wilsnack) was unsuccessful. His work as bishop between 1452 and 1458 – trying to impose reforms and reclaim lost diocesan revenues – was opposed by Duke Sigismund of Austria. The duke imprisoned Nicholas in 1460, for which Pope Pius II excommunicated Sigismund and laid an interdict on his lands. Nicholas of Cusa returned to Rome, but was never able to return to his bishopric.
He died at Todi on 11 August 1464. Sigmund's capitulation in 1464 came a few days after Nicholas's death at Todi in Umbria.[5]




Tomb in S.Pietro in Vincoli, Rome, with the relief "Cardinal Nicholas before St Peter" by Andrea Bregno


Upon his death, Cusanus's body was interred in the church of San Pietro in Vincoli in Rome, probably near the relic of Peter's chains; but it was later lost. His monument, with a sculpted image of the cardinal, remains. Two other tombstones, one medieval and one modern, also are found in the church. In accordance with his wishes, his heart rests within the chapel altar at the Cusanusstift in Kues. To this charitable institution that he had founded he bequeathed his entire inheritance: it still stands, and serves the purpose Nicholas intended for it, as a home for the aged. The Cusanusstift houses also many of his manuscripts.[1]
Nicholas was widely read, and his works were published in the sixteenth century in both Paris and Basel. Sixteenth-century French scholars, including Jacques Lefèvre d'Étaples and Charles de Bovelles, cited him. Lefèvre even edited the Paris 1514 Opera.[6] Nonetheless, there was no Cusan school, and his works were largely unknown until the nineteenth century, though Giordano Bruno quoted him, while some thinkers, like Gottfried Leibniz, were thought to have been influenced by him.[7] Neo-Kantian scholars began studying Nicholas in the nineteenth century, and new editions were begun by the Heidelberger Akademie der Wissenschaften in the 1930s and published by Felix Meiner Verlag [2].[8] In the early twentieth century, he was hailed as the 'first modern thinker',[9] and much debate since then has centered around the question whether he should be seen as essentially a medieval or Renaissance figure. Societies and centers dedicated to Cusanus can be found in Argentina, Japan, Germany, Italy and the United States.
Philosophy[edit]
Nicholas of Cusa was noted for his deeply mystical writings about Christianity, particularly on the possibility of knowing God with the divine human mind — not possible through mere human means — via "learned ignorance". Cusanus wrote of the enfolding of creation in God and their unfolding in creation. He was suspected by some of holding pantheistic beliefs, but his writings were never accused of being heretical.[10] Physicist and philosopher Max Bernhard Weinstein wrote that Nicholas was, to a certain extent, a Pandeist.[11] Nicholas also wrote in De coniecturis about using conjectures or surmises to rise to better understanding of the truth. The individual might rise above mere reason to the vision of the intellect, but the same person might fall back from such vision.
Theologically, Nicholas anticipated the profound implications of Reformed teaching on the harrowing of Hell (Sermon on Psalm 30:11), followed by Pico della Mirandola, who similarly explained the descensus in terms of Christ’s agony.
Science and mathematics[edit]
Most of Nicholas of Cusa's mathematical ideas can be found in his essays, De Docta Ignorantia (Of Learned Ignorance), De Visione Dei (On the Vision of God) and On Conjectures. He also wrote on squaring the circle in his mathematical treatises.
From the Catholic Encyclopedia (1913 edition):

The astronomical views of the cardinal are scattered through his philosophical treatises. They evince complete independence of traditional doctrines, though they are based on symbolism of numbers, on combinations of letters, and on abstract speculations rather than observation. The earth is a star like other stars, is not the centre of the universe, is not at rest, nor are its poles fixed. The celestial bodies are not strictly spherical, nor are their orbits circular. The difference between theory and appearance is explained by relative motion. Had Copernicus been aware of these assertions he would probably have been encouraged by them to publish his own monumental work.[12]

Like Nicole Oresme, Nicholas of Cusa also wrote about the possibility of the plurality of worlds.[13][14][15]
Norman Moore, M.D., tells us in The Fitz-Patrick Lectures of 1905:

In medicine he introduced an improvement which in an altered form has continued in use to this day. This improvement was the counting of the pulse which up to his time had been felt and discussed in many ways but never counted. ...Nicholas of Cusa proposed to compare the rate of pulses by weighing the quantity of water run out of a water clock while the pulse beat one hundred times. ...The manufacture of watches with second-hands has since given us a simpler method of counting, but the merit of introducing this useful kind of observation into clinical medicine belongs to Nicholas of Cusa.[16]

Politics[edit]
In 1433, Nicholas proposed reform of the Holy Roman Empire and a method to elect Holy Roman Emperors. Although it was not adopted by the Church, his method was essentially the same one known today as the Borda count, which is used in many academic institutions, competitions, and even some political jurisdictions, in original form and a number of variations. His proposal preceded Borda's work by over three centuries.[17]
Nicholas' opinions on the Empire, which he hoped to reform and strengthen, were cited against papal claims of temporal power in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. Protestant writers were happy to cite a cardinal against Rome's pretensions. Protestants, however, found his writings against the Hussites wrong. Nicholas seemed to Protestants to give the church too much power to interpret Scripture, instead of treating it as self interpreting and self-sufficient for salvation, the principle of sola scriptura.[18]
Nicholas' own thought on the church changed with his departure from Basel. He tried arguing that the Basel assembly lacked the consent of the church throughout the world, especially the princes. Then he tried arguing that the church was unfolded from Peter (explicatio Petri).[19] This allowed him to support the pope without abandoning ideas of reform. Thus he was able to propose to Pius II reform of the church, beginning with the pope himself. Then it was to spread through the Roman curia and outward throughout Christendom.[20]
Nicolas of Cusa noted that government was founded on the consent of the governed:

Accordingly, since by nature all men are free, any authority by which subjects are prevented from doing evil and their freedom is restrained to doing good through fear from penalties, comes solely from harmony and from the consent of the subjects, whether the authority reside in written law or in the living law which is in the ruler. For if by nature men are equally strong and equally free, the true and settled power of one over the others, the ruler having equal natural power, could be set up only by the choice and consent of the others, just as a law also is set up by consent.[21][22]

Nicholas and other religions[edit]
Shortly after the Fall of Constantinople in 1453, Nicholas wrote De pace fidei, On the Peace of Faith. This visionary work imagined a summit meeting in Heaven of representatives of all nations and religions. Islam and the Hussite movement in Bohemia are represented. The conference agrees that there can be una religio in varietate rituum, a single faith manifested in different rites, as manifested in the eastern and western rites of the Catholic Church. The dialog presupposes the greater accuracy of Christianity but gives respect to other religions.[23] Less irenic but not virulent, is Cusanus' Cribratio Alchorani, Sifting the Koran, a detailed review of the Koran in Latin translation. While the arguments for the superiority of Christianity are still shown in this book, it also credits Judaism and Islam with sharing in the truth at least partially.[24]
Cusanus' attitude toward the Jews was not always mild; on 21 September 1451 he ordered that Jews of Arnhem were to wear badges identifying them as such. The De pace fidei mentions the possibility that the Jews might not embrace the larger union of una religio in varietate rituum, but it dismisses them as politically insignificant. This matches the decrees from Cusanus' legation restricting Jewish activities, restrictions later canceled by Pope Nicholas V.[25]
Works[edit]
Nicholas of Cusa wrote a large number of works, which include:

De auctoritate praesidendi in concilio generali (1434), a proposal for resolving the question of presidency over the deliberations of the Council of Basil.
De concordantia catholica (The Catholic Concordance) (1434), a synthesis of ideas on church and empire balancing hierarchy with consent.[26]
Reparatio kalendarii (1434/5), a plan for reforming the church's calendar.
De Docta ignorantia (On Learned Ignorance) (1440).[27]
De coniecturis (On Conjectures) (1441-2)
Dialogus concludens Amedistarum errorem (1441), an ecclesiological explanation of his papal advocacy.
De Deo abscondito (On the Hidden God) (1444/5)[27]
De quaerendo Deum (On Seeking God) (1445)[27]
De date patris luminum (On the Gift of the Father of Lights (1445/6)
De transmutationibus geometricis
De arithmetricis complementis (1445)
De filiatione Dei (On Divine Sonship)
De genesi (On Genesis)
Apologia doctae ignorantiae (The Defense of Learned Ignorance) (1449), a response to charges of heresy and pantheism by the Heidelberg scholastic theologian John Wenck in a work entitled De ignota litteratura (On Unknown Learning).[28]
Idiota de mente (The Layman on Mind) (1450). This is formed of four dialogues: De Sapientia I-II, De Mente III, and De staticis experimentis IV.
De visione Dei (On the Vision of God) (1453), completed at the request of the monks of the Benedictine abbey at Tegernsee.
De pace fidei (1453), written in response to the news of the fall of Constantinople to the Turks.
De theologicis complementis, in which he pursued his continuing fascination with theological applications of mathematical models.
Caesarea circuli quadratura (1457)
De beryllo (On the Beryl) (1458), a brief epistemological treatise using a beryl or transparent stone as the crucial analogy.
De aequalitate (1459)
De principio (1459)
Reformatio generalis, (1459) a treatise on the general reform of the church, written at the request of Pope Pius II, but generally ignored by the Pope and cardinals.[28]
De possest (1460)
Cribratio Alkorani, a Christocentric evaluation of the Koran written at the request of Pope Pius II, based on the twelfth-century translation of Robert of Ketton.
De non aliud (On the Not-Other) (1462)
De venatione sapientiae (1462)
De ludo globi (1463)
Conpendium (1463)
De mathematicis complementis
De apice theoriae (On the Summit of Contemplation) (1464), his last work.[27]

Modern editions[edit]

Opera omnia, ed. E Hoffmann et al., (Hamburg: Felix Meiner, 1932-2006) [The modern critical edition, begun under the editorship of Ernst Hoffmann and Raymond Klibansky]
Acta Cusana, ed Erich Muethen and Hermann Hallauer, (1976-) [A series designed to publish all extant documents, letters, deeds and other materials in which Cusanus and his activities are mentioned]
On Learned Ignorance, tr. J Hopkins, (Minneapolis, MN: Banning, 1985)
Jasper Hopkins, Nicholas of Cusa's Dialectical Mysticism: Text, Translation, and Interpretive Study of De Visione Dei , (Minneapolis, MN: Banning, 1985)
Dialectical Mysticism, tr. J Hopkins, (Minneapolis, MN: Banning, 1988)
De auctoritate praesidendi in concilio generali, tr. HL Bond et al., Church History 59, (1990), 19-34
De concordantia catholica (The Catholic Concordance), tr. P Sigmund, Cambridge Texts in the History of Political Thought, (Cambridge: CUP, 1991)
A Miscellany on Nicholas of Cusa, tr. J Hopkins, (Minneapolis, MN: Banning, 1994)
On Wisdom and Knowledge, tr. J Hopkins, (Minneapolis, MN: Banning, 1996)
Metaphysical Speculations, tr. J Hopkins, 2 vols, (Minneapolis, MN: Banning, 1997-2000) [Contains translations of: Vol 1: De apice theoria; Vol 2: De Coniecturis and De Ludo Globi]
Bond, H. Lawrence (ed.), Nicholas of Cusa: Selected Spiritual Writings, Classics of Western Spirituality, (New York: Paulist Press, 1997). ISBN 0-8091-3698-8 [Contains translations of On Learned Ignorance, Dialogue on the Hidden God, On Seeking God, On the Vision of God, and On the Summit of Contemplation.]
Hopkins, Jasper (ed.), Complete philosophical and theological treatises of Nicholas of Cusa, 2 vols., (Minneapolis: AJ Banning Press, 2001)
Izbicki, Thomas M., ed., Nicholas of Cusa, Writings on Church and Reform, (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2008).

See also[edit]

List of Roman Catholic scientist-clerics
Università degli Studi Niccolò Cusano
73700 von Kues
Absolute (philosophy)
I know that I know nothing

References[edit]


^ Donald F. Duclow, "Life and Works", in Christopher M. Bellitto, Thomas M. Izbicki, Gerald Christianson (Eds.), Introducing Nicholas of Cusa, A Guide to a Renaissance Man, Paulist Press, 2004, p25
^ Donald F. Duclow, "Life and Works", in Christopher M. Bellitto, Thomas M. Izbicki, Gerald Christianson (Eds.), Introducing Nicholas of Cusa, A Guide to a Renaissance Man, Paulist Press, 2004, pp. 25-56 at pp. 26-29.
^ Paul E. Sigmund, Nicholas of Cusa and Medieval Political Thought, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1963.
^ Duclow, "Life and Works," pp. 29-38.
^ Duclow, "Life and Works," pp. 38-48.
^ The Prefatory Epistles of Jacques Lefévre D'Etaples and Related Texts, ed. Eugene F. Rice, New York: Columbia University Press, 1972; P. M. Sanders, "Charles de Bovelle's Treatise on Regular Polyhedra," Annals of Science 41 (1984): 513-566.
^ Leo Ctana, "The Meaning of contractio in Giordano Bruno's Sigillus sigillorum." In Giordano Bruno: Philosopher of the Renaissance, ed. Hilary Gatti, Aldershot, Ashgate, 2002, pp. 327-341; Thomas P. McTighe, "Nicholas of Cusa and Leibniz's Principle of Indiscernibility," The Modern Schoolman 42 (1964): 33-46.
^ Morimichi Watanabe, "The origins of modern Cusanus research in Germany and the establishment of the Heidelberg Opera Omnia," in Nicholas of Cusa: In Search of God and Wisdom: Essays in Honor of Morimichi Watanabe by the American Cusanus Society, ed. Gerald Christianson and Thomas M. Izbicki (Leiden: Brill, 1991), pp. 17-42.
^ Ernst Cassirer, Individuum und Kosmos in der Philosophie der Renaissance, (1927).
^ Jasper Hopkins, Nicholas of Cusa's Debate with John Wenck: A Translation and an Appraisal of De Ignota Litteratura and Apologia Doctae Ignorantiae , 3rd ed., (Minneapolis, MN: Banning, 1988).
^ Max Bernhard Weinsten, Welt- und Lebensanschauungen, Hervorgegangen aus Religion, Philosophie und Naturerkenntnis ("World and Life Views, Emerging From Religion, Philosophy and Nature") (1910), page 306: "Er ist bis zu einem gewissen Grade Pandeist. Gott schafft die Welt nur aus sich (de nullo alio creat, sed ex se); indem er alles umfaßt, entfaltet er alles aus sich, ohne doch sich dabei irgend zu verändern."
^ Hagen, J. (1911). "Nicholas of Cusa". The Catholic Encyclopedia 11. Robert Appleton Company. Retrieved 2008-10-13.&#160;
^ Dick, Steven J. Plurality of Worlds: The Extraterrestrial Life Debate from Democritus to Kant. Cambridge University Press (June 29, 1984). pgs 35-42.
^ "Medieval &amp; Renaissance Astronomy", Australia Telescope National Facility. Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation. Retrieved from http://www.atnf.csiro.au/outreach/education/senior/cosmicengine/renaissanceastro.html on March 14, 2014.
^ Nikoletseas, Michael M. (2014). Deus Absconditus - The Hidden God. ISBN 978-1495336225.
^ Moore, Norman, M.D. "The Fitz-Patrick Lectures for 1905". The Lancet, Vol.2, Part 2, p.1525 (Oct-Dec, 1905). J. Onwhyn. Retrieved 3 May 2013.&#160;
^ Gunter Hagele and Friedrich Pukelsheim, "The electoral systems of Nicholas of Cusa in the Catholic Concordance and beyond," in The Church, the Councils, &amp; Reform: The Legacy of the Fifteenth Century, ed. Gerald Christianson, Thomas M. Izbicki and Christopher M. Bellitto, Washington, DC: Catholic University of America Press, 2008, pp. 229-249.
^ Thomas M. Izbicki, "'Their Cardinal Cusanus': Nicholas of Cusa in Tudor and Stuart polemics," in Izbicki, Reform, Ecclesiology, and the Christian Life in the Late Middle Ages, Aldershott: Variorum, 2008, IX, pp. 1-30.
^ Izbicki, "The Church," in Introducing Nicholas of Cusa, pp. 113-140.
^ Morimichi Watanabe and Thomas M. Izbicki, “Nicholas of Cusa: A General Reform of the Church,” in Nicholas of Cusa on Christ and the Church: Essays in Memory of Chandler McCuskey Brooks for the American Cusanus Society, ed. Gerald Christianson and Thomas M. Izbicki (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1996), pp. 175-202.
^ De concordantia catholica II xiv
^ George Holland Sabine (1937) A History of Political Theory, p 319, Holt, Rinehart and Winston
^ Thomas P. McTighe, "Nicholas of Cusa's Unity-Metaphysics and the Formula Religio una in rituum varietate", in Gerald Christianson and Thomas M. Izbicki (edd.), Nicholas of Cusa in Search of God and Wisdom: Essays in Honor of Morimichi Watanabe by the American Cusanus Society, ed. Gerald Christianson and Thomas M. Izbicki (Leiden: Brill, 1991), pp. 161-172.
^ Jasper Hopkins, “The Role of Pia Interpretatio in Nicholas of Cusa’s Hermeneutical Approach to the Koran,” in Gregorio Piaia ed., Concordia discors: Studi su Niccolò Cusano e l’umanesimo europeo offerti a Giovanni Santinello Padua: Antenore, 1993, pp. 251-273.
^ Thomas M. Izbicki, "Nicholas of Cusa and the Jews," in Conflict and Reconciliation: Perspectives on Nicholas of Cusa, ed. Inigo Bocken, Leiden: Brill, 2004, 119-130.
^ English translation in De concordantia catholica (The Catholic Concordance), tr. P Sigmund, Cambridge Texts in the History of Political Thought, (Cambridge: CUP, 1991).
^ a b c d English translation in Bond, H. Lawrence (ed.), Nicholas of Cusa: Selected Spiritual Writings, Classics of Western Spirituality, (New York: Paulist Press, 1997).
^ a b Bernard McGinn, The Harvest of Mysticism, (2005), p435.


Further reading[edit]

English language


Beierwaltes, Werner, 'Cusanus and Eriugena', Dionysius, 13 (1989), 115-152.
Bellitto, Christopher, Thoma M Izbicki and Gerald Christianson, eds, Introducing Nicholas of Cusa: A Guide to a Renaissance Man, (New York: Paulist Press, 2004).
Catà, Cesare, 'Perspicere Deum. Nicholas of Cusa and the European Art of Fifteenth Century', Viator 39 no. 1 (Spring 2008).
McGinn, Bernard, The Harvest of Mysticism, (2005), pp432–483.
Meuthen, Erich, Nicholas of Cusa: A Sketch for a Biography. (Washington, DC: The Catholic University of America Press, 2010).
Miller, C. Lee, Reading Cusanus: Metaphor and Dialectic in a Conjectural Universe, (Washington, DC: Catholic University of America Press, 2003).
Yamaki, Kazuhiko, ed., Nicholas of Cusa: A Medieval Thinker for the Modern Age, (Routledge, 2001).


Foreign language


Catà, Cesare, 'La Croce e l'Inconcepibile. Il pensiero di Nicola Cusano tra filosofia e predicazione', EUM, Macerata (2009).
D'Amico, Claudia, and Machetta, J., eds, 'El problema del conocimiento en Nicolás de Cusa: genealogía y proyección', Editorial Biblos, (2004).
Flasch, Kurt, Nikolaus von Kues: Geschichte einer Entwicklung, (Georg Olms Verlag: 1998).
Hoff, Johannes, Kontingenz, Berührung, Überschreitung. Zur philosophischen Propädeutik christlicher Mystik nach Nikolaus von Kues, (Alber: Freiburg/Br. 2007) [Contingency, Tangency, Transgression. A Philosophical Propaedeutics of Christian Mysticism subsequent to Nicholas of Cusa]
Jaspers, Karl, Nikolaus Cusanus, (München, 1964).
Kern, Ralf, Wissenschaftliche Instrumente in ihrer Zeit, 4 Bde. (Köln: Walther Koenig, 2010).
Kijewska, Agnieszka, Roman Majeran, Harald Schwaetzer (еds), Eriugena Cusanus. (Lublin, 2011).

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Nikolaus von Kues.



Works by or about Nicholas of Cusa at Internet Archive
Works by or about Nicolaus Cusanus at Internet Archive
Bernkastel-Kues tribute to Nikolaus von Kues
MacTutor biography, focusing on mathematical achievements
A biography of Nicholas of Cusa
Chronological list of the works of Nicholas of Cusa
History of Modern Philosophy: From Nicolas of Cusa to the Present Time Richard Falckenberg 1893
Catholic Encyclopedia article on Nicholas of Cusa
Website of the Cusanusstift (German)
American Cusanus Society
Cusanus-Portal (DFG-Project by the Institut fuer Cusanus-Forschung and the Center for Digital Humanities at the university of Trier with a digitized version of the ‘Opera Omnia’, the critical edition of the Latin texts from Nicholas of Cusa, published by the Heidelberg Academy of Sciences, with the English translations of Jasper Hopkins, several German translations, a German encyclopedia and an international bibliography)
Jasper Hopkins, Ph.D. has produced English translations with some commentary of much of Nicholas's work. PDF versions are available at this site.
Cusa's Peace of Faith



Catholic Church titles


Preceded&#160;by
Johann Röttel
Bishop of Brixen
1450–1464
Succeeded&#160;by
Georg Golser










v
t
e


Catholic Church







Organizations, papacy, teachings and liturgical traditions






History



Jesus
Twelve Apostles
Early Christianity
History of the papacy
Ecumenical Councils
Missions
Great Schism of East
Crusades
Great Schism of West
Protestant Reformation
Counter-Reformation
Catholic Church by country
Vatican City

index













Hierarchy



Pope
Cardinals
Patriarchs
Major Archbishops
Primates
Metropolitans
Archbishops
Diocesan Bishops
Coadjutor Bishops
Auxiliary Bishops
Titular Bishops
Bishops Emeriti
Priesthood








Theology



Body and Soul
Divine Grace
Dogma
One, Holy, Catholic and Apostolic Church
Original sin
Saints

list


Salvation
Sermon on the Mount
The Ten Commandments
Trinity
Worship








Sacraments



Baptism
Confirmation
Eucharist
Penance
Anointing of the Sick

Last rites


Holy Orders
Matrimony








Mariology



Roman Catholic Mariology
Assumption
History of Mariology
Immaculate Conception
Mariology of the popes
Mariology of the saints
Mother of God
Perpetual Virginity
Veneration








Doctors
of the Church







Gregory the Great
Ambrose
Augustine of Hippo
Jerome
John Chrysostom
Basil of Caesarea
Gregory of Nazianzus
Athanasius of Alexandria
Cyril of Alexandria
Cyril of Jerusalem
John of Damascus
Bede the Venerable
Ephrem the Syrian
Thomas Aquinas
Bonaventure
Anselm of Canterbury
Isidore of Seville
Peter Chrysologus
Leo the Great
Peter Damian
Bernard of Clairvaux
Hilary of Poitiers
Alphonsus Liguori
Francis de Sales
Peter Canisius
John of the Cross
Robert Bellarmine
Albertus Magnus
Anthony of Padua
Lawrence of Brindisi
Teresa of Ávila
Catherine of Siena
Thérèse of Lisieux
John of Ávila
Hildegard of Bingen
Gregory of Narek











Pope Francis



Conclave
Inauguration
Theology
Canonizations
Visits








Preceding popes



Pope Benedict XVI
Pope John Paul II
Pope John Paul I
Pope Paul VI
Pope John XXIII
Pope Pius XII
Pope Pius XI
Pope Benedict XV
Pope Pius X
Pope Leo XIII
(more)








Religious institutes
and similar



Assumptionists
Augustinians
Benedictines
Capuchin Order
Carmelites
Carthusians
Congregations of Holy Cross
Dominican Order
Franciscan orders
Jesuits
Oratory of Saint Philip Neri








International Associations
of the Faithful



International Federation of Catholic Parochial Youth Movements
International Federation of Catholic Universities
International Kolping Society
Schoenstatt Movement
International Union of Catholic Esperantists
Sant'Egidio Community
(more)








Vatican II



Definition of the Church
Dei verbum
Gaudium et spes
Lumen gentium
Nostra aetate
Sacrosanctum Concilium








Particular Churches



Albanian
Armenian
Belarusian
Bulgarian
Chaldean
Coptic
Croatian
Eritrean
Ethiopian
Georgian
Greek
Hungarian
Italo-Albanian
Latin
Macedonian
Maronite
Melkite
Romanian
Russian
Ruthenian
Slovak
Syriac
Syro-Malabar
Syro-Malankara
Ukrainian








Liturgical rites



Alexandrian
Ambrosian
Anglican Use
Antiochian
Armenian
Byzantine
East Syrian
Mozarabic
Ordinariate Use
Roman
Sarum











 Catholicism portal
 Pope portal
















v
t
e


History of the Catholic Church






General



History of the Catholic Church
History of Christianity
History of the Papacy
History of the Roman Curia
Timeline of the Catholic Church
Art in Roman Catholicism
Catholic Ecumenical Councils
Catholic religious institutes
Christian monasticism
Papal States
Role of the Christian Church in civilization








Church beginnings



Jesus
Twelve Apostles
Saint Peter
Paul the Apostle
Saint Stephen
John the Apostle
Great Commission
Council of Jerusalem
Apostolic Age
Apostolic Fathers
Ignatius of Antioch
Irenaeus
Pope Victor I
Tertullian









Constantine to
Pope Gregory I




Constantine the Great and Christianity
Arianism
Archbasilica of St. John Lateran
First Council of Nicaea
Pope Sylvester I
First Council of Constantinople
Biblical canon
Jerome
Vulgate
First Council of Ephesus
Council of Chalcedon
Benedict of Nursia
Second Council of Constantinople
Pope Gregory I
Gregorian chant








Early Middle Ages



Third Council of Constantinople
Saint Boniface
Byzantine Iconoclasm
Second Council of Nicaea
Charlemagne
Pope Leo III
Fourth Council of Constantinople
East–West Schism








High Middle Ages



Pope Urban II
Investiture Controversy
Crusades
First Council of the Lateran
Second Council of the Lateran
Third Council of the Lateran
Pope Innocent III
Latin Empire
Francis of Assisi
Fourth Council of the Lateran
Inquisition
First Council of Lyon
Second Council of Lyon
Bernard of Clairvaux
Thomas Aquinas








Late Middle Ages



Pope Boniface VIII
Avignon Papacy
Pope Clement V
Council of Vienne
Knights Templar
Catherine of Siena
Pope Alexander VI









Protestant Reformation
Counter-Reformation




Protestant Reformation
Counter-Reformation
Thomas More
Pope Leo X
Society of Jesus
Ignatius of Loyola
Francis Xavier
Dissolution of the Monasteries
Council of Trent
Pope Pius V
Tridentine Mass
Teresa of Ávila
John of the Cross
Philip Neri
Robert Bellarmine









Baroque Period to the
French Revolution




Pope Innocent XI
Pope Benedict XIV
Suppression of the Society of Jesus
Anti-clericalism
Pope Pius VI
Shimabara Rebellion
Edict of Nantes
Dechristianisation of France during the French Revolution








19th century



Pope Pius VII
Pope Pius IX
Dogma of the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary
Our Lady of La Salette
Our Lady of Lourdes
First Vatican Council
Papal infallibility
Pope Leo XIII
Mary of the Divine Heart
Prayer of Consecration to the Sacred Heart
Rerum novarum








20th century



Pope Pius X
Our Lady of Fátima
Persecutions of the Catholic Church and Pius XII
Pope Pius XII
Pope Pius XII Consecration to the Immaculate Heart of Mary
Dogma of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary
Lateran Treaty
Pope John XXIII
Second Vatican Council
Pope Paul VI
Pope John Paul I
Pope John Paul II
World Youth Day

1995
2000










21st century



Catholic Church sexual abuse cases
Pope Benedict XVI
World Youth Day

2002
2005
2008
2011
2013


Pope Francis








By country or region



Belize
Brazil
Canada
Cuba
France
Germany
Great Britain
Haiti
Hispano-America
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Mexico
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Spain
United States
Vatican City
Venezuela
Vietnam











Catholicism Portal
Pope Portal
















v
t
e


History of Catholic theology









Theologians
Teachings
Heresies








General history



History of the Catholic Church
Early Christianity
History of the Papacy
Ecumenical Councils
Timeline of the Catholic Church
History of Christianity
History of Christian theology











Church beginnings



Paul
Clement of Rome
First Epistle of Clement
Didache
Ignatius of Antioch
Polycarp
Epistle of Barnabas
Shepherd of Hermas
Justin Martyr
Epistle to Diognetus
Irenaeus
Montanism
Tertullian
Origen
Antipope Novatian
Cyprian









Constantine to
Pope Gregory I




Athanasius of Alexandria
Arianism
Pelagianism
Nestorianism
Monophysitism
Ephrem the Syrian
Hilary of Poitiers
Cyril of Jerusalem
Basil of Caesarea
Gregory Nazianzus
Gregory of Nyssa
Ambrose
John Chrysostom
Jerome
Augustine of Hippo
John Cassian
Cyril of Alexandria
Peter Chrysologus
Pope Leo I
Boethius
Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite
Pope Gregory I








Early Middle Ages



Isidore of Seville
Maximus the Confessor
Monothelitism
Ecthesis
Bede
John of Damascus
Iconoclasm
Transubstantiation dispute
Predestination disputes
Paulinus II of Aquileia
Alcuin
Rabanus Maurus
Paschasius Radbertus
John Scotus Eriugena








High Middle Ages



Roscellinus
Gregory of Narek
Berengar of Tours
Peter Damian
Anselm of Canterbury
Joachim of Fiore
Peter Abelard
Decretum Gratiani
Bernard of Clairvaux
Peter Lombard
Anselm of Laon
Hildegard of Bingen
Hugh of Saint Victor
Dominic de Guzmán
Robert Grosseteste
Francis of Assisi
Anthony of Padua
Bonaventure
Albertus Magnus
Thomas Aquinas
Thomism
Roger Bacon








Mysticism and reforms



Ramon Llull
Duns Scotus
Dante Alighieri
William of Ockham
Richard Rolle
Catherine of Siena
Brigit of Sweden
Meister Eckhart
Johannes Tauler
Walter Hilton
The Cloud of Unknowing
Heinrich Seuse
Geert Groote
Devotio Moderna
Julian of Norwich
Thomas à Kempis
Nicholas of Kues
Marsilio Ficino
Giovanni Pico della Mirandola









Protestant Reformation
Counter-Reformation




Desiderius Erasmus
Thomas More
John Fisher
Thomas Cajetan
Johann Eck
Ignatius of Loyola
Francisco de Osuna
John of Avila
Francis Xavier
Teresa of Ávila
John of the Cross
Petrus Canisius
Luis de Molina
Molinism
Robert Bellarmine
Francisco Suárez
Lawrence of Brindisi
Francis de Sales









Baroque Period to
French Revolution




Tommaso Campanella
Pierre de Bérulle
Mary of Jesus of Ágreda
Jean-Jacques Olier
Louis Thomassin
Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet
François Fénelon
Cornelius Jansen
Jansenism
Blaise Pascal
Nicolas Malebranche
Giambattista Vico
Alphonsus Liguori
Louis de Montfort
Alfonso Muzzarelli








19th century



Johann Michael Sailer
Clemens Maria Hofbauer
Joseph Görres
Ignaz von Döllinger
John Henry Newman
Jaime Balmes
Gaetano Sanseverino
Giovanni Maria Cornoldi
Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler
Giuseppe Pecci
Joseph Hergenröther
Tommaso Maria Zigliara
Modernism
Friedrich von Hügel
George Tyrrell
Maurice Blondel
Thérèse of Lisieux








20th–21st century



G. K. Chesterton
Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange
Pierre Teilhard de Chardin
Jacques Maritain
Étienne Gilson
Gabriel Marcel
Marie-Dominique Chenu
Romano Guardini
Edith Stein
Henri de Lubac
Gabriel Roschini
Josemaría Escrivá
Karl Rahner
Yves Congar
Bernard Lonergan
Emmanuel Mounier
Jean Daniélou
Hans Urs von Balthasar
Edward Schillebeeckx
Thomas Merton
Raimondo Spiazzi
René Girard
Pope Benedict XVI
Johann Baptist Metz
Henri Nouwen
Walter Kasper
Jean-Luc Marion
Tomáš Halík











Catholicism portal
Pope portal













Authority control



WorldCat
VIAF: 89623095
LCCN: n81120432
ISNI: 0000 0001 2143 0489
GND: 118588095
SELIBR: 195771
SUDOC: 026666030
BNF: cb11887115b (data)
BPN: 09818992
ULAN: 500280752
NLA: 35746867
NDL: 00451307
NKC: jn19992000769
ICCU: IT\ICCU\CFIV\090467
BNE: XX1008389















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nicholas_of_Cusa&amp;oldid=691196813"					
				Categories: 1401 births1464 deathsPeople from Bernkastel-WittlichMedieval German theologiansGerman cardinalsGerman mathematiciansGerman astronomersBishops of Brixen15th-century German writers15th-century mathematicians15th-century philosophers15th-century Roman Catholic bishops15th-century theologiansDiplomats of the Holy SeeRhineland mysticsHeidelberg University alumniScholastic philosophersRoman Catholic cleric-scientistsBurials at San Pietro in VincoliChristian mysticsApocalypticistsGerman philosophersGerman male writersPapal diplomatsHidden categories: Articles with hCardsArticles with German-language external linksPages using S-rel template with ca parameterAC with 14 elementsWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with BPN identifiersWikipedia articles with ULAN identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiersWikipedia articles with SBN identifiers				
							
		
		
			