


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Parmenides
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				For other uses, see Parmenides (disambiguation).


Parmenides



Parmenides



Born
c. 515 BCE
Elea, Magna Graecia


Died
c. 460 BCE





Era
Pre-Socratic philosophy


Region
Western Philosophy


School
Eleatic school



Main interests

Metaphysics, Ontology



Notable ideas

"Thought and being are the same"[1]
The truth–appearance distinction




Influences


Pythagoras, Xenophanes of Colophon, Heraclitus








Influenced


Zeno of Elea, Melissus of Samos, Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Spinoza, Nietzsche, Heidegger






Parmenides of Elea (/pɑrˈmɛnɨdiːz əv ˈɛliə/; Greek: Παρμενίδης ὁ Ἐλεάτης; fl. late sixth or early fifth century BCE) was a pre-Socratic Greek philosopher from Elea in Magna Graecia (Greater Greece, included Southern Italy). He was the founder of the Eleatic school of philosophy. The single known work of Parmenides is a poem, On Nature, which has survived only in fragmentary form. In this poem, Parmenides describes two views of reality. In "the way of truth" (a part of the poem), he explains how reality (coined as "what-is") is one, change is impossible, and existence is timeless, uniform, necessary, and unchanging. In "the way of opinion," he explains the world of appearances, in which one's sensory faculties lead to conceptions which are false and deceitful. These ideas had a strong effect on Plato, and in turn, influenced the whole of Western philosophy.



Contents


1 Early life
2 Career
3 Theory

3.1 Cosmogony


4 On Nature

4.1 Proem
4.2 The Way of Truth

4.2.1 Perception vs. Logos


4.3 The Way of Opinion (doxa)


5 Interpretations of Parmenides
6 Influence on the development of science
7 Influence on literature
8 Notes
9 References and further reading
10 External links



Early life[edit]
Parmenides was born in the Greek colony of Elea (now Ascea), which, according to Herodotus,[2] had been founded shortly before 535 BCE. He was descended from a wealthy and illustrious family.[3]
His dates are uncertain; according to Diogenes Laërtius, he flourished just before 500 BCE,[4] which would put his year of birth near 540 BCE, but Plato has him visiting Athens at the age of 65, when Socrates was a young man, c. 450 BCE,[5] which, if true, suggests a year of birth of c. 515 BCE. He was said to have been a pupil of Xenophanes,[6] and regardless of whether they actually knew each other, Xenophanes' philosophy is the most obvious influence on Parmenides.[7] Diogenes Laërtius also describes Parmenides as a disciple of "Ameinias, son of Diochaites, the Pythagorean"; but there are no obvious Pythagorean elements in his thought.
However, according to Sir William Smith, in Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology (1870)[8]

Others content themselves with reckoning Parmenides as well as Zeno as belonging to the Pythagorean school, or with speaking of a Parmenidean life, in the same way as a Pythagorean life is spoken of; and even the censorious Timon allows Parmenides to have been a high-minded man; while Plato speaks of him with veneration, and Aristotle and others give him an unqualified preference over the rest of the Eleatics.

Career[edit]
The first hero cult of a philosopher we know of was Parmenides' dedication of a heroon to his teacher Ameinias in Elea.[9] Parmenides was the founder of the School of Elea, which also included Zeno of Elea and Melissus of Samos. Of his life in Elea, it was said that he had written the laws of the city.[10] His most important pupil was Zeno, who according to Plato was 25 years his junior, and was regarded as his eromenos.[11] Parmenides had a large influence on Plato, who not only named a dialogue, Parmenides, after him, but always spoke of him with veneration.[12]
Theory[edit]
Smith (1870, p 124), mentioned[8]

Reason is our guide; on the latter the eye that does not catch the object and re-echoing hearing. On the former path we convince ourselves that the existent neither has come into being, nor is perishable, and is entirely of one sort, without change and limit, neither past nor future, entirely included in the present. For it is as impossible that it can become and grow out of the existent, as that it could do so out of the non-existent; since the latter, non-existence, is absolutely inconceivable, and the former cannot precede itself; and every coming into existence presupposes a non-existence. By similar arguments divisibility, motion or change, as also infinity, are shut out from the absolutely existent, and the latter is represented as shut up in itself, so that it may be compared to a well-rounded ball; while thought is appropriated to it as its only positive definition. Thought and that which is thought of (Object) coinciding; the corresponding passages of Plato, Aristotle, Theophrastus, and others, which authenticate this view of his theory.

Cosmogony[edit]
Smith (1870, p 124), mentioned[8]

Of the cosmogony of Parmenides, which was carried out very much in detail, we possess only a few fragments and notices, which are difficult to understand, according to which, with an approach to the doctrines of the Pythagoreans, he conceived the spherical mundane system, surrounded by a circle of the pure light (Olympus, Uranus); in the centre of this mundane system the solid earth, and between the two the circle of the milkyway, of the morning or evening star, of the sun, the planets, and the moon; which circle he regarded as a mixture of the two primordial elements.

On Nature[edit]
Parmenides is one of the most significant of the pre-Socratic philosophers.[13] His only known work, conventionally titled On Nature, is a poem which has only survived in fragmentary form. Approximately 160 lines of the poem remain today; reportedly the original text had 3,000 lines. It is known, however, that the work was originally divided into three parts:

A proem (Greek: προοίμιον), which introduced the entire work,
A section known as "The Way of Truth" (aletheia, ἀλήθεια), and
A section known as "The Way of Appearance/Opinion" (doxa, δόξα).

The proem is a narrative sequence in which the narrator travels "beyond the beaten paths of mortal men" to receive a revelation from an unnamed goddess (generally thought to be Persephone or Dikē) on the nature of reality. Aletheia, an estimated 90% of which has survived, and doxa, most of which no longer exists, are then presented as the spoken revelation of the goddess without any accompanying narrative.
Parmenides attempted to distinguish between the unity of nature and its variety, insisting in the Way of Truth upon the reality of its unity, which is therefore the object of knowledge, and upon the unreality of its variety, which is therefore the object, not of knowledge, but of opinion. In the Way of Opinion he propounded a theory of the world of seeming and its development, pointing out, however, that, in accordance with the principles already laid down, these cosmological speculations do not pretend to anything more than mere appearance.
Proem[edit]
In the proem, Parmenides is the journey of the poet, escorted by maidens ("the daughters of the Sun made haste to escort me, having left the halls of Night for the light"),[14] from the ordinary daytime world to a strange destination, outside our human paths.[15] Carried in a whirling chariot, and attended by the daughters of Helios the Sun, the man reaches a temple sacred to an unnamed goddess (variously identified by the commentators as Nature, Wisdom, Necessity or Themis), by whom the rest of the poem is spoken. The goddess resides in a well-known mythological space: where Night and Day have their meeting place. Its essential character is that here all opposites are undivided, or one.[16] He must learn all things, she tells him – both truth, which is certain, and human opinions, which are uncertain – for though one cannot rely on human opinions, they represent an aspect of the whole truth.
The Way of Truth[edit]




Parmenides. Detail from The School of Athens by Raphael.


The section known as "the way of truth" discusses that which is real and contrasts with the argument in the section called "the way of opinion," which discusses that which is illusory. Under the "way of truth," Parmenides stated that there are two ways of inquiry: that it is, on the one side, and that it is not.[17] on the other side. He said that the latter argument is never feasible because there is no thing that can not be:

For never shall this prevail, that things that are not are. (B 7.1)

There are extremely delicate issues here. In the original Greek the two ways are simply named "that Is" (ὅπως ἐστίν) and "that Not-Is" (ὡς οὐκ ἐστίν) (B 2.3 and 2.5) without the "it" inserted in our English translation. In ancient Greek, which, like many languages in the world, does not always require the presence of a subject for a verb, "is" functions as a grammatically complete sentence. Much debate has been focused on where and what the subject is. The simplest explanation as to why there is no subject here is that Parmenides wishes to express the simple, bare fact of existence in his mystical experience without the ordinary distinctions, just as the Latin "pluit" and the Greek huei (ὕει "rains") mean "it rains"; there is no subject for these impersonal verbs because they express the simple fact of raining without specifying what is doing the raining. This is, for instance, Hermann Fränkel's thesis.[18] Many scholars still reject this explanation and have produced more complex metaphysical explanations. Since existence is an immediately intuited fact, non-existence is the wrong path because a thing cannot disappear, just as something cannot originate from nothing. In such mystical experience (unio mystica), however, the distinction between subject and object disappears along with the distinctions between objects, in addition to the fact that if nothing cannot be, it cannot be the object of thought either:

Thinking and the thought that it is are the same; for you will not find thinking apart from what is, in relation to which it is uttered. (B 8.34–36)


For to be aware and to be are the same. (B 3)


It is necessary to speak and to think what is; for being is, but nothing is not. (B 6.1–2)


Helplessness guides the wandering thought in their breasts; they are carried along deaf and blind alike, dazed, beasts without judgment, convinced that to be and not to be are the same and not the same, and that the road of all things is a backward-turning one. (B 6.5–9)

Thus, he concluded that "Is" could not have "come into being" because "nothing comes from nothing". Existence is necessarily eternal. That which truly is [x], has always been [x], and was never becoming [x]; that which is becoming [x] was never nothing (Not-[x]), but will never actually be. Parmenides was not struggling to formulate the laws of conservation of mass and conservation of energy; he was struggling with the metaphysics of change, which is still a relevant philosophical topic today.
Moreover, he argued that movement was impossible because it requires moving into "the void", and Parmenides identified "the void" with nothing, and therefore (by definition) it does not exist. That which does exist is The Parmenidean One, which is timeless, uniform, and unchanging:

How could what is perish? How could it have come to be? For if it came into being, it is not; nor is it if ever it is going to be. Thus coming into being is extinguished, and destruction unknown. (B 8.20–22)


Nor was [it] once, nor will [it] be, since [it] is, now, all together, / One, continuous; for what coming-to-be of it will you seek? / In what way, whence, did [it] grow? Neither from what-is-not shall I allow / You to say or think; for it is not to be said or thought / That [it] is not. And what need could have impelled it to grow / Later or sooner, if it began from nothing? Thus [it] must either be completely or not at all. (B 8.5–11)


[What exists] is now, all at once, one and continuous... Nor is it divisible, since it is all alike; nor is there any more or less of it in one place which might prevent it from holding together, but all is full of what is. (B 8.5–6, 8.22–24)


And it is all one to me / Where I am to begin; for I shall return there again. (B 5)

Perception vs. Logos[edit]
Parmenides claimed that there is no truth in the opinions of the mortals. Genesis-and-destruction, as Parmenides emphasizes, is a false opinion, because to be means to be completely, once and for all. What exists can in no way not exist.

For this view, that That Which Is Not exists, can never predominate. You must debar your thought from this way of search, nor let ordinary experience in its variety force you along this way, (namely, that of allowing) the eye, sightless as it is, and the ear, full of sound, and the tongue, to rule; but (you must) judge by means of the Reason (Logos) the much-contested proof which is expounded by me. (B 7.1–8.2)

The Way of Opinion (doxa)[edit]
After the exposition of the arche (ἀρχή), i.e. the origin, the necessary part of reality that is understood through reason or logos (that [it] Is), in the next section, the Way of Appearance/Opinion/Seeming, Parmenides proceeds to explain the structure of the becoming cosmos (which is an illusion, of course) that comes from this origin.
The structure of the cosmos is a fundamental binary principle that governs the manifestations of all the particulars: "the aether fire of flame" (B 8.56), which is gentle, mild, soft, thin and clear, and self-identical, and the other is "ignorant night", body thick and heavy.

The mortals lay down and decided well to name two forms (i.e. the flaming light and obscure darkness of night), out of which it is necessary not to make one, and in this they are led astray. (B 8.53–4)

The structure of the cosmos then generated is recollected by Aetius (II, 7, 1):

For Parmenides says that there are circular bands wound round one upon the other, one made of the rare, the other of the dense; and others between these mixed of light and darkness. What surrounds them all is solid like a wall. Beneath it is a fiery band, and what is in the very middle of them all is solid, around which again is a fiery band. The most central of the mixed bands is for them all the origin and cause of motion and becoming, which he also calls steering goddess and keyholder and Justice and Necessity. The air has been separated off from the earth, vapourized by its more violent condensation, and the sun and the circle of the Milky Way are exhalations of fire. The moon is a mixture of both earth and fire. The aether lies around above all else, and beneath it is ranged that fiery part which we call heaven, beneath which are the regions around the earth.[19]

Interpretations of Parmenides[edit]
The traditional interpretation of Parmenides' work is that he argued that the every-day perception of reality of the physical world (as described in doxa) is mistaken, and that the reality of the world is 'One Being' (as described in aletheia): an unchanging, ungenerated, indestructible whole. Under the Way of Opinion, Parmenides set out a contrasting but more conventional view of the world, thereby becoming an early exponent of the duality of appearance and reality. For him and his pupils, the phenomena of movement and change are simply appearances of a changeless, eternal reality. This interpretation could settle because of various wrong translations of the fragments. For example, it is not at all clear that Parmenides refuted that which we call perception. The verb noein, used frequently by Parmenides, could better be translated as 'to be aware of' than as 'to think'. Furthermore, it is hard to believe that 'being' is only within our heads, according to Parmenides.
Parmenides' philosophy is presented in the form of poetry. The philosophy he argued was, he says, given to him by a goddess, though the "mythological" details in Parmenides' poem do not bear any close correspondence to anything known from traditional Greek mythology:

Welcome, youth, who come attended by immortal charioteers and mares which bear you on your journey to our dwelling. For it is no evil fate that has set you to travel on this road, far from the beaten paths of men, but right and justice. It is meet that you learn all things — both the unshakable heart of well-rounded truth and the opinions of mortals in which there is not true belief. (B 1.24–30)

It is with respect to this religious/mystical context that recent generations of scholars such as Alexander P. Mourelatos, Charles H. Kahn, and the controversial Peter Kingsley have begun to call parts of the traditional, rational logical/philosophical interpretation of Parmenides into question (Kingsley in particular stating that Parmenides practiced iatromancy). It has been claimed that previous scholars placed too little emphasis on the apocalyptic context in which Parmenides frames his revelation. As a result, traditional interpretations have put Parmenidean philosophy into a more modern, metaphysical context to which it is not necessarily well suited, which has led to misunderstanding of the true meaning and intention of Parmenides' message. The obscurity and fragmentary state of the text, however, renders almost every claim that can be made about Parmenides extremely contentious, and the traditional interpretation has by no means been abandoned.
Parmenides' considerable influence on the thinking of Plato is undeniable, and in this respect Parmenides has influenced the whole history of Western philosophy, and is often seen as its grandfather. Even Plato himself, in the Sophist, refers to the work of "our Father Parmenides" as something to be taken very seriously and treated with respect. In the Parmenides, the Eleatic philosopher, which may well be Parmenides himself, and Socrates argue about dialectic. In the Theaetetus, Socrates says that Parmenides alone among the wise (Protagoras, Heraclitus, Empedocles, Epicharmus, and Homer) denied that everything is change and motion.
Parmenides is credited with a great deal of influence as the author of an "Eleatic challenge" that determined the course of subsequent philosophers' enquiries. For example, the ideas of Empedocles, Anaxagoras, Leucippus, and Democritus have been seen as in response to Parmenides' arguments and conclusions.[20]
Parmenides' influence on philosophy reaches up till present times. The Italian philosopher Emanuele Severino has founded his extended philosophical investigations on the words of Parmenides. His philosophy is sometimes called Neo Parmenideism, and can be understood as an attempt to build a bridge between the poem on truth and the poem on opinion.
Influence on the development of science[edit]
Parmenides made the ontological argument against nothingness, essentially denying the possible existence of a void. According to Aristotle, this led Democritus and Leucippus, and many other physicists,[21] to propose the atomic theory, which supposes that everything in the universe is either atoms or voids, specifically to contradict Parmenides' argument. Aristotle himself reasoned, in opposition to atomism, that in a complete vacuum, motion would encounter no resistance, and "no one could say why a thing once set in motion should stop anywhere; for why should it stop here rather than here? So that a thing will either be at rest or must be moved ad infinitum, unless something more powerful get in its way."[21] See also horror vacui.
Erwin Schrödinger identified Parmenides' monad of the "Way of Truth" as being the conscious self in "Nature and the Greeks".[22] The scientific implications of this view have been discussed by scientist Anthony Hyman.[23]
A shadow of Parmenides' ideas can be seen in the physical concept of Block time, which considers existence to consist of past, present, and future, and the flow of time to be illusory. In his critique of this idea, Karl Popper called Einstein "Parmenides".[24] However, Popper did write:

So what was really new in Parmenides was his axiomatic-deductive method, which Leucippus and Democritus turned into a hypothetical-deductive method, and thus made part of scientific methodology.[25]

A recent interpretation views Parmenides as a philosopher who proposed a method for doing natural science. Although 'peri physeos' is a poem, it may be viewed as an epistemological essay, an essay on method. Parmenides' ἐὸν may refer to a formal system, a calculus which can describe nature more precisely than natural languages. 'Physis' may be identical to ἐὸν.[26]
Influence on literature[edit]
Frederick Best wrote a story inspired by the poem On Nature called Cosmic Foam,[27] in which the narrator journeys beyond this universe to a place between the One and the void and gains a new understanding of the nature of reality.
In 2006, Argentine novelist Cesar Aira published Parmenides, in which Parmenides is a wealthy bureaucrat that hires a young, poor poet to ghost write a book that will cover the whole of nature. Early on in their relationship, the poet writes a 200-line sample for Parmenides to evaluate and nothing else. It is never clear whether Parmenides read those lines, and in the ten years in which wealthy man and ghost writer get together to talk about the project no more lines are ever written.
Notes[edit]


^ DK fragment B 6: "χρὴ τὸ λέγειν τε νοεῖν τ᾿ ἐὸν ἔμμεναι"; cf. DK B 3 "τὸ γὰρ αὐτὸ νοεῖν ἐστίν τε καὶ εἶναι [It is the same thing that can be thought and that can be]."
^ Herodotus, i.164
^ Diogenes Laërtius, ix. 21
^ Diogenes Laërtius, ix. 23
^ Plato, Parmenides, 127a–128b
^ Aristotle, Metaphysics, i. 5; Sextus Empiricus, adv. Math. vii. 111; Clement of Alexandria, Stromata, i. 301; Diogenes Laërtius, ix. 21
^ Cf. Simplicius, Physics, 22.26–23.20; Hippolytus, i. 14
^ a b c Sir Smith William (1870). Dictionary of Greek and Roman biography and mythology. p.&#160;124.&#160;
^ Encyclopedia of ancient Greece by Nigel Guy Wilson (2006), p. 353, ISBN 978-0-415-97334-2
^ Speusippus in Diogenes Laërtius, ix. 23, comp. Strabo, vi.; Plutarch, adv. Colot. 1126AB
^ Plato, Parmenides, 127a: "Zeno and Parmenides once came [to Athens] for the festival of the Great Panathenaea. Parmenides was already a very old man, white-haired but of distinguished appearance — he was about 65. Zeno was then nearly 40, tall and pleasant to look at — he was said to have been Parmenides' lover."
^ e.g. Plato, Theaetetus, 183e; Sophist, 237a
^ According to Czech philosopher Milič Čapek "[Parmenides'] decisive influence on the development of Western thought is probably without parallel", The New Aspects of Time, 1991, p. 145. That assessment may overstate Parmenides' impact and importance, but it is a useful corrective to the tendency to underestimate it.
^ Schofield, G. S. Kirk, J. E. Raven, M. (1993). The presocratic philosophers&#160;: a critical history with a selection of texts (2nd ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p.&#160;243. ISBN&#160;978-0-521-27455-5.&#160;
^ Furley, D.J. (1973). Exegesis and Argument: Studies in Greek Philosophy presented to Gregory Vlastos. pp.&#160;1–15.&#160;
^ Nussbaum, Martha (1979). "Eleatic Conventionalism and Philoaus on the Conditions of Thought". Harvard Studies in Classical Philology.&#160;
^ Frag. B 8.11
^ Hermann Fränkel, Dichtung und Philosophie des frühen Griechentums, New York: American Philological Association, 1962; see also Lawrence C. Chin, "Xenophanes and Parmenides".
^ Stobaeus, i. 22. 1a, quoted in W. K. C. Guthrie (1979), A History of Greek Philosophy: Volume 2, The Presocratic Tradition from Parmenides to Democritus, pp. 61–2. Cambridge University Press.
^ See e.g. David Sedley, "Parmenides," in E. Craig (ed.), Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Routledge, 1998): "Parmenides marks a watershed in Presocratic philosophy. In the next generation he remained the senior voice of Eleaticism, perceived as champion of the One against the Many. His One was defended by Zeno of Elea and Melissus, while those who wished to vindicate cosmic plurality and change felt obliged to respond to his challenge. Empedocles, Anaxagoras, Leucippus and Democritus framed their theories in terms which conceded as much as possible to his rejections of literal generation and annihilation and of division."
^ a b Aristotle, Physics, Book IV, 6 and 8.
^ Erwin Schrödinger (1954), Nature and the Greeks: and, Science and Humanism, pp. 26–33, Cambridge University Press
^ Hyman, Anthony (2007), "The Selfseeker", Teignvalley Press
^ Popper, Karl (2002). Unended Quest. p.&#160;127. ISBN&#160;84-206-7240-8.&#160;
^ Popper, Karl (1998). The World of Parmenides: Essays on the Presocratic Enlightenment. Routledge. p.&#160;91. ISBN&#160;0415173019.&#160;
^ Nikoletseas, Michael M. (2014). "Parmenides: The World as Modus Cogitandi". ISBN 978-1492283584"
^ Sci Phi Journal: Issue #1, October 2014: The Journal of Science Fiction and Philosophy, edited by Jason Rennie.[1]


References and further reading[edit]

Austin, Scott (1986). Parmenides: Being, Bounds and Logic. Yale University Press. ISBN&#160;0-300-03559-4.&#160;
Austin, Scott (2007), Parmenides and the History of Dialectic: Three Essays, Parmenides Publishing, ISBN 978-1-930972-19-3
Bakalis Nikolaos (2005), Handbook of Greek Philosophy: From Thales to the Stoics Analysis and Fragments, Trafford Publishing, ISBN 1-4120-4843-5
Barnes, Jonathan (1978). The Presocratic Philosophers (Two Volumes). Routledge and Kegan Paul.&#160;
Burnet J. (2003), Early Greek Philosophy, Kessinger Publishing (first edition 1908).
Čapek, Milič (1991), The New Aspects of Time, Kluwer
Cassin, Barbra (1998), Parménide Sur l'Etant ou Sur la nature de l'Etant, Greek text and French Translation with commentary, Editions Du Seuil.
Cordero, Nestor-Luis (2004), By Being, It Is: The Thesis of Parmenides. Parmenides Publishing, ISBN 978-1-930972-03-2
Cordero Néstor-Luis (ed.), Parmenides, Venerable and Awesome (Plato, Theaetetus 183e) Las Vegas: Parmenides Publishing 2011. Proceedings of the International Symposium (Buenos Aires, 2007), ISBN 978-1-930972-33-9
Coxon A. H. (2009), The Fragments of Parmenides: A Critical Text With Introduction and Translation, the Ancient Testimonia and a Commentary. Las Vegas, Parmenides Publishing (new edition of Coxon 1986), ISBN 978-1-930972-67-4
Curd, Patricia (2004), The Legacy of Parmenides: Eleatic Monism and Later Presocratic Thought, Parmenides Publishing, ISBN 978-1-930972-15-5 (First edition Princeton University Press 1998)
Gallop David. (1991), Parmenides of Elea – Fragments, University of Toronto Press.
Guthrie W. K. C. (1979), A History of Greek Philosophy – The Presocratic tradition from Parmenides to Democritus, Cambridge University Press.
Heidegger, Martin, Parmenides (trans. André Schuwer and Richard Rojcewicz, Indiana University Press, 1992)
Hermann, Arnold (2005), The Illustrated To Think Like God: Pythagoras and Parmenides-The Origins of Philosophy, Parmenides Publishing, ISBN 978-1-930972-17-9
Hermann, Arnold (2005), To Think Like God: Pythagoras and Parmenides-The Origins of Philosophy, Fully Annotated Edition, Parmenides Publishing, ISBN 978-1-930972-00-1
Hermann, Arnold (2010), Plato's Parmenides: Text, Translation &amp; Introductory Essay, Parmenides Publishing, ISBN 978-1-930972-71-1
Hyman, Anthony (2007), The Selfseeker, Teignvalley Press. Explores the Parmenidean dialectic and its application to modern science.
Kingsley, Peter (2001). In the Dark Places of Wisdom. Duckworth and Co.&#160;
Kingsley, Peter (2003), Reality. California: Golden Sufi Center. ISBN 9781890350093.
Kirk G. S., Raven J. E. and Schofield M. (1983) The Presocratic Philosophers, Cambridge University Press, Second edition.
Luchte, James (2011). Early Greek Thought: Before the Dawn. London: Bloomsbury Publishing. ISBN&#160;978-0567353313.&#160;
Lünstroth, Margarete: Teilhaben und Erleiden in Platons Parmenides. Untersuchungen zum Gebrauch von μετέχειν und πάσχειν. Vertumnus vol. 6. Edition Ruprecht: Göttingen 2006, ISBN 978-3-7675-3080-5
Melchert, Norman (2002). The Great Conversation: A Historical Introduction to Philosophy. McGraw Hill. ISBN&#160;0-19-517510-7.&#160;
Mourelatos, Alexander P. D. (2007), The Route of Parmenides: A Study of Word, Image, and Argument in the Fragments, Parmenides Publishing, ISBN 978-1-930972-11-7 (First edition Yale University Press 1970)
Nietzsche, Friedrich, Philosophy in the Tragic Age of the Greeks, Regnery Gateway ISBN 0-89526-944-9
Popper, Karl R. (1998). The World of Parmenides. Routledge. ISBN&#160;0-415-17301-9.&#160;
Gilbert Ryle: Plato's Parmenides, in: Mind 48, 1939, pp.&#160;129–51, 303–25.
Martin Suhr: Platons Kritik an den Eleaten. Vorschläge zur Interpretation des platonischen Dialogs ‚Parmenides‘, Hamburg 1969
Hans Günter Zekl: Der Parmenides, N. G. Elwert Verlag, Marburg/Lahn 1971.

Extensive bibliography (up to 2004) by Nestor Luis Cordero; and annotated bibliography by Raul Corazzon
External links[edit]



Wikisource has original text related to this article:
Fragments of Parmenides






Wikiquote has quotations related to: Parmenides





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Parmenides of Elea.



Parmenides entry by John Palmer in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
 Diogenes Laërtius, Life of Parmenides, translated by Robert Drew Hicks (1925).
"Lecture Notes: Parmenides", S. Marc Cohen, University of Washighton
Parmenides and the Question of Being in Greek Thought with a selection of critical judgments
Parmenides of Elea: Critical Editions and Translations – annotated list of the critical editions and of the English, German, French, Italian and Spanish translations
Parmenides Bilingual Anthology (in Greek and English, side by side)
Fragments of Parmenides – parallel Greek with links to Perseus, French, and English (Burnet) includes Parmenides article from Encyclopædia Britannica Eleventh Edition
John Burnet, Early Greek Philosophy, 3rd edition 1920: Chap 4 Parmenides of Elia includes fragments of Parmenides preserved for the most part by Simplicius including The Way of Belief and the Way of Truth
What is Parmenides' Being: explanation of a philosophical enigma
Works by or about Parmenides at Internet Archive
Works by Parmenides at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 









v
t
e


Pre-Socratic philosophers by school










Milesian
Pythagoreanism
Ephesian
Eleatic
Pluralist
Atomist
Sophist
Others








Thales
Anaximander
Anaximenes






Pythagoras
Alcmaeon
Hippasus
Philolaus
Archytas






Heraclitus






Xenophanes
Parmenides
Zeno
Melissus






Anaxagoras
Archelaus
Empedocles






Leucippus
Democritus






Protagoras
Gorgias
Prodicus
Hippias






Pherecydes
Hippo
Diogenes




















v
t
e


Ancient Greek schools of philosophy






Pre-Socratic




Schools



Atomism
Eleatics
Ionian

Ephesian
Milesian


Pluralism
Pythagoreanism
Sophism








Philosophers



Anaxagoras
Anaximander
Anaximenes
Democritus
Empedocles
Heraclitus
Leucippus
Melissus
Parmenides
Protagoras
Pythagoras
Thales
Zeno of Elea











Socratic




Schools



Cynicism
Cyrenaics
Eretrian school
Megarian school
Peripateticism
Platonism








Philosophers



Antisthenes
Aristippus
Aristotle
Diogenes of Sinope
Euclid of Megara
Phaedo of Elis
Plato
Socrates











Hellenistic




Schools



Epicureanism
Neoplatonism
Neopythagoreanism
Pyrrhonism
Stoicism








Philosophers



Apollonius of Tyana
Epictetus
Epicurus
Lucretius
Plotinus
Pyrrho
Sextus Empiricus
Zeno of Citium











Concepts



Adiaphora (outside moral law)
Apatheia (equanimity)
Apeiron (boundlessness)
Arche (first cause)
Arete (excellence)
Ataraxia (tranquility)
Demiurge (creator)
Doxa (common opinion)
Dunamis&#160;/ Energeia (potentiality&#160;/ actuality)
Episteme (knowledge)
Epoché (suspension)
Ethos (character)
Eudaimonia (flourishing)
Henosis (oneness)
Katalepsis (comprehension)
Logos (reason)
Nous (intellect)
Pathos (emotional)
Phronesis (practical wisdom)
Physis (natural law)
Sophia (wisdom)








Fields



Aesthetics
Cosmology
Epistemology
Ethics
Logic
Metaphysics
Natural philosophy
Political philosophy
Social philosophy
















v
t
e


Ancient Greece









Outline
Timeline












&#160;



History
Geography













Periods



Cycladic civilization
Minoan civilization
Mycenaean civilization
Greek Dark Ages
Archaic period
Classical Greece
Hellenistic Greece
Roman Greece








Geography



Aegean Sea
Aeolis
Alexandria
Antioch
Cappadocia
Crete
Cyprus
Doris
Ephesus
Epirus
Hellespont
Ionia
Ionian Sea
Macedonia
Magna Graecia
Miletus
Peloponnesus
Pergamon
Pontus
Ancient Greek colonies


















&#160;



City states
Politics
Military













City states



Argos
Athens
Byzantium
Chalkis
Corinth
Megalopolis
Rhodes
Sparta
Syracuse
Thebes








Politics







Boeotarch
Boule
Koinon
Proxeny
Strategos
Synedrion
Tagus
Tyrant
Amphictyonic League








Athenian



Agora
Areopagus
Ecclesia
Graphē paranómōn
Heliaia
Ostracism








Spartan



Apella
Ephor
Gerousia
Harmost











Military



Wars
Athenian military
Antigonid Macedonian army
Army of Macedon
Ballista
Cretan archers
Hellenistic armies
Hippeis
Hoplite
Hetairoi
Macedonian phalanx
Phalanx
Peltast
Pezhetairos
Sarissa
Sacred Band of Thebes
Sciritae
Seleucid army
Spartan army
Toxotai
Xiphos
Xyston


















&#160;
People











List of ancient Greeks






Rulers



Kings of Argos
Archons of Athens
Kings of Athens
Kings of Commagene
Diadochi
Kings of Lydia
Kings of Macedonia
Kings of Paionia
Attalid kings of Pergamon
Kings of Pontus
Kings of Sparta
Tyrants of Syracuse








Philosophers



Anaxagoras
Anaximander
Anaximenes
Antisthenes
Aristotle
Democritus
Diogenes of Sinope
Empedocles
Epicurus
Gorgias
Heraclitus
Hypatia
Leucippus
Parmenides
Plato
Protagoras
Pythagoras
Socrates
Thales
Zeno








Authors



Aeschylus
Aesop
Alcaeus
Archilochus
Aristophanes
Bacchylides
Euripides
Herodotus
Hesiod
Hipponax
Homer
Ibycus
Lucian
Menander
Mimnermus
Pindar
Plutarch
Polybius
Sappho
Simonides
Sophocles
Stesichorus
Theognis
Thucydides
Timocreon
Tyrtaeus
Xenophon








Others



Agesilaus II
Agis II
Alcibiades
Alexander the Great
Aratus
Archimedes
Aspasia
Demosthenes
Epaminondas
Euclid
Hipparchus
Hippocrates
Leonidas
Lycurgus
Lysander
Milo of Croton
Miltiades
Pausanias
Pericles
Philip of Macedon
Philopoemen
Praxiteles
Ptolemy
Pyrrhus
Solon
Themistocles








Groups



Philosophers
Playwrights
Poets
Tyrants








By culture



Ancient Greek tribes
Thracian Greeks
Ancient Macedonians


















&#160;



Society
Culture













Society



Agriculture
Calendar
Clothing
Coinage
Cuisine
Economy
Education
Festivals
Funeral and burial practices
Homosexuality
Law
Olympic Games
Pederasty
Philosophy
Prostitution
Religion
Slavery
Warfare
Wedding customs
Wine











Arts
Sciences






Architecture (Greek Revival architecture)
Astronomy
Literature
Mathematics
Medicine
Music (Musical system)
Pottery
Sculpture
Technology
Theatre








Religion







Funeral and burial practices
Mythology

mythological figures


Temple
Twelve Olympians
Underworld








Sacred places



Eleusis
Delphi
Delos
Dodona
Mount Olympus
Olympia











Structures







Athenian Treasury
Lion Gate
Long Walls
Philippeion
Theatre of Dionysus
Tunnel of Eupalinos








Temples



Aphaea
Artemis
Athena Nike
Erechtheion
Hephaestus
Hera (Olympia)
Parthenon
Samothrace
Zeus (Olympia)











Language



Proto-Greek
Mycenaean
Homeric
Dialects

Aeolic
Arcadocypriot
Attic
Doric
Ionic
Locrian
Macedonian
Pamphylian


Koine








Writing



Linear A
Linear B
Cypriot syllabary
Greek alphabet
Greek numerals
Attic numerals


















&#160;
Lists









Cities

in Epirus


People
Place names
Stoae
Temples
Theatres














 Category
 Portal
 WikiProject
















v
t
e


Metaphysics






Metaphysicians



Parmenides
Plato
Aristotle
Plotinus
Duns Scotus
Thomas Aquinas
Francisco Suárez
Nicolas Malebranche
René Descartes
John Locke
David Hume
Thomas Reid
Immanuel Kant
Isaac Newton
Arthur Schopenhauer
Baruch Spinoza
Georg W. F. Hegel
George Berkeley
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz
Henri Bergson
Friedrich Nietzsche
Charles Sanders Peirce
Joseph Maréchal
Ludwig Wittgenstein
Martin Heidegger
Alfred N. Whitehead
Bertrand Russell
Dorothy Emmet
G. E. Moore
Jean-Paul Sartre
Gilbert Ryle
Hilary Putnam
P. F. Strawson
R. G. Collingwood
Adolph Stöhr
Rudolf Carnap
Saul Kripke
Willard V. O. Quine
G. E. M. Anscombe
Donald Davidson
Michael Dummett
David Malet Armstrong
David Lewis
Alvin Plantinga
Peter van Inwagen
Derek Parfit
more ...








Theories



Abstract object theory
Action theory
Anti-realism
Determinism
Dualism
Enactivism
Essentialism
Existentialism
Free will
Idealism
Libertarianism
Liberty
Materialism
Meaning of life
Monism
Naturalism
Nihilism
Phenomenalism
Realism
Physicalism
Pirsig's metaphysics of Quality
Platonic idealism
Relativism
Scientific realism
Solipsism
Subjectivism
Substance theory
Type theory








Concepts



Abstract object
Anima mundi
Being
Category of being
Causality
Choice
Cogito ergo sum
Concept
Embodied cognition
Entity
Essence
Existence
Experience
Hypostatic abstraction
Idea
Identity
Identity and change
Information
Insight
Intelligence
Intention
Linguistic modality
Matter
Meaning
Memetics
Mental representation
Mind
Motion
Necessity
Notion
Object
Pattern
Perception
Physical body
Principle
Property
Qualia
Quality
Reality
Soul
Subject
Substantial form
Thought
Time
Truth
Type–token distinction
Universal
Unobservable
Value
more ...








Related topics



Axiology
Cosmology
Epistemology
Interpretations of quantum mechanics
Meta-
Ontology
Philosophy of mind
Philosophy of psychology
Philosophy of self
Philosophy of space and time
Teleology
Theoretical physics











 Category
 Portal
 WikiProject













Authority control



WorldCat
VIAF: 66471970
LCCN: n79065281
ISNI: 0000 0001 2101 977X
GND: 118591770
SUDOC: 027058697
BNF: cb119186506 (data)















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Parmenides&amp;oldid=689613734"					
				Categories: Parmenides510 BC450 BC5th-century BC Greek people5th-century BC philosophers5th-century BC poetsLucanian GreeksAncient Greek philosophersAncient Greek shamansOntologistsPhilosophers of Magna GraeciaPresocratic philosophersPythagoreans510s BC births450s BC deathsHidden categories: Articles with hCardsArticles containing Ancient Greek-language textCommons category with local link same as on WikidataWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersPages using authority control with parametersVIAF different on Wikidata				
							
		
		
			