


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Philosophy of physics
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				

Part of a series on


Philosophy



Plato&#160;– Kant&#160;– Nietzsche



Philosophers




Aestheticians
Epistemologists
Ethicists
Logicians
Metaphysicians
Social and political philosophers




Traditions




Analytic
Aristotelian
Continental
Existentialism
Pragmatism
Eastern
Islamic
Platonic
Scholastic
Western




Periods




Ancient
Medieval
Modern
Contemporary




Literature




Aesthetics
Epistemology
Ethics
Logic
Metaphysics
Political philosophy




Branches




Aesthetics
Epistemology
Ethics
Legal philosophy
Logic
Metaphysics
Political philosophy
Social philosophy




Lists




Index
Outline
Years
Problems
Publications
Theories
Glossary
Philosophers




 Philosophy portal





v
t
e





In philosophy, the philosophy of physics studies the fundamental philosophical questions underlying modern physics, the study of matter and energy and how they interact. The philosophy of physics begins by reflecting on the basic metaphysical and epistemological questions posed by physics: causality, determinism, and the nature of physical law. It then turns to questions raised by important topics in contemporary physics:

Physical cosmology: space, time, and the origin and ultimate fate of the universe;
Thermodynamics and statistical mechanics: energy, work, randomness, information;
Quantum mechanics: the rival interpretations thereof, and its counterintuitive conclusions.

Centuries ago, the study of causality, and of the fundamental nature of space, time, matter, and the universe were part of metaphysics. Today the philosophy of physics is essentially a part of the philosophy of science. Physicists utilize the scientific method to delineate the universals and constants governing physical phenomena, and the philosophy of physics reflects on the results of this empirical research.



Contents


1 Purpose of physics
2 Philosophy of space and time

2.1 Time
2.2 Time travel
2.3 Space


3 Philosophy of quantum mechanics

3.1 Determinism
3.2 Indeterminism
3.3 Uncertainty principle
3.4 Complementarity


4 History of the philosophy of physics

4.1 Aristotelian physics
4.2 Newtonian physics
4.3 Leibniz
4.4 Quotes from Einstein's work on the importance of the philosophy of physics


5 See also
6 References
7 Further reading
8 External links



Purpose of physics[edit]
According to Niels Bohr, the purpose of physics is:[1]

not to disclose the real essence of phenomena but only to track down... relations between the manifold aspects of experience.

Many, particularly realists, find this minimal formulation an inadequate formulation of the purpose of physics, which they view as providing, in addition, a deeper world picture.
Philosophy of space and time[edit]
Main article: Philosophy of space and time
The existence and nature of space and time (or space-time) are central topics in the philosophy of physics.[2]
Time[edit]
Main article: Time in physics




Time, in many philosophies, is seen as change.


Time is considered to be a fundamental quantity (that is, a quantity which cannot be defined in terms of other quantities), because at present nothing is more basic than time. Thus time is defined via measurement—by its standard time interval. Currently, the standard time interval (called "conventional second", or simply "second") is defined as 9,192,631,770 oscillations of a hyperfine transition in the 133 caesium atom. (ISO 31-1). What time is and how it works follows from the above definition. Time then can be combined mathematically with the fundamental quantities of space and mass to define concepts such as velocity, momentum, energy, and fields.
Both Newton and Galileo,[3] as well as most people up until the 20th century, thought that time was the same for everyone everywhere. Our modern conception of time is based on Einstein's theory of relativity and Minkowski's spacetime, in which rates of time run differently in different inertial frames of reference, and space and time are merged into spacetime. Time may be quantized, with the theoretical smallest time being on the order of the Planck time. Einstein's general relativity as well as the redshift of the light from receding distant galaxies indicate that the entire Universe and possibly space-time itself began about 13.8 billion years ago in the big bang. Whether and how the universe will ever end are open questions (see Ultimate fate of the universe).
Time travel[edit]
Main article: Time travel
Some theories, most notably special and general relativity, suggest that suitable geometries of spacetime, or certain types of motion in space, may allow time travel into the past and future. Concepts that aid such understanding include the closed timelike curve.
Albert Einstein's special theory of relativity (and, by extension, the general theory) predicts time dilation that could be interpreted as time travel. The theory states that, relative to a stationary observer, time appears to pass more slowly for faster-moving bodies: for example, a moving clock will appear to run slow; as a clock approaches the speed of light its hands will appear to nearly stop moving. The effects of this sort of time dilation are discussed further in the popular "twin paradox". These results are experimentally observable and affect the operation of GPS satellites and other high-tech systems used in daily life.
A second, similar type of time travel is permitted by general relativity. In this type a distant observer sees time passing more slowly for a clock at the bottom of a deep gravity well, and a clock lowered into a deep gravity well and pulled back up will indicate that less time has passed compared to a stationary clock that stayed with the distant observer.
These effects are to some degree similar to hibernation, or cooling of live objects (which slow down the rates of chemical processes in the subject) almost indefinitely suspending their life thus resulting in "time travel" toward the future, but never backward. They do not violate causality. This is not typical of the "time travel" featured in science fiction (where causality is violated at will), and there is little doubt surrounding its existence. "Time travel" will hereafter refer to travel with some degree of freedom into the past or future of proper time.
Many in the scientific community believe that time travel is highly unlikely, because it violates causality i.e. the logic of cause and effect. For example, what happens if you attempt to go back in time and kill yourself at an earlier stage in your life (or your grandfather, which leads to the grandfather paradox)? Stephen Hawking once suggested that the absence of tourists from the future constitutes a strong argument against the existence of time travel— a variant of the Fermi paradox, with time travelers instead of alien visitors. Hitherto there is no experimental evidence of time travel, making it a mere hypothesis as opposed to an empirical fact.
Space[edit]
Main article: Space
Space is one of the few fundamental quantities in physics, meaning that it cannot be defined via other quantities because there is nothing more fundamental known at present. Thus, similar to the definition of other fundamental quantities (like time and mass), space is defined via measurement. Currently, the standard space interval, called a standard metre or simply metre, is defined as the distance traveled by light in a vacuum during a time interval of 1/299792458 of a second (exact).
In classical physics, space is a three-dimensional Euclidean space where any position can be described using three coordinates. Special and general relativity use spacetime rather than space; spacetime is modeled as a four-dimensional space (with the time axis being imaginary in special relativity and real in general relativity, and currently there are many theories which use more than four spatial dimensions.
Philosophy of quantum mechanics[edit]
Main article: Interpretation of quantum mechanics
Quantum mechanics is a large focus of contemporary philosophy of physics, specifically concerning the correct interpretation of quantum mechanics. Very broadly, much of the philosophical work that is done in quantum theory is trying to make sense of superposition states:[4] the property that particles seem to not just be in one determinate position at one time, but are somewhere 'here', and also 'there' at the same time. Such a radical view turns a lot of our common sense metaphysical ideas on their head. Much of contemporary philosophy of quantum mechanics aims to make sense of what the very empirically successful formalism of quantum mechanics tells us about the physical world.
Determinism[edit]
The 18th century saw many advances in the domain of science. After Newton, most scientists agreed on the presupposition that the universe is governed by strict natural laws that can be discovered and formalized by means of scientific observation and experiment. This position is known as determinism. However, determinism seems to preclude the possibility of free will. That is, if the universe, and thus any person in it, is governed by strict and universal laws, then that means that a person's behavior could be predicted based on sufficient knowledge of the circumstances that obtained prior to that person's behavior. This appears to contradict the person's perception of free will, except as interpreted in compatibilism. Conversely, if we accept that human beings do have (libertarian or incompatibilist) free will, then we must accept that the world is not entirely governed by natural law. Some have argued that if the world is not entirely governed by natural law, then the task of science is rendered impossible. However, the development of quantum mechanics gave thinkers alternatives to these strictly bound possibilities, proposing a model for a universe that follows general rules but never had a predetermined future.
Indeterminism[edit]
See also: Indeterminism, Indeterminism in science and Bohr–Einstein debates
Against the proponents of determinism like Einstein and Max Planck, indeterminism—championed by the English astronomer Sir Arthur Eddington[5]—says that a physical object has an ontologically undetermined component that is not due to the epistemological limitations of physicists' understanding. The uncertainty principle, then, would not necessarily be due to hidden variables but to an indeterminism in nature itself.
Heisenberg, de Broglie, Dirac, Bohr, Jeans, Weyl, Compton, Thomson, Schrödinger, Jordan, Millikan, Lemaître, Reichenbach, et al. were all supporters of indeterminism.[5]
Uncertainty principle[edit]
Main article: Uncertainty principle
The uncertainty principle is a mathematical relation asserting an upper limit to the accuracy of the simultaneous measurement of any pair of conjugate variables, e.g. position and momentum. In the formalism of operator notation, this limit is the evaluation of the commutator of the variables' corresponding operators.
The uncertainty principle arose as an answer to the question: How does one measure the location of an electron around a nucleus if an electron is a wave? When quantum mechanics was developed, it was seen to be a relation between the classical and quantum descriptions of a system using wave mechanics.
In March 1926, working in Niels Bohr's institute, Werner Heisenberg formulated the principle of uncertainty thereby laying the foundation of what became known as the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics. Heisenberg had been studying the papers of Paul Dirac and Pascual Jordan. He discovered a problem with measurement of basic variables in the equations. His analysis showed that uncertainties, or imprecisions, always turned up if one tried to measure the position and the momentum of a particle at the same time. Heisenberg concluded that these uncertainties or imprecisions in the measurements were not the fault of the experimenter, but fundamental in nature and are inherent mathematical properties of operators in quantum mechanics arising from definitions of these operators.[6]
The term Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics was often used interchangeably with and as a synonym for Heisenberg's uncertainty principle by detractors (such as Einstein and the physicist Alfred Landé) who believed in determinism and saw the common features of the Bohr-Heisenberg theories as a threat. Within the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics the uncertainty principle was taken to mean that on an elementary level, the physical universe does not exist in a deterministic form, but rather as a collection of probabilities, or possible outcomes. For example, the pattern (probability distribution) produced by millions of photons passing through a diffraction slit can be calculated using quantum mechanics, but the exact path of each photon cannot be predicted by any known method. The Copenhagen interpretation holds that it cannot be predicted by any method, not even with theoretically infinitely precise measurements.
Complementarity[edit]
The idea of complementarity is critical in quantum mechanics. It says that light can behave both like a particle and like a wave. When the double-slit experiment was performed, light acted in some cases as a wave, and some cases as a particle. Physicists had no convincing theory to explain this until Bohr and complementarity came along.
History of the philosophy of physics[edit]
Aristotelian physics[edit]
Aristotelian physics viewed the universe as a sphere with a center. Matter, composed of the classical elements, earth, water, air, and fire, sought to go down towards the center of the universe, the center of the earth, or up, away from it. Things in the aether such as the moon, the sun, planets, or stars circled the center of the universe.[7] Movement is defined as change in place,[7] i.e. space.[8]
Newtonian physics[edit]
The implicit axions of Aristotelian physics with respect to movement of matter in space were superseded in Newtonian physics by Newton's First Law of Motion.[9]


“
Every body perseveres in its state either of rest or of uniform motion in a straight line, except insofar as it is compelled to change its state by impressed forces.
”


"Every body" includes the Moon, and an apple; and includes all types of matter, air as well as water, stones, or even a flame. Nothing has a natural or inherent motion.[10] Absolute space being three-dimensional Euclidean space, infinite and without a center.[10] Being "at rest" means being at the same place in absolute space over time.[11] The topology and affine structure of space must permit movement in a straight line at a uniform volocity; thus both space and time must have definite, stable dimensions.[12]
Leibniz[edit]
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, 1646 – 1716, was a contemporary of Newton. He contributed a fair amount to the statics and dynamics emerging around him, often disagreeing with Descartes and Newton. He devised a new theory of motion (dynamics) based on kinetic energy and potential energy, which posited space as relative, whereas Newton was thoroughly convinced that space was absolute. An important example of Leibniz's mature physical thinking is his Specimen Dynamicum of 1695.[13]
Until the discovery of subatomic particles and the quantum mechanics governing them, many of Leibniz's speculative ideas about aspects of nature not reducible to statics and dynamics made little sense. For instance, he anticipated Albert Einstein by arguing, against Newton, that space, time and motion are relative, not absolute:[14] "As for my own opinion, I have said more than once, that I hold space to be something merely relative, as time is, that I hold it to be an order of coexistences, as time is an order of successions."[15]
Quotes from Einstein's work on the importance of the philosophy of physics[edit]




Einstein was interested in the philosophical implications of his theory.


Albert Einstein was extremely interested in the philosophical conclusions of his work. He writes:

"I fully agree with you about the significance and educational value of methodology as well as history and philosophy of science. So many people today—and even professional scientists—seem to me like somebody who has seen thousands of trees but has never seen a forest. A knowledge of the historic and philosophical background gives that kind of independence from prejudices of his generation from which most scientists are suffering. This independence created by philosophical insight is—in my opinion—the mark of distinction between a mere artisan or specialist and a real seeker after truth." Einstein. letter to Robert A. Thornton, 7 December 1944. EA 61-574.

Elsewhere:

"How does it happen that a properly endowed natural scientist comes to concern himself with epistemology? Is there no more valuable work in his specialty? I hear many of my colleagues saying, and I sense it from many more, that they feel this way. I cannot share this sentiment. ... Concepts that have proven useful in ordering things easily achieve such an authority over us that we forget their earthly origins and accept them as unalterable givens. Thus they come to be stamped as 'necessities of thought,' 'a priori givens,' etc."


"The path of scientific advance is often made impassable for a long time through such errors. For that reason, it is by no means an idle game if we become practiced in analyzing the long-commonplace concepts and exhibiting [revealing, exposing? -Ed.] those circumstances upon which their justification and usefulness depend, how they have grown up, individually, out of the givens of experience. By this means, their all-too-great authority will be broken." Einstein, 1916, "Memorial notice for Ernst Mach," Physikalische Zeitschrift 17: 101-02.

See also[edit]




Philosophy portal



Physics portal








Book: Physics








Anthropic principle
Arrow of time
Causality (physics)
Causal closure
Constructor theory
Determinism
Digital philosophy
Digital physics
Dualism
Energy
Field (physics)
Functional decomposition
Fundamental interaction
Holism
Instrumentalism
Laws of thermodynamics
Macroscopic
Matter
Mesoscopic scale
Modal realism
Monism
Pluralism
Physical ontology




Naturalism:

Metaphysical
Methodological


Operationalism
Phenomenology (science)

Phenomenology (particle physics)


Philosophy of:

Classical physics
Space &amp; time
Thermodynamics &amp; statistical mechanics
Motion


Physical

Bodies
Information
Law
System


Physicalism
Physics

Aristotle


Physics envy




Quantum theory:

Bohr-Einstein debates
EPR paradox
Interpretations of
Metaphysics
Mysticism


Reductionism
Relativity:

General
Special


Space

Absolute theory
Container space
Free space
Relational space
Relational theory
Spacetime


Supervenience
Symmetry in physics
Theophysics
Time in physics




References[edit]


^ N.Bohr, Atomic Theory and the Description of Human Knowledge (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1934) p.19. Found in: R.Plaga (1997). "Proposal for an experimental test of the many-worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics". Foundations of Physics, v. 27, p. 559. http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/quant-ph/9510007v3
^ first page of the introduction, Tim Maudlin (2012-07-22). Philosophy of Physics: Space and Time: Space and Time (Princeton Foundations of Contemporary Philosophy) . Princeton University Press. Kindle Edition. "...the existence and nature of space and time (or space-time) is a central topic."
^ Roger Penrose, 2004. The Road to Reality: A Complete Guide to the Laws of the Universe. London: Jonathan Cape. ISBN 0-224-04447-8 (hardcover), 0-09-944068-7 (paperback).
^ https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J8k_2oD66mI&amp;t=128
^ a b de Koninck, Charles (2008). "The philosophy of Sir Arthur Eddington and The problem of indeterminism". The writings of Charles de Koninck. Notre Dame, Ind.&#160;:: University of Notre Dame Press,. ISBN&#160;978-0-268-02595-3. OCLC&#160;615199716.&#160;
^ Niels Bohr, Atomic Physics and Human Knowledge, p. 38
^ a b Tim Maudlin (2012-07-22). Philosophy of Physics: Space and Time: Space and Time (Princeton Foundations of Contemporary Philosophy) (p. 3). Princeton University Press. Kindle Edition."Because it is a sphere, Aristotle's universe contains a geometrically privileged center, and Aristotle makes reference to that center in characterizing the natural motions of different sorts of matter. “Upward,”“downward,” and “uniform circular motion” all are defined in terms of the center of the universe."
^ Tim Maudlin (2012-07-22). Philosophy of Physics: Space and Time: Space and Time (Princeton Foundations of Contemporary Philosophy) (p. 4). Princeton University Press. Kindle Edition. "Aristotle adopts the concept of space, and the correlative concept of motion, that we all intuitively employ."
^ Tim Maudlin (2012-07-22). Philosophy of Physics: Space and Time: Space and Time (Princeton Foundations of Contemporary Philosophy) (pp. 4-5). Princeton University Press. Kindle Edition. "Newtonian physics is implicit in his First Law of Motion: Law I&#160;: Every body perseveres in its state either of rest or of uniform motion in a straight line, except insofar as it is compelled to change its state by impressed forces. 1 This single law smashes the Aristotelian universe to smithereens."
^ a b Tim Maudlin (2012-07-22). Philosophy of Physics: Space and Time: Space and Time (Princeton Foundations of Contemporary Philosophy) (pp. 5). Princeton University Press. Kindle Edition.
^ Tim Maudlin (2012-07-22). Philosophy of Physics: Space and Time: Space and Time (Princeton Foundations of Contemporary Philosophy) (pp. 9-10). Princeton University Press. Kindle Edition. "Newton believed in the existence of a spatial arena with the geometrical structure of E3. He believed that this infinite three-dimensional space exists at every moment of time. And he also believed something much more subtle and controversial, namely, that identically the same points of space persist through time."
^ Tim Maudlin (2012-07-22). Philosophy of Physics: Space and Time: Space and Time (Princeton Foundations of Contemporary Philosophy) (p. 12). Princeton University Press. Kindle Edition. "...space must have a topology, an affine structure, and a metric; time must be one-dimensional with a topology and a metric; and, most importantly, the individual parts of space must persist through time.
^ Ariew and Garber 117, Loemker §46, W II.5. On Leibniz and physics, see the chapter by Garber in Jolley (1995) and Wilson (1989).
^ Rafael Ferraro (2007). Einstein's Space-Time: An Introduction to Special and General Relativity. Springer. p.&#160;1. ISBN&#160;978-0-387-69946-2.&#160;
^ See H. G. Alexander, ed., The Leibniz-Clarke Correspondence, Manchester: Manchester University Press, pp. 25–26.


Further reading[edit]

David Albert, 1994. Quantum Mechanics and Experience. Harvard Univ. Press.
John D. Barrow and Frank J. Tipler, 1986. The Cosmological Anthropic Principle. Oxford Univ. Press.
Beisbart, C. and S. Hartmann, eds., 2011. "Probabilities in Physics". Oxford Univ. Press.
John S. Bell, 2004 (1987), Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics. Cambridge Univ. Press.
David Bohm, 1980. Wholeness and the Implicate Order. Routledge.
Nick Bostrom, 2002. Anthropic Bias: Observation Selection Effects in Science and Philosophy. Routledge.
Thomas Brody, 1993, Ed. by Luis de la Peña and Peter E. Hodgson The Philosophy Behind Physics Springer ISBN 3-540-55914-0
Harvey Brown, 2005. Physical Relativity. Space-time structure from a dynamical perspective. Oxford Univ. Press.
Butterfield, J., and John Earman, eds., 2007. Philosophy of Physics, Parts A and B. Elsevier.
Craig Callender and Nick Huggett, 2001. Physics Meets Philosophy at the Planck Scale. Cambridge Univ. Press.
David Deutsch, 1997. The Fabric of Reality. London: The Penguin Press.
Bernard d'Espagnat, 1989. Reality and the Physicist. Cambridge Univ. Press. Trans. of Une incertaine réalité; le monde quantique, la connaissance et la durée.
--------, 1995. Veiled Reality. Addison-Wesley.
--------, 2006. On Physics and Philosophy. Princeton Univ. Press.
Roland Omnes, 1994. The Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics. Princeton Univ. Press.
--------, 1999. Quantum Philosophy. Princeton Univ. Press.
Huw Price, 1996. Time's Arrow and Archimedes's Point. Oxford Univ. Press.
Lawrence Sklar, 1992. Philosophy of Physics. Westview Press. ISBN 0-8133-0625-6, ISBN 978-0-8133-0625-4
Victor Stenger, 2000. Timeless Reality. Prometheus Books.
Carl Friedrich von Weizsäcker, 1980. The Unity of Nature. Farrar Straus &amp; Giroux.
Werner Heisenberg, 1971. Physics and Beyond: Encounters and Conversations. Harper &amp; Row (World Perspectives series), 1971.
William Berkson, 1974. Fields of Force. Routledge and Kegan Paul, London. ISBN 0-7100-7626-6
Encyclopedia Britannica, Philosophy of Physics, David Z. Albert

External links[edit]

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy:

"Absolute and Relational Theories of Space and Motion"—Nick Huggett and Carl Hoefer
"Being and Becoming in Modern Physics"—Steven Savitt
"Boltzmann's Work in Statistical Physics"—Jos Uffink
"Conventionality of Simultaneity"—Allen Janis
"Early Philosophical Interpretations of General Relativity"—Thomas A. Ryckman
"Experiments in Physics"—Allan Franklin
"Holism and Nonseparability in Physics"—Richard Healey
"Intertheory Relations in Physics"—Robert Batterman
"Naturalism"—David Papineau
"Philosophy of Statistical Mechanics"—Lawrence Sklar
"Physicalism"—Daniel Sojkal
"Quantum Mechanics"—Jenann Ismael
"Reichenbach's Common Cause Principle"—Frank Artzenius
"Structural Realism"—James Ladyman
"Structuralism in Physics"—Heinz-Juergen Schmidt
"Symmetry and Symmetry Breaking"—Katherine Brading and Elena Castellani
"Thermodynamic Asymmetry in Time"—Craig Callender
"Time"—by Ned Markosian
"Uncertainty principle"—Jan Hilgevoord and Jos Uffink
"The Unity of Science"—Jordi Cat











v
t
e


Philosophy










&#160;
Branches










Traditional



Metaphysics
Epistemology
Logic
Ethics
Aesthetics








Philosophy of



Action
Art

Culture
Design
Music
Film


Being
Business
Dialogue
Education
Environment
Futility
Happiness
Healthcare
History
Human nature
Humor
Language
Literature
Mathematics
Mind

Pain
Psychology


Philosophy
Religion
Science

Physics
Chemistry
Biology
Geography


Sexuality
Social science

Economics
Justice
Law
Politics
Society


Space and time
Sport
Technology

Computer science
Engineering
Information


War


















&#160;
Schools of thought










By era



Ancient
Western

Medieval
Renaissance
Early modern
Modern
Contemporary










Ancient




Chinese



Agriculturalism
Confucianism
Legalism
Logicians
Mohism
Chinese naturalism
Neotaoism
Taoism
Yangism
Zen








Greco-Roman



Aristotelianism
Cynicism
Epicureanism
Hermeneutics
Neoplatonism
Peripatetic
Platonism
Presocratic
Pythagoreanism
Sophism
Stoicism








Indian



Buddhist
Cārvāka
Hindu
Jain








Persian



Mazdakism
Zoroastrianism
Zurvanism











Medieval
9th–16th
century





European



Christian philosophy
Scholasticism
Thomism
Renaissance humanism








East Asian



Korean Confucianism
Edo Neo-Confucianism
Neo-Confucianism








Indian



Navya-Nyāya
Vishishtadvaita
Dvaita








Islamic



Averroism
Avicennism
Persian Illuminationism
Ilm al-Kalam
Sufi








Jewish



Judeo-Islamic











Modern
17th–19th
century





people



Neo-Scholasticism
Cartesianism
Kantianism
Neo-Kantianism
Hegelianism
Marxism








Ideal&#160;/ Material



Idealism
Absolute idealism
Rationalism
Empiricism
Utilitarianism
Pragmatism








Other



Liberalism
Anarchism
Modernism
Phenomenology
Transcendentalism
Existentialism
Kokugaku
New Confucianism











Contemporary
20th–21st
century





Analytic



Analytic feminism
Consequentialism
Experimental philosophy
Internalism and Externalism
Falsificationism
Foundationalism&#160;/ Coherentism
Logical positivism
Legal positivism
Quinean Naturalism
Ordinary language philosophy
Quietism
Rawlsian
Reformed epistemology
Postanalytic philosophy
Contemporary utilitarianism
Neo-Aristotelian
Vienna Circle
Wittgensteinian








Continental



Critical theory
Deconstruction
Existentialism
Feminist
Frankfurt School
Postmodernism
Post-structuralism
Social constructionism
Structuralism








Other



Kyoto School
Objectivism
Russian cosmism
more...





















&#160;
Positions










Aesthetics



Formalism
Institutionalism
Aesthetic response








Ethics



Consequentialism
Deontology
Virtue








Free will



Compatibilism
Determinism
Libertarianism








Metaphysics



Atomism
Dualism
Monism
Naturalism








Epistemology



Constructivism
Empiricism
Idealism
Particularism
Fideism
Rationalism&#160;/ Reasonism
Skepticism
Solipsism








Mind



Behaviorism
Eliminativism
Epiphenomenalism
Functionalism
Objectivism
Subjectivism








Normativity



Absolutism
Particularism
Relativism
Nihilism
Skepticism
Universalism








Ontology



Action
Event
Process








Reality



Anti-realism
Conceptualism
Idealism
Materialism
Naturalism
Nominalism
Realism


















&#160;



Philosophy by region
Philosophy-related lists













By region



African
Ethiopian
Aztec
Native America
Eastern
Chinese
Egyptian
Czech
Indian
Indonesian
Iranian
Japanese
Korean
Vietnam
Pakistani
Western
American
British
Danish
French
German
Greek
Italian
Polish
Romanian
Russian
Slovene








Lists



Outline
Index
Years
Problems
Schools
Glossary
Philosophers
Movements
Publications

















Portal
Category
WikiProject
Changes
















v
t
e


Philosophy of time






Concepts
in time



Time
Duration
A priori and a posteriori
Eternity
Event
Action
Deterministic system
Free will
Eternal return
A-series and B-series
Temporal parts
Growing block universe
Multiple time dimensions





Time Portal






Theories
of time



Determinism
Temporal finitism
Fatalism
Indeterminism
Compatibilism and incompatibilism
Presentism
Eternalism
Four dimensionalism
Endurantism
Perdurantism
B-Theory of time








Related
articles



Metaphysics
Etiology
Teleology
Post hoc ergo propter hoc
The Unreality of Time
















v
t
e


Philosophy of science










Concepts



Analysis
Analytic–synthetic distinction
A priori and a posteriori
Causality
Commensurability
Consilience
Construct
Creative synthesis
Demarcation problem
Empirical evidence
Explanatory power
Fact
Falsifiability
Feminist method
Ignoramus et ignorabimus
Inductive reasoning
Intertheoretic reduction
Inquiry
Nature
Objectivity
Observation
Paradigm
Problem of induction
Scientific law
Scientific method
Scientific revolution
Scientific theory
Testability
Theory choice
Theory-ladenness
Underdetermination
Unity of science








Metatheory
of science



Coherentism
Confirmation holism
Constructive empiricism
Constructive realism
Constructivist epistemology
Contextualism
Conventionalism
{Deductive-nomological model
Hypothetico-deductive model
Inductionism}
Epistemological anarchism
Fallibilism
Foundationalism
Instrumentalism
Pragmatism
Model-dependent realism
Naturalism
Physicalism
Positivism-Reductionism-Determinism
Rationalism&#160;/ Empiricism
Received view&#160;/ Semantic view of theories
Scientific realism&#160;/ Anti-realism
Scientific essentialism
Scientific formalism
Scientific skepticism
Scientism
Structuralism
Uniformitarianism
Vitalism








Philosophy of



Physics

thermal and statistical
Motion


Chemistry
Biology
Environment
Geography
Social science
Technology

Engineering
Artificial intelligence
Computer science


Information
Mind
Psychology
Perception
Space and time








Related topics



Alchemy
Criticism of science
Epistemology
Faith and rationality
History and philosophy of science
History of science
History of evolutionary thought
Logic
Metaphysics
Pseudoscience
Relationship between religion and science
Rhetoric of science
Sociology of scientific knowledge
Sociology of scientific ignorance















&#160;
Philosophers of science by era










Ancient



Plato
Aristotle
Stoicism
Epicurians








Medieval



Averroes
Avicenna
Roger Bacon
William of Ockham
Hugh of Saint Victor
Dominicus Gundissalinus
Robert Kilwardby








Early modern



Francis Bacon
Thomas Hobbes
René Descartes
Galileo Galilei
Pierre Gassendi
Isaac Newton
David Hume








Late modern



Immanuel Kant
Friedrich Schelling
Auguste Comte
William Whewell
Wilhelm Windelband
John Stuart Mill
Herbert Spencer
Pierre Duhem
Henri Poincaré
Wilhelm Wundt








Contemporary



Albert Einstein
Bertrand Russell
Alfred North Whitehead
Rudolf Carnap
W.V.O. Quine
Bas van Fraassen
Carl Gustav Hempel
Charles Sanders Peirce
Daniel Dennett
Hans Reichenbach
Ian Hacking
Imre Lakatos
Jürgen Habermas
Karl Pearson
Karl Popper
Larry Laudan
Michael Polanyi
Otto Neurath
Paul Feyerabend
Thomas Kuhn

















Portal
Category
















v
t
e


The fundamental interactions of physics







Physical forces

Strong interaction
Weak interaction
Electromagnetism
Gravitation









Hypothetical forces

Quintessence
















v
t
e


Branches of physics






Divisions



Applied
Experimental
Theoretical











Energy
Motion






Thermodynamics
Mechanics

Classical

Lagrangian
Hamiltonian


Continuum
Celestial
Statistical
Fluid
Quantum













Waves
Fields






Gravitation
Electromagnetism
Quantum field theory
Relativity

Special
General










By speciality



Accelerator
Acoustics
Astrophysics

Nuclear
Stellar
Heliophysics

Solar


Space
Astroparticle


Atomic–molecular–optical (AMO)
Communication
Computational
Condensed matter

Solid-state


Digital
Engineering
Material
Mathematical
Nuclear
Optics

Geometrical
Physical
Nonlinear
Quantum


Particle

Phenomenology


Plasma
Polymer
Statistical









Physics with
other sciences




Biophysics

Cardiophysics
Biomechanics
Medical
Neurophysics
Virophysics


Agrophysics

Soil


Atmospheric physics
Chemical
Econophysics
Geophysics
Psychophysics















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Philosophy_of_physics&amp;oldid=690664180"					
				Categories: Philosophy of physicsPhilosophy of science				
							
		
		
			