


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Political system
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								  (Redirected from Political systems)
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				

Part of a series on


Politics







Primary topics



Index of politics articles
Politics by country
Politics by subdivision
Political economy
Political history
Political history of the world
Political philosophy









Political systems



Anarchism


City-state
Democracy


Federacy
Feudalism


Dictatorship
Directorialism


Meritocracy
Monarchy


Parliamentary
Presidential


Semi-presidential
Theocracy









Academic disciplines




Political science
(political scientists)


International relations
(theory)

Comparative politics









Public administration



Bureaucracy (street-level)
Adhocracy









Policy



Public policy (doctrine)


Public interest
Foreign policy









Organs of government



Separation of powers


Legislature
Executive


Judiciary
Electoral branch









Related topics



Sovereignty
Theories of political behavior
Political psychology
Biology and political orientation
Political organisations









Subseries



Electoral systems


Elections (voting)


Federalism
Form of government


Ideology
Political campaigning


Political parties







Politics portal





v
t
e







Part of the Politics series


Basic forms of government


Power structure




Confederation
Empire
Federation
Hegemony
Unitary state




Power source





Authoritarian state




Autocracy
Despotism
Illiberal democracy
Semi-authoritarian
Dictatorship
Totalitarianism




Democracy




Direct
Representative
Semi
others




Monarchy




Absolute
Constitutional
Legalist




Oligarchy




Aristocracy
Military junta
Plutocracy
Stratocracy
Timocracy




Other




Anarchy
Anocracy
Kritarchy
Minarchy
Particracy
Republic
Theocracy







Politics portal





v
t
e





A political system is a system of politics and government. It is usually compared to the legal system, economic system, cultural system, and other social systems. However, this is a very simplified view of a much more complex system of categories involving the questions of who should have authority and what the government's influence on its people and economy should be.



Contents


1 Anthropological forms of political systems
2 Political parties in political systems

2.1 American political parties (democracy/republic)


3 Sociology of political systems
4 See also
5 Notes
6 References
7 External links



Anthropological forms of political systems[edit]
Anthropologists generally recognize four kinds of political systems, two of which are uncentralized and two of which are centralized.[1]

Uncentralized systems

Band society

Small family group, no larger than an extended family or clan; it has been defined as consisting of no more than 30 to 50 individuals.
A band can cease to exist if only a small group walks out.


Tribe

Generally larger, consisting of many families. Tribes have more social institutions, such as a chief or elders.
More permanent than bands. Many tribes are sub-divided into bands.




Centralized governments

Chiefdom

More complex than a tribe or a band society, and less complex than a state or a civilization
Characterized by pervasive inequality and centralization of authority.
A single lineage/family of the elite class becomes the ruling elite of the chiefdom
Complex chiefdoms have two or even three tiers of political hierarchy.
"An autonomous political unit comprising a number of villages or communities under the permanent control of a paramount chief"


Sovereign state

A sovereign state is a state with a permanent population, a defined territory, a government and the capacity to enter into relations with other sovereign states.




Supranational Political Systems

Supranational political systems are created by independent nations to reach a common goal or form an alliance.

Empires

Empires are widespread states or communities under a single rule. They are characterized by the rulers desire for unanimous religious affiliation or posing as threat for other empires in times of war.* Empires often made considerable progress in ways of democratic structures, creating and building city infrastructures, and maintaining civility within the diverse communities. Because of the intricate organization of the empires, they were often able to hold a large majority of power on a universal level.*


Leagues

Leagues are international organizations composed of states coming together for a single common purpose.* In this way leagues are different from empires, as they only seek to fulfill a single goal. Often leagues are formed on the brink of a military or economic downfall. Meetings and hearings are conducted in a neutral location with representatives of all involved nations present.



Political parties in political systems[edit]
Political systems do not inherently require the institution of political parties to advance the politics of the political system. Political parties are formed after political systems are put in place.
American political parties (democracy/republic)[edit]
In the case of American politics, Article Two of the United States Constitution, specifically Section I, gives no mention to political parties when describing the presidential election process. It was only after the establishment of the government that the first political parties formed.
George Washington, the first U.S. president was against the establishment of political parties in most circumstances and therefore belonged to no party. In his Farewell Address Washington gives reason for his distrust in political parties, specifically in the newly formed United States. Washington does endorse political parties in some political systems however, specifically monarchies.
Further information: Political Parties
Washington was the only President not to be elected through a party oriented election process. Because of this, it is difficult to comment on an America without political party institutions. Washington’s case does point to the original path of the American political system however, one lacking political parties.
Both the U.S. Constitution and Washington provide support for the American political system, a Democracy and Republic, to be founded without political parties. The past has shown this type of system to work well with parties, but nonetheless, these two systems do not require political parties in their institutions.
Over the years the American political system has seen a sharp decline in voter turnout. In 1960, over 63% of the American population cast their presidential votes, whereas by 1996, there were less than 50% of Americans showing up to the polls.
Sociology of political systems[edit]
The sociological interest in political systems is figuring out who holds the power in the relationship of the government and its people and how the government’s power is used. There are three types of political systems that sociologists consider.

Authoritarianism

In authoritarian governments, the people have no power or representation and it is characterized by absolute or blind obedience to [formal] authority, as against individual freedom and related to the expectation of unquestioning obedience. The elite leaders handle all economic, military, and foreign relations. Dictatorships are examples of authoritarianism.
Totalitarianism is the most extreme form of authoritarianism because it controls all aspects of life including communication between citizens, censors the media, and threatens by means of terror.


Monarchies

A monarchy is a government controlled by a king or queen determined by a predisposed line of sovereignty. In the modern world there are two types of monarchies, absolute monarchies and constitutional monarchies. An absolute monarchy works like a dictatorship in that the king has complete rule over his country. A constitutional monarchy gives the royal family limited powers and usually works in accordance with an elected body of officials. Social revolutions of the 18th, 19th, and 20th century overthrew the majority of existing monarchies in favor of a more democratic governments and the rise of the lower-class.


Democracy

A democracy is a form of government in which the citizens create and vote for laws directly or indirectly via representatives. The idea of democracy stems back from ancient Greece and the profound works of ancient academics. However, the presence of democracy does not always mean citizen’s wishes will be equally represented. For example, in many democratic countries immigrants, and racial and ethnic minorities do not receive the same rights as the majority citizens.



See also[edit]

Government
Political structure
Polity
Voting system
Tudors
Ming Dynasty
Romanovs
Tractatus Politicus

Notes[edit]


^ Haviland, W.A. (2003). Anthropology: Tenth Edition. Wadsworth:Belmont, CA.


References[edit]

Almond, Gabriel A., et al. Comparative Politics Today: A World View (Seventh Edition). 2000. ISBN 0-316-03497-5

June 25, 2011.

Ferris, Kerry, and Jill Stein. The Real World An Introduction to Sociology. 3rd ed. New York City: W W Norton &amp; Co, 2012. Print.
"political system". Encyclopædia Britannica. Encyclopædia Britannica Online.

Encyclopædia Britannica Inc., 2012. Web. 02 Dec. 2012 &lt;http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/467746/political-system/36699/Confederations-and-federations&gt;.
External links[edit]



Look up political system in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Political systems.



For further resources on political theory and the mechanics of political system design, see the Governance and Social Development Resource Centre's topic guide on political systems









v
t
e


Systems&#160;&#160;· &#160;Systems science






Types of systems



Anatomical
Art
Biological
Complex
Complex adaptive
Conceptual
Coupled human–environment
Database
Dynamical
Ecological
Economic
Formal
GPS
Holarchic
Information
Legal
Measurement
Metric
Multi-agent
Nervous
Nonlinear
Operating
Physical
Political
Sensory
Social
Solar








Theoretical fields







Chaos theory
Complex systems
Control theory
Cybernetics
Earth system science
Living systems
Sociotechnical system
Urban metabolism
World-systems theory








Systems ...



analysis
biology
dynamics
ecology
engineering
neuroscience
psychology
science
theory
thinking











Systems scientists



Russell L. Ackoff
William Ross Ashby
Béla H. Bánáthy
Gregory Bateson
Anthony Stafford Beer
Richard E. Bellman
Ludwig von Bertalanffy
Kenneth E. Boulding
Murray Bowen
C. West Churchman
George Dantzig
Heinz von Foerster
Jay Wright Forrester
Charles A S Hall
James J. Kay
George Klir
Edward Norton Lorenz
Niklas Luhmann
Humberto Maturana
Margaret Mead
Donella Meadows
Mihajlo D. Mesarovic
James Grier Miller
Howard T. Odum
Talcott Parsons
Ilya Prigogine
Qian Xuesen
Anatol Rapoport
Peter Senge
Claude Shannon
Francisco Varela
Kevin Warwick
Norbert Wiener
Anthony Wilden








 Categories



Systems

conceptual
physical
social


Systems science











 Systems science portal













Authority control



GND: 4046584-6















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Political_system&amp;oldid=686892552"					
				Categories: Political systemsPolitical terminologyHidden categories: Commons category with local link same as on WikidataWikipedia articles with GND identifiers				
							
		
		
			