


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Richard Rorty
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				

Richard McKay Rorty





Born
(1931-10-04)October 4, 1931
New York City


Died
June 8, 2007(2007-06-08) (aged&#160;75)
Palo Alto, California





Era
20th-century philosophy


Region
Western Philosophy


School
Pragmatism, postanalytic philosophy



Main interests




Epistemology
Philosophy of language
Philosophy of mind
Ethics
Metaphilosophy
Liberalism
postmodernism






Notable ideas




Postphilosophy
Ironism
Final vocabulary
Epistemological behaviorism







Influences





Dewey
Heidegger
Wittgenstein
Sellars
Nietzsche
Quine
Davidson
Rawls
Kuhn
Derrida
Foucault











Influenced





Brandom
Posner
McDowell
Vattimo
BonJour
Williams
Jurgen Habermas









Richard McKay Rorty (October 4, 1931&#160;– June 8, 2007) was an American philosopher. Educated at the University of Chicago and Yale University, he had strong interests and training in both the history of philosophy and contemporary analytic philosophy, the latter of which came to comprise the main focus of his work at Princeton University in the 1960s.[1] He subsequently came to reject the tradition of philosophy according to which knowledge involves correct representation (a "mirror of nature") of a world whose existence remains wholly independent of that representation. Rorty had a long and diverse academic career, including positions as Stuart Professor of Philosophy at Princeton University, Kenan Professor of Humanities at the University of Virginia, and Professor of Comparative Literature at Stanford University. Among his most influential books are Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature (1979), Consequences of Pragmatism (1982), and Contingency, Irony, and Solidarity (1989).
Rorty saw the idea of knowledge as a "mirror of nature" as pervasive throughout the history of western philosophy. Against this approach, Rorty advocated for a novel form of American pragmatism, sometimes called neopragmatism, in which scientific and philosophical methods form merely a set of contingent "vocabularies" which people abandon or adopt over time according to social conventions and usefulness. Abandoning representationalist accounts of knowledge and language, Rorty believed, would lead to a state of mind he referred to as "ironism", in which people become completely aware of the contingency of their placement in history and of their philosophical vocabulary. Rorty tied this brand of philosophy to the notion of "social hope"; he believed that without the representationalist accounts, and without metaphors between the mind and the world, human society would behave more peacefully. He also emphasized the reasons why the interpretation of culture as conversation (Bernstein 1971), constitutes the crucial concept of a "postphilosophical" culture determined to abandon representationalist accounts of traditional epistemology, incorporating American pragmatist naturalism that considers the natural sciences as an advance towards liberalism.



Contents


1 Biography
2 Major works

2.1 Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature
2.2 Contingency, Irony, and Solidarity
2.3 Objectivity, Relativism, and Truth
2.4 Essays on Heidegger and Others
2.5 Achieving Our Country


3 On human rights
4 Reception and criticism
5 Select bibliography
6 See also
7 Further reading
8 Notes
9 External links



Biography[edit]
Richard Rorty was born October 4, 1931, in New York City.[2] His parents, James and Winifred Rorty, were activists, writers and social democrats. His maternal grandfather, Walter Rauschenbusch, was a central figure in the Social Gospel movement of the early 20th century.[3] His father experienced two nervous breakdowns in his later life. The second breakdown, which he had in the early 1960s, was more serious and "included claims to divine prescience".[4] Consequently Richard Rorty fell into depression as a teenager and began a six-year psychiatric analysis for obsessional neurosis in 1962.[4] Rorty wrote about the beauty of rural New Jersey orchids in his short autobiography, "Trotsky and the Wild Orchids." His colleague Jürgen Habermas's obituary for Rorty points out that Rorty's contrasting childhood experiences, such as beautiful orchids versus reading a book in his parents' house that defended Leon Trotsky against Stalin, created an early interest in philosophy. He describes Rorty as an ironist:

"Nothing is sacred to Rorty the ironist. Asked at the end of his life about the 'holy', the strict atheist answered with words reminiscent of the young Hegel: 'My sense of the holy is bound up with the hope that some day my remote descendants will live in a global civilization in which love is pretty much the only law."[5]

Rorty enrolled at the University of Chicago shortly before turning 15, where he received a bachelor's and a master's degree in philosophy (studying under Richard McKeon),[6][7] continuing at Yale University for a PhD in philosophy (1952–1956).[8] He married another academic, Amélie Oksenberg Rorty (Harvard University professor), with whom he had a son, Jay, in 1954. After two years in the United States Army, he taught at Wellesley College for three years until 1961.[9] Rorty divorced his wife and then married Stanford University bioethicist Mary Varney Rorty in 1972. They had two children, Kevin and Patricia. While Richard Rorty was a "strict atheist" (Habermas),[5] Mary Varney Rorty was a practicing Mormon.[4]
Rorty was a professor of philosophy at Princeton University for 21 years.[9] In 1981, he was a recipient of a MacArthur Fellowship, commonly known as the "Genius Award," in its first year of awarding, and in 1982 he became Kenan Professor of the Humanities at the University Of Virginia.[10] In 1997 Rorty became professor of comparative literature (and philosophy, by courtesy), at Stanford University, where he spent the remainder of his academinc career [10] During this period he was especially popular, and once quipped that he had been assigned to the position of "transitory professor of trendy studies".[11]
Rorty's doctoral dissertation, "The Concept of Potentiality" was an historical study of the concept, completed under the supervision of Paul Weiss, but his first book (as editor), The Linguistic Turn (1967), was firmly in the prevailing analytic mode, collecting classic essays on the linguistic turn in analytic philosophy. However, he gradually became acquainted with the American philosophical movement known as pragmatism, particularly the writings of John Dewey. The noteworthy work being done by analytic philosophers such as Willard Van Orman Quine and Wilfrid Sellars caused significant shifts in his thinking, which were reflected in his next book, Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature (1979).
Pragmatists generally hold that the meaning of a proposition is determined by its use in linguistic practice. Rorty combined pragmatism about truth and other matters with a later Wittgensteinian philosophy of language which declares that meaning is a social-linguistic product, and sentences do not 'link up' with the world in a correspondence relation. Rorty wrote in his Contingency, Irony, and Solidarity (1989):

"Truth cannot be out there -- cannot exist independently of the human mind -- because sentences cannot so exist, or be out there. The world is out there, but descriptions of the world are not. Only descriptions of the world can be true or false. The world on its own unaided by the describing activities of humans cannot.”(5)

Views like this led Rorty to question many of philosophy's most basic assumptions&#160;— and have also led to him being apprehended as a postmodern/deconstructionist philosopher. Indeed, from the late 1980s through the 1990s, Rorty focused on the continental philosophical tradition, examining the works of Friederich Nietzsche, Martin Heidegger, Michel Foucault, Jean-François Lyotard and Jacques Derrida. His work from this period included Contingency, Irony, and Solidarity, Essays on Heidegger and Others: Philosophical Papers (1991) and Truth and Progress: Philosophical Papers (1998). The latter two works attempt to bridge the dichotomy between analytic and continental philosophy by claiming that the two traditions complement rather than oppose each other.
According to Rorty, analytic philosophy may not have lived up to its pretensions and may not have solved the puzzles it thought it had. Yet such philosophy, in the process of finding reasons for putting those pretensions and puzzles aside, helped earn itself an important place in the history of ideas. By giving up on the quest for apodicticity and finality that Edmund Husserl shared with Rudolf Carnap and Bertrand Russell, and by finding new reasons for thinking that such quest will never succeed, analytic philosophy cleared a path that leads past scientism, just as the German idealists cleared a path that led around empiricism.
In the last fifteen years of his life, Rorty continued to publish his writings, including four volumes of his archived philosophical papers, Achieving Our Country (1998), a political manifesto partly based on readings of Dewey and Walt Whitman in which he defended the idea of a progressive, pragmatic left against what he feels are defeatist, anti-liberal, anti-humanist positions espoused by the critical left and continental school. Rorty felt these anti-humanist positions were personified by figures like Nietzsche, Heidegger, and Foucault. Such theorists were also guilty of an "inverted Platonism" in which they attempted to craft overarching, metaphysical, "sublime" philosophies—which in fact contradicted their core claims to be ironist and contingent. Rorty's last works, after his move to Stanford University, focused on the place of religion in contemporary life, liberal communities, comparative literature and philosophy as "cultural politics".
Shortly before his death, he wrote a piece called "The Fire of Life", (published in the November 2007 issue of Poetry magazine),[12] in which he meditates on his diagnosis and the comfort of poetry. He concludes, "I now wish that I had spent somewhat more of my life with verse. This is not because I fear having missed out on truths that are incapable of statement in prose. There are no such truths; there is nothing about death that Swinburne and Landor knew but Epicurus and Heidegger failed to grasp. Rather, it is because I would have lived more fully if I had been able to rattle off more old chestnuts — just as I would have if I had made more close friends. Cultures with richer vocabularies are more fully human — farther removed from the beasts — than those with poorer ones; individual men and women are more fully human when their memories are amply stocked with verses."
On June 8, 2007, Rorty died in his home from pancreatic cancer.[8][10][13]
Major works[edit]
Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature[edit]
Main article: Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature
In Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature (1979), Rorty argues that the central problems of modern epistemology depend upon a picture of the mind as trying to faithfully represent (or "mirror") a mind-independent, external reality. If we give up this metaphor, then the entire enterprise of foundationalist epistemology is misguided. A foundationalist believes that in order to avoid the regress inherent in claiming that all beliefs are justified by other beliefs, some beliefs must be self-justifying and form the foundations to all knowledge.
There were two senses of "foundationalism" criticized in Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature. In the epistemological sense, Rorty criticized the attempt to justify knowledge claims by tracing them to a set of foundations (e.g., self-evident premises or noninferential sensations); more broadly, he criticized the claim of philosophy to function foundationally within a culture. The former argument draws on Sellars's critique of the idea that there is a "given" in sensory perception, in combination with Quine's critique of the distinction between analytic sentences (sentences which are true solely in virtue of what they mean) and synthetic sentences (sentences made true by the world). Each critique, taken alone, provides a problem for a conception of how philosophy ought to proceed, yet leaves enough of the tradition intact to proceed with its former aspirations. Combined, Rorty claimed, the two critiques are devastating. With no privileged insight into the structure of belief and no privileged realm of truths of meaning, we have, instead, knowledge as those beliefs that pay their way. The only worthwhile description of the actual process of inquiry, Rorty claimed, was a Kuhnian account of the standard phases of the progress of disciplines, oscillating through normal and abnormal periods, between routine problem-solving and intellectual crises.
After eliminating foundationalism, Rorty argues that one of the few roles left for a philosopher is to act as an intellectual gadfly, attempting to induce a revolutionary break with previous practice, a role that Rorty was happy to take on himself. Rorty suggests that each generation tries to subject all disciplines to the model that the most successful discipline of the day employs. In Rorty's view, the success of modern science has led academics in philosophy and the humanities to mistakenly imitate scientific methods. Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature popularized and extended ideas of Wilfrid Sellars (the critique of the Myth of the given) and Willard Van Orman Quine (the critique of the analytic-synthetic distinction) and others who advocate the Wittgensteinian doctrine of "dissolving" rather than solving philosophical problems.
Contingency, Irony, and Solidarity[edit]
Main article: Contingency, Irony, and Solidarity
In Contingency, Irony, and Solidarity (1989), Rorty abandons specifically analytic modes of explication in favor of narrative pastiche in order to develop an alternative conceptual vocabulary to that of the "Platonists" he rejects. This schema is based on the belief that there is no worthwhile theory of truth, aside from a boring, non-epistemic semantic one (as Donald Davidson developed out of the work of Alfred Tarski). Rorty suggests that the task of philosophy should be distinguished along public and private lines. Private philosophers, who provide one with greater abilities to (re)create oneself, a view adapted from Nietzsche and which Rorty also identifies with the novels of Marcel Proust and Vladimir Nabokov, should not be expected to help with public problems. For a public philosophy, one might turn to Rawls or Habermas.
This book also marks his first attempt to specifically articulate a political vision consistent with his philosophy, the vision of a diverse community bound together by opposition to cruelty, and not by abstract ideas such as 'justice' or 'common humanity,' policed by the separation of the public and private realms of life.
In this book, Rorty introduces the terminology of Ironism, which he uses to describe his mindset and his philosophy.
Objectivity, Relativism, and Truth[edit]
Amongst the essays in Objectivity, Relativism, and Truth: Philosophical Papers, Volume 1 (1990), is "The Priority of Democracy to Philosophy," in which Rorty defends Rawls against communitarian critics. Rorty argues that liberalism can "get along without philosophical presuppositions," while at the same time conceding to communitarians that "a conception of the self that makes the community constitutive of the self does comport well with liberal democracy."[14] For Rorty, social institutions ought to be thought of as "experiments in cooperation rather than as attempts to embody a universal and ahistorical order."[15]
Essays on Heidegger and Others[edit]
In this text, Rorty focuses primarily on the continental philosophers Heidegger and Derrida. He argues that these European "post-Nietzscheans" share much with American pragmatists, in that they critique metaphysics and reject the correspondence theory of truth. When discussing Derrida, Rorty claims that Derrida is most useful when viewed as a funny writer who attempted to circumvent the Western philosophical tradition, rather than the inventor of a philosophical (or literary) "method." In this vein, Rorty criticizes Derrida's followers like Paul de Man for taking deconstructive literary theory too seriously.
Achieving Our Country[edit]
Main article: Achieving Our Country
In Achieving Our Country: Leftist Thought in Twentieth-Century America (1997), Rorty differentiates between what he sees as the two sides of the Left, a cultural Left and a progressive Left. He criticizes the cultural Left, which is exemplified by post-structuralists such as Foucault and postmodernists such as Lyotard, for offering critiques of society, but no alternatives (or alternatives that are so vague and general as to be abdications). Although these intellectuals make insightful claims about the ills of society, Rorty suggests that they provide no alternatives and even occasionally deny the possibility of progress. On the other hand, the progressive Left, exemplified for Rorty by the pragmatist Dewey, Whitman and James Baldwin, makes hope for a better future its priority. Without hope, Rorty argues, change is spiritually inconceivable and the cultural Left has begun to breed cynicism. Rorty sees the progressive Left as acting in the philosophical spirit of pragmatism.
On human rights[edit]
Rorty's notion of human rights is grounded on the notion of sentimentality. He contended that throughout history humans have devised various means of construing certain groups of individuals as inhuman or subhuman. Thinking in rationalist (foundationalist) terms will not solve this problem, he claimed. Rorty advocated the creation of a culture of global human rights in order to stop violations from happening through a sentimental education. He argued that we should create a sense of empathy or teach empathy to others so as to understand others' suffering.[16]
Reception and criticism[edit]
Rorty is among the most widely discussed and controversial contemporary philosophers,[17] and his works have provoked thoughtful responses from many well-respected philosophers. In Robert Brandom's anthology, entitled Rorty and His Critics, for example, Rorty's philosophy is discussed by Donald Davidson, Jürgen Habermas, Hilary Putnam, John McDowell, Jacques Bouveresse, and Daniel Dennett, among others.[18] In 2007, Roger Scruton wrote, "Rorty was paramount among those thinkers who advance their own opinion as immune to criticism, by pretending that it is not truth but consensus that counts, while defining the consensus in terms of people like themselves".[19]
John McDowell is strongly influenced by Rorty, particularly by Rorty's Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature (1979).[20] In continental philosophy, authors such as Jürgen Habermas, Gianni Vattimo, Jacques Derrida, Albrecht Wellmer, Hans Joas, Chantal Mouffe, Simon Critchley, Esa Saarinen and Mike Sandbothe are influenced in different ways by Rorty's thinking. American novelist David Foster Wallace titled a short story in his collection Oblivion: Stories "Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature," and critics have accredited Rorty's influence to some of Wallace's writings on Irony.[21]
Susan Haack has been a fierce critic of Rorty's neopragmatism. Haack criticises Rorty's claim to be a pragmatist at all and wrote a short play called We Pragmatists, where Rorty and Charles Sanders Peirce have a fictional conversation using only accurate quotes from their own writing. For Haack, the only link between Rorty's neopragmatism and the pragmatism of Peirce is the name. Haack believes Rorty's neopragmatism is both anti-philosophical, anti-intellectual and exposes people further to rhetorical manipulation.[9][22][23]
Although Rorty was a confirmed liberal, his political and moral philosophies have been attacked by commentators from the Left, some of whom believe them to be insufficient frameworks for social justice.[24] Rorty was also criticized by others for his rejection of the idea that science can depict the world.[25] One criticism, especially of Contingency, irony, and solidarity is that Rorty's philosophical 'hero', the ironist, is an elitist figure.[26] Rorty claims that the majority of people would be "commonsensically nominalist and historicist" but not ironist. These people would combine an ongoing attention to the particular as opposed to the transcendent (nominalism), with an awareness of their place in a continuum of contingent lived experience alongside other individuals (historicist), without necessarily having continual doubts about the resulting worldview as the ironist does. An ironist is someone who: 1) "has radical and continuing doubts about their final vocabulary"; 2) "realizes that argument phrased in their vocabulary can neither underwrite nor dissolve these doubts"; and 3) "does not think their vocabulary is closer to reality than others" (all 73, Contingency, irony, and solidarity). On the other hand the Italian philosopher Gianni Vattimo alongside the Spanish philosopher Santiago Zabala in their 2011 book Hermeneutic Communism: from Heidegger to Marx affirm that "together with Richard Rorty we also consider it a flaw that `the main thing contemporary academic Marxists inherit from Marx and Engels is the conviction that the quest for the cooperative commonwealth should be scientific rather than utopian, knowing rather than romantic.′ As we will show hermeneutics contains all the utopian and romantic features that Rorty refers to because, contrary to the knowledge of science, it does not claim modern universality but rather postmodern particularism.”[27]
Rorty often draws on a broad range of other philosophers to support his views, and his interpretation of their works has been contested.[28] Since Rorty is working from a tradition of re-interpretation, he remains uninterested in 'accurately' portraying other thinkers, but rather in utilizing their work in the same way a literary critic might use a novel. His essay "The Historiography of Philosophy: Four Genres" is a thorough description of how he treats the greats in the history of philosophy. In Contingency, irony, and solidarity, Rorty attempts to disarm those who criticize his writings by arguing that their philosophical criticisms are made using axioms that are explicitly rejected within Rorty's own philosophy.[29] For instance, Rorty defines allegations of irrationality as affirmations of vernacular "otherness", and so—Rorty claims—accusations of irrationality can be expected during any argument and must simply be brushed aside.[30]
Select bibliography[edit]

Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1979. ISBN
Consequences of Pragmatism. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1982. ISBN 978-0816610631
Contingency, Irony, and Solidarity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989. ISBN 978-0-521-35381-6
Philosophical Papers vols I-IV:

Objectivity, Relativism and Truth: Philosophical Papers I. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991. ISBN 978-0521353694
Essays on Heidegger and Others: Philosophical Papers II. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991. ISBN
Truth and Progress: Philosophical Papers III. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998. ISBN
Philosophy as Cultural Politics: Philosophical Papers IV. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007.


Mind, Language, and Metaphilosophy: Early Philosophical Papers Eds. S. Leach and J. Tartaglia. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2014. ISBN 978-1-107-61229-7.
Achieving Our Country: Leftist Thought in Twentieth Century America. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1998. ISBN 978-0674003118
Philosophy and Social Hope. New York: Penguin, 2000. ISBN
Against Bosses, Against Oligarchies: A Conversation with Richard Rorty. Chicago: Prickly Paradigm Press, 2002. ISBN
The Future of Religion with Gianni Vattimo Ed. Santiago Zabala. New York: Columbia University Press, 2005. ISBN 978-0231134941
An Ethics for Today: Finding Common Ground Between Philosophy and Religion. New York: Columbia University Press, 2005. ISBN 978-0-231-15056-9

As editor:

The Linguistic Turn, Essays in Philosophical Method, (1967), ed. by Richard M. Rorty, University of Chicago press, 1992, ISBN 9780226725697 (an introduction and two retrospective essays)
Philosophy in History. ed. by R. Rorty, J. B. Schneewind and Quentin Skinner, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985 (an essay by R. Rorty, Historiography of philosophy, pp. &#160;29–76)

See also[edit]




New York City portal



Philosophy portal




Anti-foundationalism
Contributions to liberal theory
Deconstruction-and-religion
List of American philosophers
List of thinkers influenced by deconstruction

Further reading[edit]

Richard Rorty: Critical Assessments (4 vols) / James Tartaglia, 2009
The domestication of Derrida: Rorty, pragmatism and deconstruction/ Lorenzo Fabbri, 2008
Richard Rorty: The Making of an American Philosopher / Neil Gross, 2008
Rorty's Politics of Redescription / Gideon Calder, 2007
Rorty and the Mirror of Nature / James Tartaglia, 2007
Richard Rorty: Pragmatism and Political Liberalism / Michael Bacon, 2007
Richard Rorty: politics and vision / Christopher Voparil, 2006
Richard Rorty: his philosophy under discussion / Andreas Vieth, 2005
Richard Rorty / Charles B Guignon., 2003
Rorty / Gideon Calder, 2003
Richard Rorty's American faith / Taub, Gad Shmuel, 2003
The ethical ironist: Kierkegaard, Rorty, and the educational quest / Rohrer, Patricia Jean, 2003
Doing philosophy as a way to individuation: Reading Rorty and Cavell / Kwak, Duck-Joo, 2003
Richard Rorty / Alan R Malachowski, 2002
Richard Rorty: critical dialogues / Matthew Festenstei, 2001
Richard Rorty: education, philosophy, and politics / Michael Peters, 2001
Rorty and his critics / Robert Brandom, 2000
On Rorty / Richard Rumana, 2000
Philosophy and freedom&#160;: Derrida, Rorty, Habermas, Foucault / John McCumber, 2000
A pragmatist's progress?: Richard Rorty and American intellectual history / John Pettegrew, 2000
Problems of the modern self: Reflections on Rorty, Taylor, Nietzsche, and Foucault / Dudrick, David Francis, 2000
The last conceptual revolution: a critique of Richard Rorty's political philosophy / Eric Gander, 1999
Richard Rorty's politics: liberalism at the end of the American century / Markar Melkonian, 1999
The work of friendship&#160;: Rorty, his critics, and the project of solidarity / Dianne Rothleder, 1999
For the love of perfection&#160;: Richard Rorty and liberal education / René Vincente Arcilla, 1995
Rorty &amp; pragmatism: the philosopher responds to his critics / Herman J Saatkamp, 1995
Richard Rorty&#160;: prophet and poet of the new pragmatism / David L Hall, 1994
Reading Rorty: critical responses to Philosophy and the mirror of nature (and beyond) / Alan R Malachowski, 1990
Rorty's humanistic pragmatism&#160;: philosophy democratized / Konstantin Kolenda, 1990
Arriaga M / Richard Rorty's anti-foundationalism and traditional philosophy's claim of social relevance.

Notes[edit]


^ http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/rorty/#1
^ "Richard Rorty: The Making of an American Philosopher". press.uchicago.edu. 1931-10-04. Retrieved 2012-09-26.&#160;
^ Bernstein, Adam (11 June 2007). "Richard Rorty, 75; Leading U.S. Pragmatist Philosopher". washingtonpost.com. Retrieved 26 September 2012.&#160;
^ a b c Bruce Kuklick. "Neil Gross, Richard Rorty: The Making of an American Philosopher." Transactions of the Charles S. Peirce Society 47.1 (2011):36.
^ a b "Jürgen Habermas: Philosopher, poet and friend (12/06/2007)". signandsight. Retrieved 2012-09-26.&#160;
^ Marchetti, Giancarlo. "Interview with Richard Rorty." Philosophy Now Volume 43, Oct.-Nov. 2003.
^ Ryerson, James. "The Quest for Uncertainty Richard Rorty's Pragmatic Pilgrimage." Linguafranca Volume 10, Dec. 2000/Jan. 2001. Web. 21 June 2011. &lt;http://linguafranca.mirror.theinfo.org/print/0012/feature_quest.html&gt;
^ a b "Richard Rorty, distinguished public intellectual and controversial philosopher, dead at 75" (Stanford's announcement), June 10, 2007
^ a b c Stanford Encyclopedia Of Philosophy
^ a b c "Richard Rorty, Philosopher, Dies at 75" (NY Times Obituary), June 11, 2007
^ Ryerson, James. "Essay: Thinking Cheerfully." The New York Times Book Review. July 22, 2007: p 27.
^ Rorty, Richard (November 2007). "The Fire of Life". Poetry magazine.&#160;
^ "Richard Rorty," (short obituary), June 9, 2007.
^ Objectivity, Relativism, and Truth: Philosophical Papers, Volume 1 (1990), p 179
^ Objectivity, Relativism, and Truth: Philosophical Papers, Volume 1 (1990), p 196
^ See Barreto, José-Manuel. "Rorty and Human Rights: Contingency, Emotions and How to Defend Human Rights Telling Stories." Utrecht Law Review, Volume 7 Issue 2 April 2011
^ (Last sentence of the introduction)
^ Amazon.com: Rorty and His Critics (Philosophers and their Critics): Robert B. Brandom: Books
^ Scruton, Roger (2007-06-12). "Richard Rorty's legacy". openDemocracy. Retrieved 2012-09-26.&#160;
^ In the preface to Mind and World (pp. ix-x) McDowell states that "it will be obvious that Rorty's work is [...] central for the way I define my stance here".
^ Howard, Jennifer. "The Afterlife of David Foster Wallace". Chronicle of Higher Education. Retrieved 30 December 2013.&#160;
^ Susan Haack (November 1997). "Vulgar Rortyism". New Criterion.&#160;
^ Haack, Susan (1993). "Ch. 9: Vulgar Pragmatism: an Unedifying Prospect". Evidence and Inquiry. Oxford UK: Blackwell. ISBN&#160;0-631-11851-9.&#160;
^ "Objectivity and Action: Wal-Mart and the Legacy of Marx and Nietzsche", A discussion of Terry Eagleton's attacks on Rorty's philosophy as insufficient in the fight against corporations such as Wal-Mart
^ "The failure to recognize science's particular powers to depict reality, Daniel Dennett wrote, shows 'flatfooted ignorance of the proven methods of scientific truth-seeking and their power.'"[1]
^ Rob Reich - The Paradoxes of Education in Rorty's Liberal Utopia
^ Gianni Vattimo and Santiago Zabala. Hermeneutic Communism: From Heidegger to Marx Columbia University Press. 2011. Pgs. 2 and 3
^ Richard Rorty (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy)
^ Contingency, Irony, and Solidarity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989. ISBN, p 44
^ Contingency, Irony, and Solidarity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989. ISBN, p 48


External links[edit]





This article's use of external links may not follow Wikipedia's policies or guidelines. Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links, and converting useful links where appropriate into footnote references. (December 2014)





Wikiquote has quotations related to: Richard Rorty



Richard Rorty at DMOZ
UCIspace @ the Libraries digital collection: Richard Rorty born digital files, 1988-2003
Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy article
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry
Rorty audio, "Dewey and Posner on Pragmatism and Moral Progress," University of Chicago Law School, April 14, 2006.
PhilWeb's entry for Richard Rorty An exhaustive compilation of on-line links and off-line sources.
Rorty essays published in Dissent (magazine)
Rorty audio, informative interview by Prof. Robert P. Harrison, Nov. 22, 2005.
Rorty interview, "Against Bosses, Against Oligarchies," conducted by Derek Nystrom &amp; Kent Puckett, Prickly Paradigm Press, Sept. 1998.
Rorty interview, The Atlantic Monthly, April 23, 1998.
Rorty Memorial Lecture by Jürgen Habermas, Stanford University, Nov. 2, 2007.
Rorty eulogized by Richard Posner, Brian Eno, Mark Edmundson, Jürgen Habermas, Daniel Dennett, Stanley Fish, David Bromwich, Simon Blackburn, Morris Dickstein &amp; others, Slate Magazine, June 18, 2007.
"The Inspiring Power of the Shy Thinker: Richard Rorty" by Hans Ulrich Gumbrecht, TELOS, June 13, 2007.
Richard Rorty at Princeton: Personal Recollections by Raymond Geuss in Arion, Winter 2008
Rereading Rorty by Albrecht Wellmer in Krisis, 2008.









v
t
e


Philosophy of mind






Philosophers



Anscombe
Austin
Aquinas
Bain
Bergson
Bhattacharya
Block
Brentano
Broad
Burge
Chalmers
Churchland
Dennett
Dharmakirti
Davidson
Descartes
Goldman
Heidegger
Husserl
Fodor
James
Kierkegaard
Leibniz
Lewis
McDowell
Merleau-Ponty
Minsky
Moore
Nagel
Parfit
Putnam
Popper
Rorty
Ryle
Searle
Spinoza
Turing
Vasubandhu
Wittgenstein
Zhuangzi
more...








Theories



Behaviorism
Biological naturalism
Dualism
Eliminative materialism
Emergent materialism
Epiphenomenalism
Functionalism
Idealism
Interactionism
Materialism
Monism
Naïve realism
Neutral monism
Phenomenalism
Phenomenology

existential
neurophenomenology


Physicalism

identity theory


Pragmatism
Property dualism
Representational
Solipsism
Subjectivism
Substance dualism








Concepts



Abstract object
Artificial intelligence
Chinese room
Cognition
Cognitive closure
Concept
Concept and object
Consciousness
Hard problem of consciousness
Hypostatic abstraction
Idea
Identity
Ingenuity
Intelligence
Intentionality
Introspection
Intuition
Language of thought
Materialism
Mental event
Mental image
Mental process
Mental property
Mental representation
Mind
Mind–body problem
New mysterianism
Pain
Problem of other minds
Propositional attitude
Qualia
Tabula rasa
Understanding
Zombie
more...








Related topics



Metaphysics
Philosophy of artificial intelligence&#160;/ information&#160;/ perception&#160;/ self











Portal
Category
Task Force
Discussion
















v
t
e


Martin Heidegger






Philosophy



Aletheia
Dasein
Ekstase
Fundamental ontology
Gestell
Hermeneutic circle
Language speaks
Metaphysics of presence
Ontic
Terminology
Thrownness
World disclosure








Works



Being and Time (1927)
Kant and the Problem of Metaphysics (1929)
Introduction to Metaphysics (1935)
Contributions to Philosophy (1936–1938)
Hölderlin's Hymn "The Ister" (1942)
The Question Concerning Technology (1949)
The Origin of the Work of Art (1950)
What Is Called Thinking? (1951-2)
Black Notebooks (1931-1941)
Heidegger Gesamtausgabe








Film and TV



The Ister
Being in the World
Human, All Too Human








Related topics



Heidegger scholars
Heidegger Studies
Views on Nazism













Authority control



WorldCat
VIAF: 89085824
LCCN: n79063821
ISNI: 0000 0001 2142 9496
GND: 118970623
SELIBR: 209277
SUDOC: 028709098
BNF: cb12035977b (data)
NLA: 35461392
NDL: 00454615
NKC: jn19990007134
BNE: XX1056682















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Richard_Rorty&amp;oldid=689403779"					
				Categories: 1931 births2007 deaths20th-century American writers21st-century American writers20th-century philosophers21st-century philosophersAmerican philosophersAmerican people of German descentDeaths from pancreatic cancerHeidegger scholarsIrony theoristsMacArthur FellowsPhilosophers of languagePhilosophers of mindPhilosophers of sciencePragmatistsPrinceton University facultyAmerican social democratsAmerican social liberalsUniversity of Chicago alumniWellesley College facultyWittgensteinian philosophersGuggenheim FellowsHidden categories: Articles with hCardsWikipedia external links cleanup from December 2014Wikipedia spam cleanup from December 2014Articles with DMOZ linksWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiers				
							
		
		
			