


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Sati' al-Husri
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				



Portrait of Sati al-Husri, 1918-20


Sāṭi` al-Ḥuṣrī (in Arabic: ساطع الحصري, in Turkish: Mustafa Satı Bey, August 1882 – 1968) was an Ottoman and Syrian writer, educationalist and an influential Arab nationalist thinker in the 20th century.



Contents


1 Early life
2 Career as an educationalist
3 Ideological views
4 Quotes
5 Notes
6 Sources



Early life[edit]
Al-Husri was born in Sana'a, Yemen, to a government official from a wealthy Aleppine family. Due to frequent moving he never received a formal education from a madrasah, but spent his formative years in Istanbul, capital of the Ottoman Empire which dominated the region at the time. Before studying the Arabic language, he learned Turkish and French. When he spoke, he reportedly had a slight Turkish accent.[1]
Career as an educationalist[edit]
In 1900, he graduated from the Royal Academy, and worked as a schoolteacher in Ioannina in Epirus, then part of the European territories of the Ottoman Empire. During this period, he began to show an interest in questions of nationality and was exposed to the competing strands of European nationalism. After five years in Yanina, he took up a high-ranking administrative position in Macedonia, where the officers who would later form the Committee for Union and Progress (CUP) had a strong presence. After the Young Turk revolution of 1908, he was appointed in May 1909 director of the Teachers' Institute, Darülmuallimin in Istanbul, where he initiated major reforms in pedagogy and the public education system. In this period he became editor of two important educational reviews ("Tedrisat-ı İbtidaiye Mecmuası", "Muallim").[2] From 1910 to 1912, he visited European countries to examine modern educational methods.[3] Initially a supporter of Ottomanism and the Young Turks, from 1916 on he moved towards Arabism.[3]
The Ottoman government granted al-Husri the post of director-general of education in the Syria Province at the beginning of World War I in 1914.[1] In 1919, after the establishment of an independent Arab state in Syria under Faisal, al-Husri moved to Damascus where he was appointed Director General of Education, and later Minister of Education.[3]
Al-Husri followed Faisal to Iraq in 1920 after the French imposed their mandate on Syria, and from 1921 to 1927 held the position of Director of General Education. In addition to other positions, he subsequently held the post of head of the Higher Teachers' Training College until 1937. During these years he played an influential role in promoting Arab nationalism through the educational system, and brought in teachers from Syria and Palestine to teach Arabic history and culture. According to Malik Mufti, his "chief accomplishment was to inculcate into the political and military elites of the country a permanent commitment to the vision of a strong and integrated Iraq destined one day to lead the entire Arab world."[4]
In 1941 nationalist army officers, from the first generation to have come under the influence of al-Husri's ideas,[5] carried out a coup d'état against the pro-British monarchy and government, briefly installing a pro-Axis regime under Rashid Ali al-Gailani. When British forces restored the monarchy, al-Husri was deported as were over a hundred of the Syrian and Palestinian teachers he had induced to come to Iraq.[6]
Al-Husri's next major enterprise was the reform of the educational system in Syria. In 1943 the newly elected Syrian president Shukri al-Kuwatli invited him to Damascus, then still under the French mandate, to draw up a new curriculum along Arab nationalist lines for the country's secondary education system. Al-Husri established a curriculum informed by his nationalist ideas which considerably reduced the French cultural element and broke away from the French educational model. Against the bitter opposition of the French, and the reservations of various political figures, the new curriculum was introduced in December 1944, but the sudden change caused confusion and shortages of the new schoolbooks did nothing to improve its reception. A year later, the former curriculum was restored.[7]
In 1947, al-Husri moved to Cairo, taking up a position in the Cultural Directorate of the League of Arab States. He would remain there for 18 years, during which he produced most of his works. He returned to Baghdad in 1965, and died there in December 1968.[3]
Ideological views[edit]
Al-Husri's approach to Arab nationalism was influenced by nineteenth-century European thinkers, especially German romantic nationalists. Historian Maher Charif describes him as having a "cultural-sentimental" approach to nationalism. He viewed the nation as a living entity, and like other thinkers of his school insisted on its long-standing historic existence, even if its members were unconscious of that or refused to be considered an Arab. For al-Husri, the basic constituent elements of a nation were a shared language and a shared history. He rejected the idea that other factors, such as state action, religion, or economic factors, could play a part in bringing about nationalist sentiment; this was solely an emotional phenomenon arising from unity of language and culture.[8]
Al-Husri saw localist tendencies as the main obstacle to the realisation of nationalist goals, but pointed to the German and Italian experiences as indications that they would eventually be overcome. Communist internationalism was also a threat, but by the mid-1920s, with the Caliphate abolished, al-Husri was confident that the challenge posed by pan-Islamism was vanquished.[9]
Charif states that al-Husri "established a barrier between civilisation on the one hand, and culture on the other hand, taking the view that the first, which comprises the sciences, technology and modes of production, is intrinsically 'universal', while the latter, which comprises customs and language, is as such 'national'." The Arab nation should, therefore, adopt all that the west had to offer in the first sphere, but jealously preserve its own culture. This distinction was influential among later nationalist theorists.[10]
Al-Husri paid particular attention to questions of language, a difficult issue in the Arab world due to widespread diglossia. He considered that a language reform was necessary given the situation whereby most Arabs were unable to use Classical Arabic, the universal Arab written language, yet could not communicate successfully with each other in the greatly differing spoken dialects of the Arab world. His proposal was that, at least as a temporary measure pending improved education, a somewhat simplified form of Classical Arabic should be developed which would be to some degree closer to the spoken dialects, yet retain its position as a universal language common to all Arabs.
Quotes[edit]

Every Arab-speaking people is an Arab people. Every individual belonging to one of these Arabic-speaking peoples is an Arab. And if he does not recognize this, and if he is not proud of his Arabism, then we must look for the reasons that have made him take this stand. It may be an expression of ignorance; in that case we must teach him the truth. It may spring from an indifference or false consciousness; in that case we must enlighten him and lead him to the right path. It may result from extreme egoism; in that case we must limit his egoism. But under no circumstances, should we say: "As long as he does not wish to be an Arab, and as long as he is disdainful of his Arabness, then he is not an Arab." He is an Arab regardless of his own wishes. Whether ignorant, indifferent, undutiful, or disloyal, he is an Arab, but an Arab without consciousness or feeling, and perhaps even without conscience. (Translation from Adeed Dawisha, Arab Nationalism in the Twentieth Century: From Triumph to Despair [Princeton and Oxford, 2003] p.&#160;72.


We can say that the system to which we should direct our hopes and aspirations is a Fascist system (1930), translated by William L. Cleveland, The Making of an Arab Nationalist: Ottomanism and Arabism in the Life and Thought of Sati' al-Husri (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1971), p.&#160;127

Notes[edit]

^ a b Dawisha, p.49.
^ Kara, pp. 264-293.
^ a b c d Charif, pp. 239-240.
^ Mufti, pp. 28-29
^ Mufti, p. 34
^ Mufti, p. 37n.
^ Moubayed, p.
^ Charif, p. 204.
^ Charif, p. 205.
^ Charif, pp. 204-205.

Sources[edit]

Charif, Maher, Rihanat al-nahda fi'l-fikr al-'arabi, Damascus, Dar al-Mada, 2000
Cleveland, William L.: The making of an Arab nationalist. Ottomanism and Arabism in the life and thought of Sati' al-Husri. Princeton, N.J. 1971.
Kara, Cevat, "Das Dârülmuallimîn unter Sâtı Bey. Wegbereiter moderner Pädagogik im Osmanischen Reich," in: Yavuz Köse (ed.), Istanbul: Vom imperialen Herrschersitz zur Megapolis. Historiographische Betrachtungen zu Gesellschaft, Institutionen und Räumen, Munich: Meisenbauer, 2006, 264-293
Moubayed, Sami, The George Washington of Syria: The Rise and Fall of Shukri al-Quwatli, Beirut, Dar al-Zakira, 2005
Mufti, Malik, Sovereign Creations: Pan-Arabism and Political Order in Syria and Iraq, Ithaca, Cornell University Press, 1996









v
t
e


Arab nationalism






Ideology



Arab socialism
Ba'athism
Nasserism
Pan-Arabism
Third International Theory








History



Arabization
Arab Revolt
Intercommunal conflict in Mandatory Palestine
Iraqi revolt against the British
Great Syrian Revolt
1936–39 Arab revolt in Palestine
1941 Iraqi coup d'état
Arab–Israeli conflict
Egyptian Revolution of 1952
United Arab Republic
United Arab States
Arab Federation
14 July Revolution
1959 Mosul uprising
Arab Cold War
North Yemen Civil War
Dhofar Rebellion
Ramadan Revolution
1961 Syrian coup d'état
1963 Syrian coup d'état
November 1963 Iraqi coup d'état
Aden Emergency
Unified Political Command
1966 Syrian coup d'état
Six-Day War
17 July Revolution
Ba'athist Iraq
1969 Libyan coup d'état
Federation of Arab Republics
Arab Islamic Republic
Arab separatism in Khuzestan
1979 Khuzestan uprising
Popular Arab and Islamic Congress








Concepts



Arab identity
Arab Union
Greater Syria
Rejectionism








Personalities



Michel Aflaq
Jassem Alwan
Abdul Rahman Arif
Abdul Salam Arif
Zaki al-Arsuzi
Bashar al-Assad
Hafez al-Assad
Jamal al-Atassi
Lu'ay al-Atassi
Nureddin al-Atassi
Mansur al-Atrash
Sultan al-Atrash
Tariq Aziz
Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr
Ahmed Ben Bella
Salah al-Din al-Bitar
Houari Boumediene
Butrus al-Bustani
Izzat Darwaza
Izzat Ibrahim al-Douri
Faisal I of Iraq
Muammar Gaddafi
Rashid Ali al-Gaylani
George Habash
Sati' al-Husri
Hussein bin Ali, Sharif of Mecca
Saddam Hussein
Amin al-Husseini
Salah Jadid
Abd al-Rahman al-Kawakibi
Gamal Abdel Nasser
Abu Nidal
Adnan Pachachi
Shukri al-Quwatli
Ameen Rihani
Fuad al-Rikabi
Abdullah Rimawi
Hamdeen Sabahi
Constantin Zureiq








Organizations



Al-Awda
Al-Fatat
Al-Mourabitoun
Amal Movement
Arab Ba'ath Movement
Arab Higher Committee
Arab Liberation Army
Arab Nationalist Movement
Arab Socialist Action Party
Arab Socialist Union (Egypt)
Arab Socialist Union (Iraq)
Arabian Peninsula People's Union
Army of the Men of the Naqshbandi Order
Ba'ath Party
Ba'ath Party (Iraqi-dominated faction)
Ba'ath Party (Syrian-dominated faction)
Egyptian Revolutionary Command Council
Free Officers Movement (Egypt)
Free Princes Movement
General Military Council for Iraqi Revolutionaries
Independence Party (Mandatory Palestine)
Islamic Legion
Libyan Arab Socialist Union
National Liberation Front (Algeria)
Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine
Rejectionist Front
Revolutionary Command Council (Iraq)
Supreme Command for Jihad and Liberation








Literature



On the Way of Resurrection
The Battle for One Destiny








Symbolism



Eagle of Saladin
Flag of the Arab Revolt
Hawk of Quraish
Pan-Arab colors








Related topics



Algerian nationalism
Egyptian nationalism
Iraqi nationalism
Lebanese nationalism
Libyan nationalism
Palestinian nationalism
Somali nationalism
Syrian nationalism
Tunisian nationalism
Islamism
Pan-Islamism













Authority control



WorldCat
VIAF: 79014314
LCCN: n85079252
ISNI: 0000 0001 1771 7882
GND: 118708325
SELIBR: 34470
SUDOC: 071542981
BNF: cb10653443b (data)
NLA: 35094329















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sati%27_al-Husri&amp;oldid=691129592"					
				Categories: 20th-century Syrian writersSyrian ministers of educationArab nationalist thinkersOttoman Arabs1880 births1967 deathsPeople from Sana'aPeople from AleppoSyrian Arab nationalistsOttoman Arab nationalistsHidden categories: Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiers				
							
		
		
			