


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Schools of Islamic theology
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								  (Redirected from Islamic theology)
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				




Part of a series on


God in Islam



Allah Jalla Jalālah
in Arabic calligraphy





List


Allah
Names
Phrases and expressions
Theology
Oneness
Islamic creed
Negation
Transcendence
Nearness








Category
Islam portal







v
t
e






See Islamic schools and branches for different schools of thought; see Aqidah for the concept of the different "creeds" in Islam; see Ilm al-Kalam for the concept of theological discourse.



 Part of a series on Islam
Aqidah







Five Pillars of Islam


Shahādah
Ṣalāt


Ṣawm
Zakāh
Hajj


Aqidah schools of divinity
Sunni Islam
Ilm al-Kalam

Ash'ariyyah

Al-Ash'ari
Al-Baqillani
Al-Qushayri
Al-Ghazali
Ar-Razi
Al-Baydawi


Mâtûrîd’iyyah

Al-Maturidi



Textualist

Athar’iyyah

Ibn Hanbal
Ibn Qudamah
Ibn Taymiyyah
Ibn Qayyim
Al-Sindhi
Ibn ʿAbd al-Wahhab
Nāsr ud-Dīn al-Albanī



Shia Islam

Bāṭen’iyyah

Ibn Ismāʿīl
Al-Wafī


Ithnā‘ashariyyah

Al-Hilli
Allameh Majlesi



Other schools

Jabr’iyyah

Ibn Safwan


Murji'ah
Qadar’iyyah

Sinbuya Asvari
Al-Juhani
Mu'tazila

Ibn Ata
Ibn Ubayd












Sunni Islam1

Six articles of belief


Allah


Prophets


Holy books
Angels


The Last Judgement


Predestination









Shi'a2

Twelvers
Principles

Tawhīd
‘Adalah


Nubuwwah
Imāmah


Qiyamah


Practices

Ṣalāt
Ṣawm
Zakāh


Hajj
Khums
Jihad


Commanding what is just


Forbidding what is evil


Tawallā'
Tabarrá


Ismaili
Seven Pillars

Walāyah
Ṭawhid
Ṣalāt


Zakāh
Ṣawm
Hajj
Jihad









Kharijites3
Sixth Pillar of Islam




1 Including Ahmadis
2 Including Alevis, Druze &amp; Alawites
3 Including Ibadis
 Islam portal





v
t
e







Part of a series on


Islam







Beliefs



Oneness of God



Prophets
Revealed books




Angels
Predestination



Day of Resurrection









Practices



Profession of faith
Prayer




Fasting
Alms
Pilgrimage









Texts and laws



Quran
Sunnah
Hadith




Sharia (law)
Fiqh (jurisprudence)



Kalam (dialectic)








History



Timeline
Muhammad



Ahl al-Bayt
Sahabah




Rashidun
Imamate




Caliphate
Spread of Islam
Slavery










Denominations



Sunni
Shia
Sufism
Ibadi
Quranism
Ahmadiyya
African American
Nondenominational









Culture and society



Academics
Animals
Art
Calendar




Children
Demographics
Feminism




Festivals
Mosque
Philosophy
Politics




Proselytizing
Science
Women









Related topics



Criticism of Islam
Islam and other religions



Islamism
Islamophobia



Glossary









 Islam portal







v
t
e





Schools of Islamic theology are various branches in different schools of thought regarding Islamic creed (ʿAqīdah). According to Muhammad Abu Zahra, Qadariyyah, Jahmites, Murji'ah, Mu'tazila, Batiniyyah, Ash'ari, Maturidi, Athari (also known as Hadith collectors, Hanbalites and their followers Salafiyyah) are the ancient schools of Islamic divinity.
The main split between Sunni and Shia Islam was initially more political than theological, but over time theological differences have developed. Still, differences in "creed" or aqidah occur as divisions orthogonal to the main divisions in Islam along political or legalistic lines, such that a Mu'tazili might, for example, have belong to the Jafari, Zaidi or even Hanafi school of jurisprudence.



Contents


1 Divinity schools in Islam
2 Sunni schools of divinity

2.1 Athari (Textualism)
2.2 Ilm al-Kalām

2.2.1 Ash'ariyyah
2.2.2 Mâtûrîd’iyyah




3 Khawarij
4 Murji'ah

4.1 Bid‘ah Murji'ah

4.1.1 Karram’iyyah


4.2 Sunni Murji'ah


5 Jabr’iyyah
6 Qadar’iyyah

6.1 Mu'tazili

6.1.1 Bâ’ Hashim’iyyah




7 Shia schools of divinity

7.1 Zaydi-Fivers
7.2 Bāṭen’iyyah

7.2.1 Imami-Ismā'īlīs
7.2.2 Batini-Twelver ʿAqīdah schools

7.2.2.1 Alevism

7.2.2.1.1 Alevi Islamic school of divinity
7.2.2.1.2 ʿAqīdah of Alevi-Islam Dīn Services


7.2.2.2 Baktāshism (Bektaşilik)

7.2.2.2.1 Baktāshi Islamic School of Divinity
7.2.2.2.2 The Baktāshi ʿaqīdah






7.3 Ithnā'ashariyyah

7.3.1 Imami-Ja'faris

7.3.1.1 Usulism
7.3.1.2 Akhbarism
7.3.1.3 Shaykhism


7.3.2 Ghulāt-Imamis

7.3.2.1 ‘Alawism

7.3.2.1.1 ‘Alawite Islamic School of Divinity
7.3.2.1.2 The ‘Alawite ʿaqīdah


7.3.2.2 Kızılbaşlık

7.3.2.2.1 The Qizilbash ʿaqīdah


7.3.2.3 Anthropopathy in the history of Ghulāt Shia






8 Salaf’iyyah
9 Ahmad’iyyah
10 See also
11 References
12 External links



Divinity schools in Islam[edit]
Main articles: Aqidah and Islamic schools and branches
Aqidah is an Islamic term meaning "creed" or "belief". Any religious belief system, or creed, can be considered an example of aqidah. However this term has taken a significant technical usage in Muslim history and theology, denoting those matters over which Muslims hold conviction. The term is usually translated as "theology". Such traditions are divisions orthogonal to sectarian divisions of Islam, and a Mu'tazili may for example, belong to Jafari, Zaidi or even Hanafi school of jurisprudence. One of the earliest systematic theological school to develop, in the mid 8th-century, was Mu'tazila. It emphasized reason and rational thought, positing that the injunctions of God are accessible to rational thought and inquiry and that the Qur'an, albeit the word of God, was created rather than uncreated, which would develop into one of the most contentious questions in Islamic theology.
In the 10th century, the Ash'ari school developed as a response to Mu'tazila, leading to the latter's decline. Ash'ari still taught the use of reason in understanding the Qur'an, but denied the possibility to deduce moral truths by reasoning. This was opposed by the school of Maturidi, which taught that certain moral truths may be found by the use of reason without the aid of revelation.
Another point of contention was the relative position of iman ("faith") vs. taqwa ("piety"). Such schools of theology are summarized under Ilm al-Kalam, or "science of discourse", as opposed to mystical schools who deny that any theological truth may be discovered by means of discourse or reason.
Sunni schools of divinity[edit]


&#160;
Part of a series on

Sunni Islam








Beliefs


Monotheism
Prophethood &#160;/  Messengership
Holy books
Angels
Judgement Day
Predestination








Five Pillars


Declaration of Faith
Prayer
Charity
Fasting
Pilgrimage








Rightly-Guided Caliphs


Abu Bakr
Umar ibn al-Khattab
Uthman ibn Affan
Ali ibn Abi Talib

Disputed

Muawiyah ibn Abi Sufyan
Umar ibn Abd al-Aziz








Sunni schools of law


Hanafi
Hanbali
Maliki
Shafi'i
Ẓāhirī

Extinct

Awza'i
Thawri
Laythi
Qurtubi
Jariri








Sunni schools of divinity


Ash'ari
Athari
Maturidi
Murji'ah
Mu'tazili








Movements


Ahl al-Hadith
Salafi movement
Barelvi
Deobandi
Islamic Modernism








Holy sites


Jerusalem
Mecca
Medina








Hadith collections


Kutub al-Sittah

Sahih al-Bukhari
Sahih Muslim
Al-Sunan al-Sughra
Sunan Abu Dawood
Sunan al-Tirmidhi
Sunan ibn Majah


Kitab al-Athar
Muwatta Malik
Musnad ash-Shafi'i
Musnad Ahmad
Sunan al-Darimi
Shama'il Muhammadiyah
Sahih Ibn Khuzaymah
Sahih Ibn Hibban
Al-Mustadrak alaa al-Sahihain
Al-Mawḍū‘āt al-Kubrá
Riyadh as-Saaliheen
Mishkat al-Masabih
Al-Mustadrak alaa al-Sahihain
Majma al-Zawa'id
Bulugh al-Maram
Kanz al-‘Ummāl fī sunan al-aqwāl wa'l af‘āl
Zujajat al-Masabih
Muntakhab Ahadith






 Islam portal





v
t
e





Main article: Sunni Islam
Sunni Muslims are the largest denomination of Islam and are known as Ahl as-Sunnah wa’l-Jamā‘h or simply as Ahl as-Sunnah. The word Sunni comes from the word sunnah, which means the teachings and actions or examples of the Islamic prophet Muhammad. Therefore, the term "Sunni" refers to those who follow or maintain the sunnah of the prophet Muhammad.
The Sunnis believe that Muhammad did not specifically appoint a successor to lead the Muslim ummah (community) before his death, and after an initial period of confusion, a group of his most prominent companions gathered and elected Abu Bakr Siddique, Muhammad's close friend and a father-in-law, as the first caliph of Islam. Sunni Muslims regard the first four caliphs (Abu Bakr, `Umar ibn al-Khattāb, Uthman Ibn Affan and Ali ibn Abu Talib) as "al-Khulafā’ur-Rāshidūn" or "The Rightly Guided Caliphs." Sunnis also believe that the position of caliph may be attained democratically, on gaining majority votes, but after the Rashidun, the position turned into a hereditary right and the caliphs belonged to various dynasties and more like monarchs rather than religious figures.
Athari (Textualism)[edit]
Main article: Athari
The Athari school derives its name from the Arabic word Athar, meaning "narrations." The Athari creed is to avoid delving into extensive theological speculation. They use the Qur'an, the Sunnah, and sayings of the Sahaba - seeing this as the middle path where the attributes of Allah are accepted without questioning 'how' they are. Ahmad bin Hanbal is regarded as the leader of the Athari school of creed. Athari is generally synonymous with Salafi. The central aspect of Athari theology is its definition of Tawhid, meaning literally unification or asserting the oneness of Allah.[1][2][3][4]
Ilm al-Kalām[edit]
Main article: Ilm al-Kalam
Kalām is the Islamic philosophy of seeking theological principles through dialectic. In Arabic, the word literally means "speech/words". A scholar of kalām is referred to as a mutakallim (Muslim theologian; plural mutakallimūn). There are many schools of Kalam, the main ones being the Ash'ari and Maturidi schools in Sunni Islam.
After leaving the Mu'tazili school, Al-Ash'ari formulated the theology of Sunni Islam.[5] He was followed in this by a large number of distinguished scholars, most of whom belonged to the Shafi'i school of law.[6] The most famous of these are Abul-Hassan Al-Bahili, Abu Bakr Al-Baqillani, al-Juwayni, Al-Razi and Al-Ghazali. Thus Al-Ash'ari’s school became, together with the Maturidi, the main schools reflecting the beliefs of the Sunnah.[6]
Ash'ariyyah[edit]
Main article: Ash'ari
Ash'ari is a school of early Islamic philosophy founded in the 10th century by Abu al-Hasan al-Ash'ari. It was instrumental in drastically changing the direction of Islam.[citation needed] The Asharite view was that comprehension of the unique nature and characteristics of God were beyond human capability.
Mâtûrîd’iyyah[edit]
Main article: Maturidi
A Maturidi is one who follows Abu Mansur Al Maturidi's theology, which is a close variant of the Ash'ari school. Points which differ are the nature of belief and the place of human reason. The Maturidis state that belief (iman) does not increase nor decrease but remains static; it is piety (taqwa) which increases and decreases. The Ash'aris say that belief does in fact increase and decrease. The Maturidis say that the unaided human mind is able to find out that some of the more major sins such as alcohol or murder are evil without the help of revelation. The Ash'aris say that the unaided human mind is unable to know if something is good or evil, lawful or unlawful, without divine revelation.
Khawarij[edit]
Main article: Khawarij
The Kharijites considered the caliphate of Abu Bakr and Umar to be rightly guided but believed that Uthman ibn Affan had deviated from the path of justice and truth in the last days of his caliphate, and hence was liable to be killed or displaced. They also believed that Ali ibn Abi Talib committed a grave sin when he agreed on the arbitration with Muʿāwiyah. In the Battle of Siffin, Ali acceded to Muawiyah's suggestion to stop the fighting and resort to negotiation. A large portion of Ali's troops (who later became the first Kharijites) refused to concede to that agreement, and they considered that Ali had breached a Qur'anic verse which states that The decision is only for Allah (Qur'an 6:57), which the Kharijites interpreted to mean that the outcome of a conflict can only be decided in battle (by God) and not in negotiations (by human beings).
The Kharijites thus deemed the arbitrators (Abu Musa al-Ashʿari and Amr Ibn Al-As), the leaders who appointed these arbitrators (Ali and Muʿāwiyah) and all those who agreed on the arbitration (all companions of Ali and Muʿāwiyah) as Kuffār (disbelievers), having breached the rules of the Qur'an. They believed that all participants in the Battle of Jamal, including Talha, Zubair (both being companions of Muhammad) and Aisha had committed a Kabira (major sin in Islam).[7]
Kharijites reject the doctrine of infallibility for the leader of the Muslim community, in contrast to Shi'a but in agreement with Sunnis.[8] Modern-day Islamic scholar Abul Ala Maududi wrote an analysis of Kharijite beliefs, marking a number of differences between Kharijism and Sunni Islam. The Kharijites believed that the act of sinning is analogous to Kufr (disbelief) and that every grave sinner was regarded as a Kāfir (disbeliever) unless he repents. With this argument, they denounced all the above-mentioned Ṣaḥābah and even cursed and used abusive language against them. Ordinary Muslims were also declared disbelievers because first, they were not free of sin; secondly they regarded the above-mentioned Ṣaḥābah as believers and considered them as religious leaders, even inferring Islamic jurisprudence from the Hadeeth narrated by them.[7] They also believed that it is not a must for the caliph to be from the Quraysh. Any pious Muslim nominated by other Muslims could be an eligible caliph.[7] Additionally, Kharijites believed that obedience to the caliph is binding as long as he is managing the affairs with justice and consultation, but if he deviates, then it becomes obligatory to confront him, demote him and even kill him.
Murji'ah[edit]
Main article: Murji'ah
Murji'ah (Arabic: المرجئة‎) is an early Islamic school whose followers are known in English as "Murjites" or "Murji'ites" (المرجئون). During the early centuries of Islam, Muslim thought encountered a multitude of influences from various ethnic and philosophical groups that it absorbed. Murji'ah emerged as a theological school that was opposed to the Kharijites on questions related to early controversies regarding sin and definitions of what is a true Muslim.
Bid‘ah Murji'ah[edit]
Main article: Bid‘ah
They advocated the idea of "delayed judgement". Only God can judge who is a true Muslim and who is not, and no one else can judge another as an infidel (kafir). Therefore, all Muslims should consider all other Muslims as true and faithful believers, and look to Allah to judge everyone during the last judgment. This theology promoted tolerance of Umayyads and converts to Islam who appeared half-hearted in their obedience. The Murjite opinion would eventually dominate that of the Kharijites.
Karram’iyyah[edit]
Main article: Karramiyya
Anthropomorphic Karram’iyyah was founded by Abū ʿAbd Allāh Muḥammad b. Karrām[9] Ibn Karram considered that God was a substance and that He had a body (jism) finite in certain directions when He comes into contact with the Throne.[10][11][12]
Further information: Anthropomorphism
Sunni Murji'ah[edit]
The Murjites exited the way of the Sunnis when they declared that no Muslim would enter the Jahannam no matter what their sins. This contradicts the traditional Sunni belief that some Muslims will enter the Jahannam temporarily. Therefore, the Murjites are classified as Ahlul Bid'ah or "People of Innovation" by Sunnis, particularly Salafis.
Jabr’iyyah[edit]
Main article: Jahmites
Jahmis were the followers of the Islamic theologian Jahm bin Safwan who associate himself with Al-Harith ibn Surayj. He was an exponent of extreme determinism according to which a man acts only metaphorically in the same way in which the sun acts or does something when it sets.[13]
Further information: Jahm ibn Safwan and Determinism
Qadar’iyyah[edit]
Main articles: Qadariyyah and Ma'bad al-Juhani
The idea of Qadariyah, i.e. the Doctrine of Free-Will, came from a Persian named Sinbuya Asvari and his follower Ma'bad al-Juhani, both was put to death by the Umayyad Caliph Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan.
Mu'tazili[edit]
Main articles: Mu'tazili and Wasil Ibn 'Ata'
Mu'tazili theology originated in the 8th century in al-Basrah when Wasil Ibn 'Ata' left the teaching lessons of Hasan al-Basri after a theological dispute. He and his followers expanded on the logic and rationalism of Greek philosophy, seeking to combine them with Islamic doctrines and show that the two were inherently compatible. The Mu'tazili debated philosophical questions such as whether the Qur'an was created or eternal, whether evil was created by God, the issue of predestination versus free will, whether God's attributes in the Qur'an were to be interpreted allegorically or literally, and whether sinning believers would have eternal punishment in Jahannam.
Further information: 'Amr ibn 'Ubayd, Al-Jubba'i, Abd al-Jabbâr al-Hamadhânî, Ibrahim an-Nazzam and Al-Jahiz
Bâ’ Hashim’iyyah[edit]
Main article: Bahshamiyya
Bâh’ Sham’iyyah[14] was a school of Mu'tazili thought, rivaling the school of Qadi Abd al-Jabbar, based primarily on the earlier teaching of Abu Hashim al-Jubba'i,[15] the son of Abu 'Ali Muhammad al-Jubba'i.
Further information: Abu'l Husayn al-Basri
Shia schools of divinity[edit]


&#160;
Part of a series on

Shia Islam








Beliefs and practices


Monotheism
Holy Books
Prophethood
Succession to Muhammad
Imamate of the Family
Angels
Judgement Day
Mourning of Muharram
Intercession
Clergy
The Four Companions
Arba'een Pilgrimage








Holy days


Ashura
Arba'een
Mawlid
Eid al-Fitr
Eid al-Adha
Eid al-Ghadeer








History


The verse of purification
Two things
Mubahala
Khumm
Fatimah's house
First Fitna
Second Fitna
The Battle of Karbala








Branches of Shia Islam


Emāmī

Ethnā‘asharī

Jā'farīs
Bātinī-Alevīs


Ghulāt

Hurūfī-Baktāshīs
Khaṣībī-Nusāyrīs




Ismāʿīlī

Nīzārī-Ismāʿīlīs
Mustā‘lī-Tāyyībīs
Durzis


Zaīdī
Extinct Shia sects








Ahl al-Kisa


Muhammad
Ali
Fatimah
Hasan
Hussein








Holy women


Fatimah
Khadija bint Khuwaylid
Umm Salama
Zaynab bint Ali

Umm ul-Banin
Fatimah bint Hasan
Sukayna bint Husayn
Rubab
Shahrbanu
Fātimah bint Mūsā
Hakimah Khātūn
Narjis
Fatimah bint Asad
Farwah bint al-Qasim






 Shia Islam portal





v
t
e





Main articles: Shi'ites, Imamah (Shia doctrine) and Shia Islamic beliefs and practices
Zaydi-Fivers[edit]
The Zaidi School of Divinity is close to the Mu'tazilite school. There are a few issues between both schools, most notably the Zaydi doctrine of the Imamate, which is rejected by the Mu'tazilites. Amongst the Shi'a, Zaydis are most similar to Sunnis[16] since Zaydism shares similar doctrines and jurisprudential opinions with Sunni scholars.[17]
Bāṭen’iyyah[edit]
Main articles: Batin (Islam), Esoteric interpretation of the Quran and Sufi cosmology
The Bāṭen’iyyah ʿAqīdah, was originally introduced by Abu’l-Khāttāb Muhammad ibn Abu Zaynab al-Asadī,[18][19] and later developed by Maymūn al-Qaddāh[20] and his son ʿAbd Allāh ibn Maymūn[21] for the esoteric interpretation[22] of the Qur'an. The members of Batiniyyah may belong to either Ismailis or Twelvers.
Further information: Sevener, Qarmatians, Fatimid Islamic Caliphate and Hashashins
Imami-Ismā'īlīs[edit]


 Part of a series on Shīa Islam
Isma‘ilism







Concepts


Qur'an
Ẓāhir
Bātin
Nūr
Pīr
Ginans
'Aql
ʿIlm
Hujja
Dā'ī
Dawah
Taqiya
Numerology
Panentheism
Reincarnation








Seven Pillars


Guardianship
Purity
Shahada
Prayer
Charity
Fasting
Pilgrimage








Musta‘li &amp; Nizari History


Shuʿayb
Nabi Shu'ayb
Seveners
Abū-Saʿīd Jannābī
Qarmatians
Abū-Tāhir Al-Jannābī
Fatimid Caliphate
Nizari Ismaili state
Baghdad Manifesto
Nasir Khusraw
Arwa al-Sulayhi
Zoeb bin Moosa
Nizari
Mustā‘lī
Hafizi
Batiniyya
Hassan-i Sabbah
Assassins
Alamut
Lambsar Castle
Alamut Castle
Masyaf Castle
Rashid ad-Din Sinan
Satpanth
Pir Sadardin
Böszörmény
Aga Khan
Jama'at Khana
Du'a








Early Imāms


Ali
Hasan
Husayn
as-Sajjad
al-Baqir
Jaʿfar al-Ṣādiq
Ismāʿīl ibn Jaʿfar al-Mubārak
Muhammad ibn Ismāʿīl ash-Shākir
ʿAbadu l-Lāh (al-Wāfī Ahmad)
Ahmad (al-Taqī Muhammad)
Ḥusayn (ar-Raḍī ʿAbdillāh)
ʿAbdu l-Lāh al-Mahdī bi l-Lāh
al-Qāʾim
al-Manṣūr
al-Muʿizz
al-ʿAzīz
al-Ḥākim
al-Ẓāhir
al-Mustanṣir bi l-Lāh
Nizār al-Muṣṭafā li-Dīn’il-Lāh / Aḥmadu l-Mustāʿlī bi l-Lāh
Manṣūr al-Āmir bi-Aḥkām’il-Lāh
Abu l-Qāsim al-Tayyib








Nizari Ismaili &amp; Taiyabi Da'is&#160;



Nizārī Ismā'īlī
Aga Khan IV


Taiyabi-Musta’li Ismailis


Dawoodi Bohra
Mufaddal Saifuddin


Sulaymani
Al-Fakhri Abdullah


Alavi Bohra
Haatim Zakiyuddin


Qutbi Bohra
Khuzaima Qutbuddin







 Islam portal





v
t
e





Main articles: Ismā'īlī, Batiniyyah, Imamah (Ismaili doctrine), Seven pillars of Ismailism and List of Ismāʿīlī Imams
The Ismā'īlī Imāmate differ from Twelvers because they had living imams or da'is for centuries. They followed Isma'il ibn Jafar, elder brother of Musa al-Kadhim, as the rightful Imam[23] after his father Ja'far al-Sadiq. The Ismailis believe that whether Imam Ismail did or did not die before Imam Ja'far, he had passed on the mantle of the imāmate to his son Muḥammad ibn Ismā'īl al-Maktum as the next imam.[24]
Further information: Nizārī Ismā'īlī, Imamah (Nizari Ismaili doctrine), History of the Shī‘a Imāmī Ismā'īlī Ṭarīqah, Musta’li Ismaili and Taiyabi Ismaili
Batini-Twelver ʿAqīdah schools[edit]
Main article: Batiniyyah
The followers of "Batiniyyah-Twelver" madh'hab consist of Alevis and Nusayris, who developed their own fiqh system and do not pursue the Ja'fari jurisprudence. Their combined population is nearly around 1% of World overall Muslim population.[25]
Alevism[edit]
Main articles: Alevism, Sufism, Qutb ad-Dīn Haydar, Qalandariyya, Haji Bektash Veli and Bektashi Order
Alevis are sometimes categorized as part of Twelver Shia Islam, and sometimes as its own religious tradition, as it has markedly different philosophy, customs, and rituals. They have many Tasawwufī characteristics and express belief in the Qur'an and The Twelve Imams, but reject polygamy and accept religious traditions predating Islam, like Turkish shamanism. They are significant in East-Central Turkey. They are sometimes considered a Sufi sect, and have an untraditional form of religious leadership that is not scholarship oriented like other Sunni and Shia groups. Seven to Eleven Million Alevi people including the other denominations of Twelver Shi'ites live in Anatolia.[25]
Alevi Islamic school of divinity[edit]
Main articles: Safaviyya, Shaykh Haydar, Qizilbash, Imadaddin Nasimi, Hurufism and Bektashism and folk religion
In Turkey, Shia Muslim people belong to the Ja'fari jurisprudence Madhhab, which tracks back to the sixth Shia Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq (also known as Imam Jafar-i Sadiq), are called as the Ja'faris, who belong to Twelver Shia. Although the Alevi Turks are being considered as a part of Twelver Shia Islam, their belief is different from the Ja'fari jurisprudence in conviction.

"The Alevi-Turks" has a unique and perplex conviction tracing back to Kaysanites Shia and Khurramites which are considered as Ghulat Shia. According to Turkish scholar Abdülbaki Gölpinarli, the Qizilbash ("Red-Heads") of the 16th century - a religious and political movement in Azerbaijan that helped to establish the Safavid dynasty - were "spiritual descendants of the Khurramites".[26]
Among the members of the "Qizilbash-Tariqah" who are considered as a sub-sect of the Alevis, two figures firstly Abu Muslim Khorasani who assisted Abbasid Caliphate to beat Umayyad Caliphate, but later eliminated and murdered by Caliph Al-Mansur, and secondly Babak Khorramdin who incited a rebellion against the Abbasid Caliphate and consequently was killed by Caliph al-Mu'tasim are highly respected. This belief provides strong clues about their Kaysanites Shia and Khurramites origins. In addition, the "Safaviyya Tariqah" leader Ismail I is a highly regarded individual in the belief of "Alevi-Qizilbash-Tariqah" associating them with the Imamah (Shia Twelver doctrine) conviction of the "Twelver Shi'a Islam".
Their aqidah (theological conviction) is based upon a syncretic fiqh system called as "Batiniyya-Sufism"[27] which incorporates some Qarmatian sentiments, originally introduced by "Abu’l-Khāttāb Muhammad ibn Abu Zaynab al-Asadī",[18][19] and later developed by "Maymun al-Qāddāh" and his son "ʿAbd Allāh ibn Maymun",[21] and "Mu'tazila" with a strong belief in The Twelve Imams.
Not all of the members believe that the fasting in Ramadan is obligatory although some Alevi-Turks performs their fasting duties partially in Ramadan.
Some beliefs of Shamanism still are common amongst the Qizilbash Alevi-Turkish people in villages.
On the other hand, the members of Bektashi Order have a conviction of "Batiniyya Isma'ilism"[27] and "Hurufism" with a strong belief in the The Twelve Imams.
In conclusion, Qizilbash-Alevis are not a part of Ja'fari jurisprudence fiqh, even though they can be considered as members of different Tariqa of Shia Islam all looks like sub-classes of Twelver. Their conviction includes "Batiniyya-Hurufism" and "Sevener-Qarmatians-Ismailism" sentiments.[27][28]
They all may be considered as special groups not following the Ja'fari jurisprudence, like Alawites who are in the class of Ghulat Twelver Shia Islam, but a special Batiniyya belief somewhat similar to Isma'ilism in their conviction.



&#160;
Part of a series on Nizari-Ismāʿīli Batiniyya, Hurufiyya, Kaysanites and Twelver Shī‘ism

Alevism







Beliefs


Allah
Quran
Haqq-Muhammad-Ali
Prophet Muḥammad ibn `Abd Allāh
Muhammad-Ali
Islamic prophet
Zahir
Batin
Buyruks
Tariqat
Haqiqa
Marifat
Wahdat al-wujud
Baqaa
Fana
Haal
Ihsan
Kashf
Nafs
Keramat
Al-Insān al-Kāmil
Lataif
Four Doors
Manzil
Nûr
Sulook
Yaqeen
Poetry
Cosmology
Philosophy
Psychology








Practices


Zakat
Zeyārat
Taqiyya
Ashura
Hıdırellez
Nowruz
Mawlid
Music
Düşkünlük Meydanı
Fasting
Müsahiplik








The Twelve Imams


Ali
Hasan
Husayn
al-Abidin
al-Baqir
al-Sadiq
al-Kadhim
ar-Rida
al-Taqi
al-Naqi
al-Askari
al-Mahdi








Leadership


Dede
Murshid
Pir
Rehber
Babas
Dergah
Jem
Cemevi








Crucial figures and influences


Khadija bint Khuwaylid
Fatimah
Khidr
Salman the Persian
Uwais al-Qarani
Jābir ibn Hayyān
Dhul-Nun al-Misri
Bayazid Bastami
Mansur Al-Hallaj
Abu al-Hassan al-Kharaqani
Yusuf Hamdani
Khoja Akhmet Yassawi
Abdul-Qadir Gilani
Ahmed ar-Rifa'i
Ibn Arabi
Qutb ad-Dīn Haydar
Ahi Evren
Haji Bektash Veli
Rumi
Sadr al-Din al-Qunawi
Zahed Gilani
Sari Saltik
Yunus Emre
Safi-ad-din Ardabili
Nāimī
Sadr al-Dīn Mūsā
Imadaddin Nasimi
Shah Nimatullah Wali
Shaykh Junayd
Shaykh Haydar
Ali Mirza Safavi
Ismail I
Kaygusuz Abdal
Otman Baba
Balım Sultan
Gül Baba
Fuzûlî
Alians
Demir Baba Teke
Arabati Baba Teḱe
Pir Sultan Abdal
Kul Nesîmî








Alevi history


Safavid conversion of Iran to Shia Islam
Shia in Persia before Safavids
Shiism in Persia after Safavids
Umayyad Caliphate
Abu Muslim
Abbasid Caliphate
Babak Khorramdin
Kaykhusraw II
Baba Ishak
Bayezid II
Persecution of Alevis
Şahkulu Rebellion
Şahkulu
Battle of Chaldiran
Selim I
Abaza rebellion
Kuyucu Murad Pasha
Auspicious Incident
Mahmud II
Koçgiri Rebellion
Dersim Rebellion
Seyid Riza
Dersim Massacre
Maraş Massacre
Çorum Massacre
Sivas massacre








Related Muslim tariqah


Malamatiyya
Qalandariyya
Qadiriyya
Akbari Sufis
Rifa'i
Uwaisi
Naqshbandi
Mevlevi Order
Zahediyeh
Safaviyya
Khalwati order
Bayramiye
Jelveti
Babai Revolt
Hurufism
Nuqtavi
Chepni people
Bektashi Order
Bektashism and folk religion
Jelali revolts
Ni'matullāhī
Arabati Baba Teḱe
Javad Nurbakhsh
Galibi Order








Other influential groups


Isma'ilism
Alavi Bohra
Nizari
Alawites
Druze
Khurramites
Qizilbash
Bábism
Bahá'í Faith
Yazdanī
Yarsanism
Yazidi
Yazidis in Armenia
Sabians
Ishikism
Gnosticism
Nabataeans
Zoroaster
Zoroastrianism
Mazdak
Zurvanism
Mandaeism
Manichaeism
Shamanism
Tengrism
Panentheism






 Islam portal





v
t
e






In conclusion, Twelver branch of Shia Islam Muslim population of Turkey is composed of Mu'tazila aqidah of Ja'fari jurisprudence madhhab, Batiniyya-Sufism aqidah of Maymūn’al-Qāddāhī fiqh of the Alevīs, and Cillī aqidah of Maymūn ibn Abu’l-Qāsim Sulaiman ibn Ahmad ibn at-Tabarānī fiqh of the Alawites,[29][30] who altogether constitutes nearly one third of the whole population of the country. (An estimate for the Turkish Alevi population varies between Seven and Eleven Million.[31][32] Over 85% of the population, on the other hand, overwhelmingly constitute Maturidi aqidah of the Hanafi fiqh and Ash'ari aqidah of the Shafi'i fiqh of the Sunni followers.)

Further information: Al-Hallaj, Sevener, Qarmatians, Baba Ishak, Babai Revolt, Hassan II (imam) and Nur al-Din Muhammad II
ʿAqīdah of Alevi-Islam Dīn Services[edit]
Main articles: ʿAqīdah, Dīn and Buyruks


“
What's Alevism, what's the understanding of Islam in Alevism? The answers to these questions, instead of the opposite of what's known by many people is that the birthplace of Alevism was never in Anatolia. This is an example of great ignorance, that is, to tell that the Alevism was emerged in Anatolia. Searching the source of Alevism in Anatolia arises from unawareness. Because there was not even one single Muslim or Turk in Anatolia before a specific date. The roots of Alevism stem from Turkestan - Central Asia. Islam was brought to Anatolia by Turks in 10th and 11th centuries by a result of migration for a period of 100 - 150 years. Before this event took place, there were no Muslim and Turks in Anatolia. Anatolia was then entirely Christian. We Turks brought Islam to Anatolia from Turkestan. - Professor İzzettin Doğan, The President of Alevi-Islam Religion Services.[33]
”



Some of the differences that mark Alevis from Shi'a Islam are the non-observance of the five daily prayers and prostrations (they only bow twice in the presence of their spiritual leader), Ramadan, and the Hajj (they consider the pilgrimage to Mecca an external pretense, the real pilgrimage being internal in one's heart); and non-attendance of mosques.[34]
Some of their members (or sub-groups) claim that God takes abode in the bodies of the human-beings (ḥulūl), believe in metempsychosis (tanāsukh), and consider Islamic law to be not obligatory (ibāḥa), similar to antinomianism.[35]



 The Fourteen Infallibles 




Muhammad
Ali
Fatimah
Hasan
Husayn
al-Sajjad
al-Baqir
al-Sadiq
al-Kadhim
al-Rida
al-Taqi
al-Hadi
al-Askari
al-Mahdi







v
t
e






Some of the Alevis criticizes the course of Islam as it is being practiced overwhelmingly by more than 99% of Sunni and Shia population.
They believe that major additions had been implemented during the time of Ummayads, and easily refuse some basic principles on the grounds that they believe it contradicts with the holy book of Islam, namely the Qu'ran.
Regular daily salat and fasting in the holy month of Ramadan are officially not accepted by some members of Alevism.
Some of their sub-groups like Ishikists and Bektashis, who portrayed themselves as Alevis, neither comprehend the essence of the regular daily salat (prayers) and fasting in the holy month of Ramadan that is frequently accentuated at many times in Quran, nor admits that these principles constitute the ineluctable foundations of the Dīn of Islam as they had been laid down by Allah and they had been practised in an uninterruptible manner during the period of Prophet Muhammad.
Furthermore, during the period of Ottoman Empire, Alevis were forbidden to proselytise, and Alevism regenerated itself internally by paternal descent. To prevent penetration by hostile outsiders, the Alevis insisted on strict endogamy which eventually made them into a quasi-ethnic group. Alevi taboos limited interaction with the dominant Sunni political-religious centre. Excommunication was the ultimate punishment threatening those who married outsiders, cooperated with outsiders economically, or ate with outsiders. It was also forbidden to use the state (Sunni) courts.[34]







Part of a series on Shia Islam
Twelvers





The Fourteen Infallibles







Muhammad
Fatimah




The Twelve Imams




Ali
Hasan
Husayn
al-Sajjad
al-Baqir
al-Sadiq
al-Kadhim
ar-Ridha
al-Taqi
al-Naqi
al-Askari
al-Mahdi







Principles





Monotheism
Judgement Day
Justice
Prophethood
Imamate





Other beliefs




Succession to Muhammad



Imamate of the Family
Angels
Mourning of Muharram
Intercession
The Occultation
Clergy
Usul al-fiqh|Usul
Ijtihad
Taqlid
'Aql
Irfan
Mahdaviat





Practices





Prayer
Fasting
Pilgrimage
Charity
Taxes
Jihad



Commanding what is just
Forbidding what is evil
Love the family of Muhammad
Dissociate from their enemies




Holy cities





Mecca
Medina
Najaf
Karbala
Mashhad
Jerusalem
Samarra
Kadhimiya
Qom





Groups





Usuli
Akhbari
Shaykhi
Ni'matullāhī
Safaviyya
Qizilbash
Alevism
Alawism
Bektashism and folk religion
Malamatiyya–Qalandariyya




Hurufism–Bektashism
Rifa'i–Galibi





Scholarship





Law
Marja'&#160;(list)
Hawza
Ayatollah&#160;(list)
Allamah
&#160; Hujjat al-Islam
Ijtihad





Hadith collections




Peak of Eloquence
The Psalms of Islam
Book of Fundamentals
The Book in Scholar's Lieu



Civilization of Laws
The Certainty



Book of Sulaym ibn Qays
Oceans of Light
Wasā'il al-Shīʿa
Reality of Certainty
Keys of Paradise




Related topics




Criticism of Twelver Shi'ism




Related portals




Shia Islam
Ashura







v
t
e





Baktāshism (Bektaşilik)[edit]
Main article: Bektashism




The founder of the Bektashiyyah sufi order Hacı Bektaş-ı Veli (Ḥājjī Baktāsh Walī), a murid of Malāmatī-Qalāndārī Sheikh Qutb ad-Dīn Haydar, who introduced the Ahmad Yasavi's doctrine of "Four Doors and Forty Stending" into his tariqah.


Baktāshi Islamic School of Divinity[edit]
Main articles: Bektashiyyah and Wahdat-ul-Wujood
The Bektashiyyah is a Shia Sufi order founded in the 13th century by Haji Bektash Veli, a dervish who escaped Central Asia and found refuge with the Seljuks in Anatolia at the time of the Mongol invasions (1219–23). This order gained a great following in rural areas and it later developed in two branches: the Çelebi clan, who claimed to be physical descendants of Haji Bektash Veli, were called "Bel evladları" (children of the loins), and became the hereditary spiritual leaders of the rural Alevis; and the Babağan, those faithful to the path "Yol evladları" (children of the way), who dominated the official Bektashi Sufi order with its elected leadership.[34]
Bektashism places much emphasis on the concept of Wahdat-ul-Wujood وحدة الوجود, the "Unity of Being" that was formulated by Ibn Arabi. This has often been labeled as pantheism, although it is a concept closer to panentheism. Bektashism is also heavily permeated with Shiite concepts, such as the marked veneration of Ali, The Twelve Imams, and the ritual commemoration of Ashurah marking the Battle of Karbala. The old Persian holiday of Nowruz is celebrated by Bektashis as Imam Ali's birthday.
In keeping with the central belief of Wahdat-ul-Wujood the Bektashi see reality contained in Haqq-Muhammad-Ali, a single unified entity. Bektashi do not consider this a form of trinity. There are many other practices and ceremonies that share similarity with other faiths, such as a ritual meal (muhabbet) and yearly confession of sins to a baba (magfirat-i zunub مغفرة الذنوب). Bektashis base their practices and rituals on their non-orthodox and mystical interpretation and understanding of the Qur'an and the prophetic practice (Sunnah). They have no written doctrine specific to them, thus rules and rituals may differ depending on under whose influence one has been taught. Bektashis generally revere Sufi mystics outside of their own order, such as Ibn Arabi, Al-Ghazali and Jelalludin Rumi who are close in spirit to them.
The Baktāshi ʿaqīdah[edit]




Four Spiritual Stations in Bektashiyyah: Sharia, tariqa, haqiqa, and the fourth station, marifa, which is considered "unseen", is actually the center of the haqiqa region. Marifa is the essence of all four stations.


Main articles: Mysticism, Four Doors, Hajji Bektash Wali, Sharia, Tariqa, Haqiqa and Marifa
The Bektashi Order is a Sufi order and shares much in common with other Islamic mystical movements, such as the need for an experienced spiritual guide — called a baba in Bektashi parlance — as well as the doctrine of "the four gates that must be traversed": the "Sharia" (religious law), "Tariqah" (the spiritual path), "Haqiqah" (truth), and "Marifa" (true knowledge).
Bektashis hold that the Qur'an has two levels of meaning: an outer (Zāher ظاهر) and an inner (bāṭen باطن).[36] They hold the latter to be superior and eternal and this is reflected in their understanding of both the universe and humanity, which is a view that can also be found in Ismailism and Batiniyya.[22]
Bektashism is also initiatic and members must traverse various levels or ranks as they progress along the spiritual path to the Reality. First level members are called aşıks عاشق. They are those who, while not having taken initiation into the order, are nevertheless drawn to it. Following initiation (called nasip) one becomes a mühip محب. After some time as a mühip, one can take further vows and become a dervish. The next level above dervish is that of baba. The baba (lit. father) is considered to be the head of a tekke and qualified to give spiritual guidance (irshad إرشاد). Above the baba is the rank of halife-baba (or dede, grandfather). Traditionally there were twelve of these, the most senior being the dedebaba (great-grandfather). The dedebaba was considered to be the highest ranking authority in the Bektashi Order. Traditionally the residence of the dedebaba was the Pir Evi (The Saint's Home) which was located in the shrine of Hajji Bektash Wali in the central Anatolian town of Hacıbektaş (Solucakarahüyük).
Further information: Alians, Arabati Baba Teḱe, Bektashism, Demir Baba Teke and Hurufism
Ithnā'ashariyyah[edit]
Main articles: Twelvers and Imamah (Shia Twelver doctrine)
Twelvers believe in twelve Imams. The twelfth Imam is believed to be in occultation, and will appear again just before the Qiyamah (Islamic view of the Last Judgment). The Shia hadiths include the sayings of the Imams. Many Muslims criticise the Shia for certain beliefs and practices, including practices such as the Mourning of Muharram (Mätam). They are the largest Shia school of thought (93%), predominant in Azerbaijan, Iran, Iraq, Lebanon and Bahrain and have a significant population in Pakistan, India, Afghanistan Kuwait and the Eastern province of Saudi Arabia. The Twelver Shia are followers of either the Jaf'ari or Batiniyyah madh'habs.
Imami-Ja'faris[edit]
Main articles: Ja'fari jurisprudence and Theology of Twelvers
Followers of the Jaf'ari madh'hab are divided into the following sub-divisions, all of them are the followers of the Theology of Twelvers:
Usulism[edit]
The Usuli form the overwhelming majority within the Twelver Shia denomination. They follow a Marja-i Taqlid on the subject of taqlid and fiqh. They are concentrated in Iran, Pakistan, Azerbaijan, India, Iraq, and Lebanon.
Further information: Usulism




Imam Ali Mosque in Najaf, Iraq, where Ali the first Shia Imam is buried.


Akhbarism[edit]
Akhbari, similar to Usulis, however reject ijtihad in favor of hadith. Concentrated in Bahrain.
Further information: Akhbarism
Shaykhism[edit]
Shaykhism is an Islamic religious movement founded by Shaykh Ahmad in the early 19th century Qajar dynasty, Iran, now retaining a minority following in Iran and Iraq. It began from a combination of Sufi and Shia and Akhbari doctrines. In the mid 19th-century many Shaykhis converted to the Bábí and Bahá'í religions, which regard Shaykh Ahmad highly.
Further information: Shaykhism
Ghulāt-Imamis[edit]
Main articles: Ghulāt and imami
‘Alawism[edit]
Main articles: Al-Khaṣībī, Ibn Nusayr and Alawites
Alawites are also called Nusayris, Nusairis, Namiriya or Ansariyya. Their madhhab is established by Ibn Nusayr, and their aqidah is developed by Al-Khaṣībī. They follow Cillī aqidah of "Maymūn ibn Abu’l-Qāsim Sulaiman ibn Ahmad ibn at-Tabarānī fiqh" of the ‘Alawis.[29][37] One million three hundred and fifty thousand of them lived in Syria and Lebanon in 1970. It is estimated they are 10-12% of the population of Syria of 23 millions in 2013. a[38]
‘Alawite Islamic School of Divinity[edit]
Alawites consider themselves to be Muslims, although some Sunnis dispute that they are.[39] Alawite doctrine incorporates Gnostic, neo-Platonic, Islamic, Christian and other elements and has, therefore, been described as syncretistic.[40][41] Their theology is based on a divine triad,[39][42][43] or trinity, which is the core of Alawite belief.[44] The triad comprises three emanations of the one God: the supreme aspect or entity called the "Essence"[44] or the "Meaning"[43] (both being translations of ma'na), together with two lesser emanations known as his "Name" (ism), or "Veil" (hijab), and his "Gate" (bab).[42][43][44][45] These emanations have manifested themselves in different human forms over several cycles in history, the last cycle of which was as Ali (the Essence/Meaning), Muhammad (the Name) and Salman the Persian (the Gate).[42][44][45][46] Alawite belief is summarised in the formula: "I turn to the Gate; I bow before the Name; I adore the Meaning".[39] The claim that Alawites believe Ali is a deity has been contested by some scholars as a misrepresentation on the basis that Ali is, in fact, considered an "essence or form", not a human being, by which believers can "grasp God".[47] Alawites also hold that they were originally stars or divine lights that were cast out of heaven through disobedience and must undergo repeated reincarnation (or metempsychosis[44]) before returning to heaven.[39][45] They can be reincarnated as Christians or others through sin and as animals if they become infidels.[39][48]
Alawite beliefs have never been confirmed by their modern religious authorities.[49] Alawites tend to conceal their beliefs (taqiyya) due to historical persecution.[50] Some tenets of the faith are secret, known only to a select few;[51][52] therefore, they have been described as a mystical sect.[53] In addition to Islamic festivals, the Alawites have been reported to celebrate or honor certain Christian festivals such as the birth of Jesus and Palm Sunday.[54][55] Their most-important feast is Eid al-Ghadeer.
The ‘Alawite ʿaqīdah[edit]
Alawites have always described themselves as being Twelver Shi'ite Muslims and have been recognized as such by the prominent Lebanese Shi'ite cleric Musa al-Sadr.[56] The Sunni Grand Mufti of Jerusalem Haj Amin al-Husseini issued a fatwa recognising them as part of the Muslim community in the interest of Arab nationalism.[57][58] However, Athari Sunni (modern day Salafis) scholars such as Ibn Kathir (a disciple of Ibn Taymiyya) have categorised Alawites as pagans in their writings.[51][59][60]
Barry Rubin has suggested that Syrian leader Hafiz al-Assad and his son and successor Bashar al-Assad pressed their fellow Alawites "to behave like regular Muslims, shedding (or at least concealing) their distinctive aspects".[61] During the early 1970s a booklet, al-`Alawiyyun Shi'atu Ahl al-Bait ("The Alawites are Followers of the Household of the Prophet") was published, which was "signed by numerous 'Alawi' men of religion", described the doctrines of the Imami Shia as Alawite.[62] Additionally, there has been a recent movement to unite Alawism and the other branches of Twelver Islam through educational exchange programs in Syria and Qom.[63]
Some sources have discussed the "Sunnification" of Alawites under the al-Assad regime.[64] Joshua Landis, director of the Center for Middle East Studies, writes that Hafiz al-Assad "tried to turn Alawites into 'good' (read Sunnified) Muslims in exchange for preserving a modicum of secularism and tolerance in society". On the other hand, Al-Assad "declared the Alawites to be nothing but Twelver Shiites".[64] In a paper, "Islamic Education in Syria", Landis wrote that "no mention" is made in Syrian textbooks (controlled by the Al-Assad regime) of Alawites, Druze, Ismailis or Shia Islam; Islam was presented as a monolithic religion.[65] Ali Sulayman al-Ahmad, chief judge of the Baathist Syrian state, has said:


“
We are ‘Alawi Muslims. Our book is the Qur'an. Our prophet is Muhammad. The Ka`ba is our qibla, and our Dīn (religion) is Islam.[49]
”


Kızılbaşlık[edit]
Main articles: Safavid conversion of Iran to Shia Islam and Qizilbash
The Qizilbash ʿaqīdah[edit]




Shah Ismail I, the Sheikh of the Safavi tariqa, founder of the Safavid Dynasty of Iran, and the Commander-in-chief of the Kızılbaş armies had contributed a lot for the development and implementation of The Qizilbash ʿAqīdah amongst the Turkmen people.


Qizilbash and Bektashi tariqah shared common religious beliefs and practices becoming intermingled as Alevis in spite of many local variations. Isolated from both the Sunni Ottomans and the Twelver Shi`a Safavids, Qizilbash and Bektashi developed traditions, practices, and doctrines by the early 17th century which marked them as a closed autonomous religious community. As a result of the immense pressures to conform to Sunni Islam, all members of Alevism developed a tradition of opposition (ibāḥa) to all forms of external religion.[34]
The doctrine of Qizilbashism is well explained in the following poem written by the Shaykh of Safaviyya tariqah Shāh Ismāʿil Khatai:

من داها نسنه بيلمه زه م / Men daha nesne bilmezem, (I don't know any other object)
آللاه بير محممد على́دير / Allah bir Muhammad-Ali'dir. (Allah is unique Muhammad-Ali)
اؤزوم غوربتده سالمازام / Özüm gurbette salmazam, (I can't let out my own essence to places far from my homeland)
آللاه بير محممد على́دير / Allah bir Muhammad-Ali'dir. (Allah is unique Muhammad-Ali)
اونلار بيردير، بير اولوبدور / Onlar birdir, bir oluştur, (They are unique, a single one, i.e. Haqq-Muhammad-Ali)
يئردن گؤيه نور اولوبدور / Yerden göğe nûr oluştur, (It's a nūr from Earth to Sky)
دؤرد گوشه ده سيرر اولوبدور، / Dört guşede sır oluştur, (It's a mysterious occult secret in every corner of the square)
آللاه بير محممد على́دير / Allah bir Muhammad-Ali'dir. (Allah is unique Muhammad-Ali)
ختايى بو يولدا سردير / Khatai bu yolda sırdır, (Khatai in this tariqah is a mysterious occult secret)
سرين وئره نلر ده اردير / Sırın verenler de erdir, (Those reveal their own secret are private as well)
آيدا سيردير، گونده نوردور / Ayda sırdır, günde nûrdur, (Secret on Moon, nūr on day)
آللاه بير محممد على́دير / Allah bir Muhammad-Ali'dir. (Allah is unique Muhammad-Ali)


The lines of poetry above may easily be judged as an act of "Shirk" (polytheism) by the Sunni Ulama, but they have a bāṭenī[66] taʾwīl (inner explanation) in Qizilbashism.
Further information: Khatai, Muhammad-Ali and Haqq-Muhammad-Ali
Anthropopathy in the history of Ghulāt Shia[edit]
Main articles: Anthropopathism, Anthropotheism and Incarnation (Christianity)
The belief of Incarnation was first emerged in Sabaʾiyya, and later some personalities like Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah, Abu Muslim, Sunpadh, Ishaq al-Turk, Al-Muqanna, Babak Khorramdin, Maziar and Ismail I had become the subject of God incarnates.
Further information: Ghulāt, List of extinct Shia sects, Kaysanites Shia, Muhammerah and Khurramites
Salaf’iyyah[edit]
Main articles: Salaf and Salafi


 Part of a series on:
Salafi movement



Sab'u Masajid, Saudi Arabia





Ideology and influences


Athari Theology
Ahl al-Hadith
Ibn Taymiyyah
Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyya
Al-Sindhi
Ibn ʿAbd al-Wahhab








Founders and key figures


Muhammad Abduh
Rashid Rida
Abd al-Aziz ibn Baz
Ibn al Uthaymeen
Nasiruddin Albani
Muqbil bin Hadi al-Wadi'i
List of Salafi scholars








Notable universities


Umm al-Qura University
Islamic University of Madinah








Related ideologies


Islamic fundamentalism
Madkhalism
Qutbism
Sahwa movement
Salafi jihadism
Wahhabism








Associated organizations


Al-Nour Party
Authenticity Party
People Party
Takfir wal-Hijra







 Politics portal
 Islam portal





v
t
e





This school of divinity is originally founded by Taqi al-Din Ibn Taymiyya and its aqaîd principles establishes the creed of contemporary Salafi Theology. According to Ibn Taymiyyah, Islamic scholars are classified into four categories as follows:

Philosophers, (Ta'tilis who denied God's attributes)
Mutakallimun,[67] (Mu'tazilites and Jahmites)
Those who believe in the proofs and aqidah of Qur'an, (Asharites)
Alims. (Maturidis)

After these definitions, Ibn Taymiyyah admits that his methodology called as Salaf’iyyah is none of these listed above but a different one.[68] The adherents of this school of divinity in general are called "Salafis".[69] Modern day proponents of the Salaf’iyyah school of theology largely come form the salafi (or "wahhabi") movement who uphold the athari works of Ibn Taymiyyah.[70] For followers of the Salafi movement, the "clear" (i.e. zahir, apparent, exoteric or literal) meaning of the Qur'an, and especially the prophetic traditions, has sole authority in matters of belief, and to engage in rational disputation (kalam), even if one arrives at the truth, is absolutely forbidden.[71] Atharis engage in an amodal reading of the Qur'an, as opposed to one engaged in Ta'wil (metaphorical interpretation). They do not attempt to conceptualize the meanings of the Qur'an rationally, and believe that the "real" modality should be consigned to God alone (tafwid).[72] In essence, the meaning has been accepted without asking "how" or "Bi-la kaifa".
On the other hand, the famous Hanbali scholar Ibn al-Jawzi states, in Kitab Akhbar as-Sifat, that Ahmad ibn Hanbal would have been opposed to anthropomorphic intrepretations of Qur'anic texts such as those of al-Qadi Abu Ya'la, Ibn Hamid and Ibn az-Zaghuni.[73] Based on Abu'l-Faraj ibn al-Jawzi's criticism of Athari-Hanbalis, Muhammad Abu Zahra, a Professor of Islamic law at Cairo University deduced that Salafi aqidah is located somewhere between ta'tili and anthropopathy (Absolute Ẓāhirīsm in understanding the tashbih in Qur'an)[68][74] in Islam. Absolute Ẓāhirīsm and total rejection of ta'wil are amongst the fundamental characteristics of this "new" Islamic school of theology.
Ibn Taymiyyah sought the return of Sunni Islam to what he viewed as earlier interpretations of the Qur'an and the Sunnah, and is considered to have had considerable influence in contemporary Wahhabism, Salafism, and Jihadism.[75][76] He is renowned for his fatwa (takfir) issued against the Mongol rulers declaring jihad by Muslims against them compulsory, on the grounds that they did not follow Sharia and as such were not Muslim, their claims to have converted to Islam notwithstanding. His teachings had a profound influence on Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab, and other later Sunni scholars.[77]
Salafis are in staunch opposition to the use of kalam, dialectics or speculative philosophy in theology. This is because it is seen as a heretical innovation in Islam which opposes the primordial aspiration to follow the original methodology of the Salaf us-salih with regards to Aqidah. According to Salafi scholars, statements of the early Imams of the early Muslims are in corroboration with this such as Abu Hanifa who prohibited his students from engaging in kalam, stating that those who practice it are of the "regressing ones".[78] Malik ibn Anas referred to kalam in the Islamic religion as being "detested",[79] and that whoever "seeks the religion through kalam will deviate".[80] In addition, Shafi'i said that no knowledge of Islam can be gained from books of kalam, as kalam "is not from knowledge"[81][82] and that "It is better for a man to spend his whole life doing whatever Allah has prohibited&#160;– besides shirk with Allah&#160;– rather than spending his whole life involved in kalam."[83]
Ahmad’iyyah[edit]


 Part of a series on:
Ahmadiyya



Flag





Beliefs and practices


Five Pillars of Islam
Six articles of faith
Quran
Sunnah
Hadith
Bay'ah








Distinct views


Prophethood
Jesus
Jihad
Evolution








Mirzā Ghulām Ahmad


Prophecies
Claims
Writings








Key Literature


Roohāni Khazāin


Malfoozāt


Tafseer-e-Kabeer


Haqā'iq al-Furqān


Review of Religions


Al Fazl (newspaper)


The Muslim Sunrise


Revelation, Rationality, Knowledge &amp; Truth








Organizational structure


The Caliphs:

I
II
III
IV
V




Lajna
Khuddam
Ansar


Jalsa Salana
Mosques
Jamia
MTA








Miscellaneous


Persecution
Ahmadiyya by country


Ahmadiyya and other faiths
List of Ahmadis


Lahore Ahmadiyya Movement


Humanity First


Ahmadiyya translations of the Quran






 Ahmadiyya portal





v
t
e





The Ahmadis' beliefs are more aligned with the Sunni tradition, such as The Five Pillars of Islam and The Six articles of Islamic Faith. Likewise, Ahmadis accept the Qur'an as their holy text, face the Kaaba during prayer, accept the authority of Hadiths (reported sayings of and stories about Muhammad) and practice the Sunnah (traditions) of Muhammad.[84]
Ahmadi teachings state that the founders of all the major world religions had divine origins. God was working towards the establishment of Islam as the final religion, because it was the most complete and included all the previous teachings of other religion[85] (but they believe that all other religions have gone astray in their present form). The completion and consummation of the development of religion came about with the coming of Muhammad; and that the perfection of the ‘manifestation’ of Muhammad’s prophethood and of the conveyance of his message was destined to occur with the coming of the Mahdi.[86]
The Ahmadiyya Muslim Community regard Mirza Ghulam Ahmad, who claimed to be the promised Messiah ("Second Coming of Christ") the Mahdi awaited by the Muslims and a 'subordinate' prophet to Muhammad whose job was to restore the Sharia given to Muhammad by guiding or rallying disenchanted Ummah back to Islam and thwart attacks on Islam by its opponents, as the "Promised One" of all religions fulfilling eschatological prophecies found in the scriptures of the Abrahamic religions, as well as Zoroastrianism, the Indian religions, Native American traditions and others.[87] Ahmadi Muslims believe that Ahmad was divinely commissioned as a true reflection of Muhammad's prophethood to establish the unity of God and to remind mankind of their duties towards God and God's creation.[88][89]
See also[edit]

List of extinct Shia sects
Islamic studies
Succession to Muhammad
Shia–Sunni relations
Shi'ite Crescent

References[edit]


^ Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyya, Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr (1991). Tariq al-hijratayn wa-bab al-sa'adatayn. Dar al-Hadith (1991). p.&#160;30.&#160;
^ al-Hanafi, Imam Ibn Abil-'Izz. Sharh At Tahawiyya. p.&#160;76.&#160;
^ al-Safarayni, Muhamad bin Ahmad. Lawami' al-anwar al-Bahiyah. Dar al-Kutub al-Ilmiyah. p.&#160;1/128.&#160;
^ Abd al-Wahhab, ibn Abd Allah, Ibn Sulayman (1999). Taysir al-'Aziz al-Hamid fi sharh kitab al-Tawhid. 'Alam al-Kutub. pp.&#160;17–19.&#160;
^ John L. Esposito, The Oxford History of Islam, p 280. ISBN 0199880417
^ a b "Scholar of renown: Abul-Hassan Al-Ash’ari". Retrieved 22 April 2015.&#160;
^ a b c Abul Ala Maududi, "Khilafat-o-Malookeyat" in Urdu language, (Caliphate and kingship), p 214.
^ Baydawi, Abdullah. "Tawali' al- Anwar min Matali' al-Anzar", circa 1300. Translated alongside other texts in the 2001 "Nature, Man and God in Medieval Islam" by Edwin Elliott Calverley and James Wilson Pollock. pp. 1001-1009
^ "KARRĀMIYA". Retrieved 22 April 2015.&#160;
^ Lewis, B.; Menage, V.L.; Pellat, Ch.; Schacht, J. (1997) [1st. pub. 1978]. Encyclopaedia of Islam (New Edition). Volume IV (Iran-Kha). Leiden, Netherlands: Brill. p.&#160;667. ISBN&#160;9004078193.&#160;
^ J. Hoffman, Valerie (2012). The Essentials of Ibadi Islam. Syracuse University Press. p.&#160;328. ISBN&#160;978-0815650843. Retrieved August 28, 2014.&#160;
^ Fleming, Benjamin; Mann, Richard (2014). Material Culture and Asian Religions: Text, Image, Object. Routledge. p.&#160;333. ISBN&#160;978-1-135013738. Retrieved August 28, 2014.&#160;
^ P. W. Pestman, Acta Orientalia Neerlandica: Proceedings of the Congress of the Dutch Oriental Society Held in Leiden on the Occasion of Its 50th Anniversary, 8th-9th May 1970, p 85.
^ Humanism in the renaissance of Islam: the cultural revival during the Buyid Age, by Joel Kramer,ISBN 90-04-07259-4, ISBN 978-90-04-07259-6
^ Frank, Richard M. "The Autonomy of the Human Agent in the Teaching of 'Abd al-Gabbar." Le Museon 95(1982): 323–355
^ "Telling the truth for more than 30 years - Sunni-Shi’i Schism: Less There Than Meets the Eye". WRMEA. Retrieved 30 November 2013.&#160;
^ Yemen: The Bradt Travel Guide - Daniel McLaughlin - Google Books. Books.google.co.uk. Retrieved 30 November 2013.&#160;
^ a b "ABU’L-ḴAṬṬĀB ASADĪ". Retrieved 22 April 2015.&#160;
^ a b "ḴAṬṬĀBIYA". Retrieved 22 April 2015.&#160;
^ Öz, Mustafa, Mezhepler Tarihi ve Terimleri Sözlüğü (The History of madh'habs and its terminology dictionary), Ensar Yayıncılık, İstanbul, 2011. (This is the name of the trainer of Muhammad bin Ismā‘īl as-ṣaghīr ibn Jā’far. He had established the principles of the Bāṭen’iyyah Madh'hab, later.
^ a b "ʿABDALLĀH B. MAYMŪN AL-QADDĀḤ". Retrieved 22 April 2015.&#160;
^ a b Halm, H. "BĀṬENĪYA". Encyclopedia Iranica. Retrieved 4 August 2014.&#160;
^ Rise of The Fatimids, by W. Ivanow. Page 81, 275
^ "ISMAʿILISM xvii. THE IMAMATE IN ISMAʿILISM". Retrieved 22 April 2015.&#160;
^ a b "Mapping the Global Muslim Population: A Report on the Size and Distribution of the World's Muslim Population". Pew Research Center. October 7, 2009. Retrieved 2010-08-24. Of the total Muslim population, 11-12% are Shia Muslims and 87-88% are Sunni Muslims. Seven to Eleven Million Alevis and Three to Four Million Alawis constitute nearly 10% of Shi'ites.&#160;
^ Roger M. Savory (ref. Abdülbaki Gölpinarli), Encyclopaedia of Islam, "Kizil-Bash", Online Edition 2005
^ a b c "BĀṬENĪYA". Retrieved 22 April 2015.&#160;
^ Öztürk, Yaşar Nuri, En-el Hak İsyanı (The Anal Haq Rebellion) – Hallâc-ı Mansûr (Darağacında Miraç - Miraç on Gallows), Vol 1 and 2, Yeni Boyut, 2011.
^ a b "Muhammad ibn Āliyy’ūl Cillī aqidah" of "Maymūn ibn Abu’l-Qāsim Sulaiman ibn Ahmad ibn at-Tabarānī fiqh" (Sūlaiman Affandy, Al-Bākūrat’ūs Sūlaiman’īyyah - Family tree of the Nusayri Tariqat, pp. 14-15, Beirut, 1873.)
^ Both Muhammad ibn Āliyy’ūl Cillī and Maymūn ibn Abu’l-Qāsim’at-Tabarānī were the murids of "Al-Khaṣībī," the founder of the Nusayri tariqa.
^ "Religions". CIA World Factbook.&#160;
^ "Mapping the Global Muslim Population". Pew Research Center. 7 October 2009.&#160;
^ Alevi-Islam Religious Services - The message of İzzettin Doğan, Zafer Mah. Ahmet Yesevi Cad. No: 290, Yenibosna / Istanbul, Turkey.
^ a b c d "The Alevi of Anatolia". angelfire.com. Retrieved 27 June 2014.&#160;
^ Halm, Heinz (2004-07-21). Shi'ism. Edinburgh University Press. p.&#160;154. ISBN&#160;978-0-7486-1888-0.&#160;
^ Radtke, B. "BĀṬEN". Encyclopedia Iranica. Retrieved 20 August 2014.&#160;
^ Both Muhammad ibn Āliyy’ūl Cillī and Maymūn ibn Abu’l-Qāsim’at-Tabarānī were the murids of "Al-Khaṣībī," the founder of the Nusayri tariqat.
^ John Pike. "Alawi Islam". Retrieved 22 April 2015.&#160;
^ a b c d e "Alawi Islam". Globalsecurity.org
^ Prochazka-Eisl, Gisela; Prochazka, Stephan (2010). The Plain of Saints and Prophets: The Nusayri-Alawi Community of Cilicia. p.&#160;81. ISBN&#160;3447061782.&#160;
^ Friedman, Yaron (2010). The Nuṣayrī-ʻAlawīs: An Introduction to the Religion, History, and Identity of the Leading Minority in Syria. p.&#160;67. ISBN&#160;9004178929.&#160;
^ a b c Böwering, Gerhard et al. (eds.) (2012). The Princeton Encyclopedia of Islamic Political Thought. p.&#160;29. ISBN&#160;0691134847.&#160;
^ a b c Friedman, Yaron (2010). The Nuṣayrī-ʻAlawīs: An Introduction to the Religion, History, and Identity of the Leading Minority in Syria. p.&#160;77. ISBN&#160;9004178929.&#160;
^ a b c d e Prochazka-Eisl, Gisela; Prochazka, Stephan (2010). The Plain of Saints and Prophets: The Nusayri-'Alawi Community of Cilicia. p.&#160;82. ISBN&#160;3447061782.&#160;
^ a b c Peters, F.E. (2009). The Monotheists: Jews, Christians, and Muslims in Conflict and Competition, Volume II. p.&#160;321. ISBN&#160;1400825717.&#160;
^ Friedman, Yaron (2010). The Nuṣayrī-ʻAlawīs: An Introduction to the Religion, History, and Identity of the Leading Minority in Syria. pp.&#160;80, 93–94. ISBN&#160;9004178929.&#160;
^ "The 'secretive sect' in charge of Syria". BBC. 17 May 2012. Retrieved 25 December 2012.&#160;
^ Alawis, Countrystudies.us, U.S. Library of Congress.
^ a b 'Abd al‑Latif al‑Yunis, Mudhakkirat al‑Duktur 'Abd al‑Latif al‑Yunis, Damascus: Dar al‑`Ilm, 1992, p. 63.
^ Secretive sect of the rulers of Syria, The Telegraph, 05 Aug 2011
^ a b "Alawi Islam". Globalsecurity.org.&#160;
^ The Nuṣayrī-ʻAlawīs. Retrieved 22 April 2015.&#160;
^ Lebanon: current issues and background, John C. Rolland (2003). Nova. 1 August 2003. ISBN&#160;9781590338711. Retrieved 25 December 2012.&#160;
^ Kaplan, Robert (February 1993). "Syria: Identity Crisis". The Atlantic.&#160;
^ Glasse, Cyril (2001). New Encyclopedia of Islam (Revised ed.). Rowman &amp; Littlefield Publishers. p.&#160;105.&#160;
^ Kramer, Martin. "Syria's '‘Alawis and Shi‘ism". In their mountainous corner of Syria, the 'Alawī claim to represent the furthest extension of Twelver Shi'ism.&#160;
^ Talhamy, Y. (2010). "The Fatwas and the Nusayri/Alawis of Syria". Middle Eastern Studies 46 (2): 175–194. doi:10.1080/00263200902940251.&#160;
^ Me'ir Mikha'el Bar-Asher; Gauke de Kootstra; Arieh Kofsky (2002). The Nuṣayr−i-ʻalaw−i Religion: An Enquiry Into Its Theology and Liturgy. BRILL. p.&#160;1. ISBN&#160;978-90-04-12552-0. Retrieved 18 March 2011.&#160;
^ "Syria crisis: Deadly shooting at Damascus funeral". BBC News. Retrieved 22 April 2015.&#160;
^ Abd-Allah, Umar F., Islamic Struggle in Syria, Berkeley&#160;: Mizan Press, c1983, pp. 43–48
^ Rubin, Barry (2007). The Truth about Syria. New York: Palgrave Macmillan. p.&#160;49. ISBN&#160;9781403982735.&#160;
^ Abd-Allah, Umar F. (1983). Islamic Struggle in Syria. Berkeley: Mizan Press. pp.&#160;43–48. ISBN&#160;0933782101.&#160;
^ Esther, Pan (18 July 2006). "Syria, Iran, and the Mideast Conflict". Backgrounder. Council on Foreign Relations. Archived from the original on 23 May 2011. Retrieved 30 April 2011.&#160;
^ a b Syrian comment. Asad's Alawi dilemma, 8 October 2004
^ "Islamic Education in Syria: Undoing Secularism". OU. Retrieved 25 December 2012.&#160;
^ Radtke, B. "BĀṬEN". Encyclopedia Iranica. Retrieved 9 July 2014.&#160;
^ Ozervarli, M. Sait (2010). "The Qur'anic Rational Theology of Ibn Taymiyya and his Criticism of the Mutakallimun". Ibn Taymiyya and His Times. Oxford University Press. ISBN&#160;0195478347.&#160;
^ a b Muhammad Abu Zahra, The history of Madh'habs and Divinity Schools in Islam.
^ Statements from the Salaf on Ascription to the Salaf, SalafiPublications.com, Article ID: SLF010001
^ Halverson, Theology and Creed in Sunni Islam, 2010: 38-48
^ Halverson, Theology and Creed in Sunni Islam, 2010: 36
^ Halverson, Theology and Creed in Sunni Islam, 2010: 36-7
^ Swartz, Merlin. A Medieval Critique of Anthropomorphism. Brill, 2001, p.134-137 .
^ Scholar of renown: Muhammad Abu Zahrah. Ed. Adil Salahi for Arab News. Published Wednesday, 14 November 2001; accessed Sunday 9 June 2013.
^ Hastings, James (1908). Encyclopædia of Religion and Ethics. Volume;7. Morrison and Gibb Limited. p.&#160;72.&#160;
^ Kepel, Gilles (2003). Jihad: The Trail of Political Islam.&#160;
^ "Ibn Taymiyyah". Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved 16 January 2015.&#160;
^ al-Makkee, Manaaqib Abee Haneefah, pg. 183–184
^ Dhammul-Kalaam (B/194)
^ Dhammul-Kalaam (Q/173/A)
^ Dhammul-Kalaam (Q/213)
^ Dhahabi, as-Siyar (10/30)
^ Ibn Abi Hatim, Manaaqibush-Shaafi'ee, pg. 182
^ Annemarie Schimmel et al.: Der Islam III. Volksfrömmigkeit, Islamische Kultur, Zeitgenössische Strömungen. Kohlhammer, Stuttgart 1990, S. 418–420
^ "The Promised Messiah - Prophecies Fulfilled". Alislam.org. Archived from the original on 25 July 2011. Retrieved 2011-08-13.&#160;
^ "The Holy Quran". Alislam.org. Archived from the original on 25 July 2011. Retrieved 2011-08-13.&#160;
^ Invitation to Ahmadiyyat by Mirza Bashir-ud-Din Mahmood Ahmad Part II, Argument 4, Chapter "Promised Messiah, Promised One of All Religions"
^ Simon Ross Valentine. Islam and the Ahmadiyya jamaʻat: history, belief, practice. Columbia University Press. pp.&#160;32–33. ISBN&#160;978-0-231-70094-8.&#160;
^ Nasir Mahmood Malik, National Tarbiyyat Secretary, USA (2007). "Raising Ahmadi Children in the West" (PDF). Al Islam. Retrieved 10 June 2011.&#160;


External links[edit]



Wikisource has the text of a 1905 New International Encyclopedia article about Islamic schools and branches.



Online Fatwa Site - Islam Question and Answer
The Four Sunni Schools of Thought
Ask Imam - Islam Q&amp;A
Online Islamic Learning
Sufism - Islamic Science of Spirituality









v
t
e


Islamic theology










&#160;



Fields
Theologians
Books













Fields



ʿAqīdah
'Aql
Astronomy
Cosmology
Eschatology
Ethics
Ilm al-Kalam
Legal philosophy
Logic
Metaphysics
Natural philosophy
Peace
Philosophy of education








Theologians



Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah
Al-Basri
Al-Qasim
Zayn al-Abidin
Muhammad al-Baqir
Zayd ibn Ali
Ja'far al-Sadiq
Abū Ḥanīfa
Malik ibn Anas
Muhammad al-Nafs al-Zakiyya
Al-Shafi‘i
Ahmad ibn Hanbal
Dawud al-Zahiri
Ibn Hazm
Abu Yusuf
Wasil ibn Ata
Amr ibn Ubayd
Abd al-Jabbar
Abd al-Qadir al-Jilani
Al-Kindi
Imam Tirmidhi
Al-Ash'ari
Al-Maturidi
Al-Ghazali
Al-Qushayri
Ibn al-Jawzi
Al-Baydawi
Al-Shahrastani
Al-Hakim al-Tirmidhi
Al-Razi
Al-Jahiz
Al-Masudi
Al-Jubba'i
Al-Dhahabi
al-Ballūṭī
Al-Mufid
Ahmad Sirhindi
Ahmad Yasavi
Al-Hilli
Allameh Majlesi
Ibn 'Aqil
Ibn 'Arabī
Ibn Qudamah
al-Shirazi
Jalal al-Din Muhammad Rumi
Fazlur Rahman Malik
Hacı Bektash Veli
Hacı Bayram Veli
Hüseyin Hilmi Işık
Mahmud Hudayi
Morteza Motahhari
Muhammad Baqir al-Sadr
Muhammad Hamidullah
Muhammed Hamdi Yazır
Muhammad Taqi Usmani
Nasir Khusraw
Sadr al-Din al-Qunawi
Said Nursî
Sheikh Bedreddin
Shaykh Tusi
Allameh Amini
Ahmad Raza Khan
Arvasī
Ala Maududī








Key books



Crucial Sunni books

Al-Irshad
Al-Aqidah al-Tahawiyyah


Buyruks
Kitab al Majmu
Masnavi
Nahj al-Balagha
Rasa'il al-Hikma
Risale-i Nur


















&#160;
Schools










Sunni



Aqidah schools of divinity

Ash'ari
Athari
Maturidi


Madh'habs

Hanafi
Maliki
Shafi'i
Hanbali
Ẓāhirī
Extinct

Awza'i &#160;•  Thawri &#160;•  Laythi &#160;•  Jariri













Imami
(Shia Islam)





Kaysanites



Mukhtar

Abu Muslim
Sunpadh
Ishaq al-Turk


Muhammerah

Khurramites

Babak • Mazyar • Ismail I&#160;/ Pir Sultan Abdal – Qizilbash&#160;/ Safavid conversion of Iran to Shia Islam


Al-Muqanna










Zaidiyyah



Jarudi
Sulaymani
Tabiri/Butri/Salihi
Alid dynasties of northern Iran

Hasan al-Utrush
Qasimi


List of extinct Shia sects

Dukayniyya
Khalafiyya
Khashabiyya










Isma'ilism
Imāmate



Batiniyyah

Sevener&#160;Qarmatians
Hamza&#160;/ al-Muqtana – ad-Darazi&#160;/ Druzes
Nasir Khusraw – Turkestan&#160;Alevism


Mustaali

Hafizi
Taiyabi


Nizari

Hashashins
Nizari Ismailis










Imāmī
Twelver



Theology of Twelvers

Ja'fari

Akhbari • Shaykhi • Usuli


Alevi

Qutb ad-Dīn Haydar – Qalandariyya
Baba Ishak – Babai
Galip Hassan – Rifa'i Galibi Order


Ghulat

Al-Khaṣībī &#160;/  Ibn Nusayr – Alawites
Nāimī&#160;/ Nasīmī – Hurufism&#160;/ Bektashism















Others



The Khawarij

Azraqi
Najdat
Sufri

Abu Qurra • Nakkariyyah


Ajardi

Maymuniyyah


Haruriyyah
Ibadi


Murji'ah

Sunni Murji'ah
Bid‘ah Murji'ah

Karramiyya




Jabriyya

Ibn Safwan


Qadariyya

Ma'bad al-Juhani
Mu'tazila

Bahshamiyya • Ikhshîdiyya




Salafiyyah

Ibn Taymiyyah
Ibn al-Qayyim
Al-Sindhi
Ibn ʿAbd al-Wahhāb























					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Schools_of_Islamic_theology&amp;oldid=691200815"					
				Categories: Islamic theologyIslamic branchesHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from May 2009Articles containing Arabic-language text				
							
		
		
			