


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Social constructionism
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				See also: Social constructivism








This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page.








The neutrality of this article is disputed. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page. Please do not remove this message until conditions to do so are met. (December 2012)







The lead section of this article may need to be rewritten. Please discuss this issue on the article's talk page. Use the lead layout guide to ensure the section will be inclusive of all essential details. (January 2012)







This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. No cleanup reason has been specified. Please help improve this article if you can. (October 2008)










Sociology







History
Outline
Portal




Theory




Positivism
Antipositivism
Functionalism
Conflict theories
Social constructionism
Structuralism
Interactionism
Critical theory
Structure and agency
Actor-network theory




Methods




Quantitative
Qualitative
Historical
Mathematical
Computational
Ethnography
Ethnomethodology
Network analysis




Subfields




Conflict
Criminology
Culture
Development
Deviance
Demography
Education
Economic
Environmental
Family
Gender
Health
Industrial
Inequality
Knowledge
Law
Literature
Medical
Military
Organizational
Political
Race &amp; ethnicity
Religion
Rural
Science
Social change
Social movements
Social psychology
Stratification
STS
Technology
Urban




Browse




Bibliography
Index
Journals
Organizations
People
Timeline







v
t
e





Social constructionism or the social construction of reality (also social concept) is a theory of knowledge in sociology and communication theory that examines the development of jointly constructed understandings of the world. It displays understanding, significance, and meaning that are developed in coordination with other human beings. The elements most important to the theory are (1) the assumption that human beings rationalize their experience by creating a model of the social world and how it functions and (2) that language is the most essential system through which humans construct reality.[1]



Contents


1 Definition
2 Origins
3 Social constructionist analysis
4 Applications

4.1 Personal construct psychology
4.2 Educational psychology
4.3 Systemic therapy


5 Teleology of social construction

5.1 Weak teleology


6 History and development

6.1 Berger and Luckmann
6.2 Narrative turn
6.3 Postmodernism


7 Criticisms
8 See also
9 References
10 Further reading

10.1 Books
10.2 Articles


11 External links



Definition[edit]
Social constructs or social constructions "define meanings, notions, or connotations" that are placed on "objects and events" in the domain and to other's understandings of their "relationships to and interactions with these objects."[2] In the realm of "social constructionist thought", a social construct is an "idea or notion that appears to be natural and obvious to people who accept it" but may or may not represent reality, so it stays an "invention or artifice of a given society."[3]
A major focus of social constructionism is to uncover the ways in which individuals and groups participate in the construction of their perceived social reality. It involves looking at the ways social phenomena are created, institutionalized, known, and made into tradition by humans.
Origins[edit]
In terms of background, social constructionism is rooted in "symbolic interactionism" and "phenomenology"[4][5] With Berger and Luckman's The Social Construction of Reality published in 1966, this concept found its hold. More than four decades later, a sizable number of theory and research pledged to the "basic tenent" that people "make their social and cultural worlds at the same time these worlds make them."[6] It is a viewpoint that uproots social processes "simultaneously playful and serious, by which reality is both revealed and concealed, created and destroyed by our activities."[7] It provides a substitute to the "Western intellectual tradition" where the researcher "earnestly seeks certainty in a representation of reality by means of propositions."[8]
In social constructionist terms, "taken-for-granted realities" are cultivated from "interactions between and among social agents;" furthermore, reality is not some "objectionable truth waiting to be uncovered through positivist scientific inquiry."[6] Rather, there can be "multiple realities that compete for truth and legitimacy."[5] Social constructionism understands the "fundamental role of language and communication" and this understanding has "contributed to the linguistic turn" and more recently the "turn to discourse theory."[9] The majority of social constructionists abide by the belief that "language does not mirror reality; rather, it constitutes [creates] it.[10]
A broad definition of social constructionism has its supporters and critics in the organizational sciences.[11] A constructionist approach to various organizational and managerial phenomena appear to be more commonplace and on the rise.[12]
Andy Lock and Tom Strong trace some of the fundamental tenets of social constructionism back to the work of the 18th century Italian political philosopher, rhetorician, historian, and jurist Giambattista Vico[13]
According to Lock and Strong, other influential thinkers whose work has had an impact on the development of social constructionism are: Edmund Husserl, Alfred Schutz, Maurice Merleau-Ponty, Martin Heidegger, Hans-Georg Gadamer, Paul Ricoeur, Jürgen Habermas, Emmanuel Levinas, Mikhail Bakhtin, Valentin Volosinov, Lev Vygotsky, George Herbert Mead, Ludwig Wittgenstein, Gregory Bateson, Harold Garfinkel, Erving Goffman, Anthony Giddens, Michel Foucault, Ken Gergen, Mary Gergen, Rom Harre, and John Shotter.[14]
Social constructionist analysis[edit]
"Social construction" may mean many things to many people. Ian Hacking, having examined a wide range of books and articles with titles of the form "The social construction of X" or "Constructing X", argues that when something is said to be "socially constructed", this is shorthand for at least the following two claims:

(0) In the present state of affairs, X is taken for granted; X appears to be inevitable.[15]:12


(1) X need not have existed, or need not be at all as it is. X, or X as it is at present, is not determined by the nature of things; it is not inevitable.[15]:6

Hacking adds that the following claims are also often, though not always, implied by the use of the phrase "social construction":

(2) X is quite bad as it is.


(3) We would be much better off if X were done away with, or at least radically transformed.[15]:6

Thus a claim that gender is socially constructed probably means that gender, as currently understood, is not an inevitable result of biology, but highly contingent on social and historical processes. In addition, depending on who is making the claim, it may mean that our current understanding of gender is harmful, and should be modified or eliminated, to the extent possible.
According to Hacking, "social construction" claims are not always clear about exactly what isn't "inevitable", or exactly what "should be done away with." Consider a hypothetical claim that quarks are "socially constructed". On one reading, this means that quarks themselves are not "inevitable" or "determined by the nature of things." On another reading, this means that our idea (or conceptualization, or understanding) of quarks is not "inevitable" or "determined by the nature of things".The distinction between "quarks themselves" and "our idea (or conceptualization, or understanding) of quarks" will undoubtedly trouble some with a philosophical bent. Hacking's distinction is based on intuitive metaphysics, with a split between things out in the world, on one hand, and ideas thereof in our minds, on the other. Hacking is less advocating a serious, particular metaphysics than he is suggesting a useful way to analyze claims about "social construction".[15]:21–24
Hacking is much more sympathetic to the second reading than the first.[15]:68–70 Furthermore, he argues that, if the second reading is taken, there need not always be a conflict between saying that quarks are "socially constructed" and saying that they are "real".[15]:29–30 In our gender example, this means that while a legitimate biological basis for gender may exist, some of society's perceptions of gender may be socially constructed.
The stronger first position, however, is more-or-less an inevitable corollary of Willard Van Orman Quine's concept of ontological relativity, and particularly of the Duhem-Quine thesis. That is, according to Quine and like-minded thinkers (who are not usually characterized as social constructionists) there is no single privileged explanatory framework that is closest to "the things themselves"—every theory has merit only in proportion to its explanatory power.[16]
As we step from the phrase to the world of human beings, "social construction" analyses can become more complex. Hacking briefly examines Helène Moussa’s analysis of the social construction of "women refugees".[15]:9–10 According to him, Moussa's argument has several pieces, some of which may be implicit:

Canadian citizens' idea of "the woman refugee" is not inevitable, but historically contingent. (Thus the idea or category "the woman refugee" can be said to be "socially constructed".)
Women coming to Canada to seek asylum are profoundly affected by the category of "the woman refugee". Among other things, if a woman does not "count" as a "woman refugee" according to the law, she may be deported, and forced to return to very difficult conditions in her homeland.
Such women may modify their behavior, and perhaps even their attitudes towards themselves, in order to gain the benefits of being classified as a "woman refugee".
If such a woman does not modify her behavior, she should be considered un-Canadian and as such should not be admitted to citizenship.

Hacking suggests that this third part of the analysis, the "interaction" between a socially constructed category and the individuals that are actually or potentially included in that category, is present in many "social construction" analyses involving types of human beings.
″Social construction-ism accepts that there is an objective reality. It is concerned with how knowledge is constructed and understood. It has therefore an epistemological not an ontological perspective. Criticisms and misunderstanding arise when this central fact is misinterpreted. This is most evident in debates and criticisms surrounding realism and relativism. The words of Kirk and Miller are relevant when they suggest that the search for a final, absolute truth be left to philosophers and theologians. Social construction-ism places great emphasis on everyday interactions between people and how they use language to construct their reality. It regards the social practices people engage in as the focus of enquiry″.[17] According to him, Kirk and Miller investigated sam shepard case- led to shepard acquittal:
Applications[edit]
Personal construct psychology[edit]
Since its appearance in the 1950s, personal construct psychology (PCP) has mainly developed as a constructivist theory of personality and a system of transforming individual meaning-making processes, largely in therapeutic contexts.[18][19][20][21][22][23] It was based around the notion of persons as scientists who form and test theories about their worlds. Therefore, it represented one of the first attempts to appreciate the constructive nature of experience and the meaning persons give to their experience.[24] Social constructionism (SC), on the other hand, mainly developed as a form of a critique,[25] aimed to transform the oppressing effects of the social meaning-making processes. Over the years, it has grown into a cluster of different approaches,[26] with no single SC position.[27] However, different approaches under the generic term of SC are loosely linked by some shared assumptions about language, knowledge, and reality.[28]
A usual way of thinking about the relationship between PCP and SC is treating them as two separate entities that are similar in some aspects, but also very different in others. This way of conceptualizing this relationship is a logical result of the circumstantial differences of their emergence. In subsequent analyses these differences between PCP and SC were framed around several points of tension, formulated as binary oppositions: personal/social; individualist/relational; agency/structure; constructivist/constructionist.[29][30][31][32][33][34] Although some of the most important issues in contemporary psychology are elaborated in these contributions, the polarized positioning also sustained the idea of a separation between PCP and SC, paving the way for only limited opportunities for dialogue between them.[35][36]
Reframing the relationship between PCP and SC may be of use in both the PCP and the SC communities. On one hand, it extends and enriches SC theory and points to benefits of applying the PCP “toolkit” in constructionist therapy and research. On the other hand, the reframing contributes to PCP theory and points to new ways of addressing social construction in therapeutic conversations.[37]
Educational psychology[edit]
Social constructivism has been studied by many educational psychologists, who are concerned with its implications for teaching and learning. For more on the psychological dimensions of social constructivism, see the work of Ernst von Glasersfeld and A. Sullivan Palincsar.[38]
Systemic therapy[edit]
Systemic therapy is a form of psychotherapy which seeks to address people as people in relationship, dealing with the interactions of groups and their interactional patterns and dynamics.
Teleology of social construction[edit]
The concepts of weak and strong as applied to opposing philosophical positions, "isms", inform a teleology&#160;– the goal-oriented, meaningful or "final end" of an interpretation of reality. "Isms" are not personal opinions, but the extreme, modal, formulations that actual persons, individuals, can then consider, and take a position between. There are opposing philosophical positions concerning the feasibility of co-creating a common, shared, social reality, called weak and strong.
John R. Searle does not elucidate the terms strong and weak in his book The Construction of Social Reality,[39] but he clearly uses them in his Chinese room argument, where he debates the feasibility of creating a computing machine with a sharable understanding of reality, and he adds "We are precisely such machines." Strong artificial intelligence (Strong AI) is the bet that computer programmers will somehow eventually achieve a computing machine with a mind of its own, and that it will eventually be more powerful than a human mind. Weak AI bets they won't.
David Deutsch in his book The Fabric of Reality uses a form of strong Turing principle to share Frank Tipler's view of the final state of the universe as an omnipotent (but not omniscient), Omega point, computer. But this computer is a society of creative thinkers, or people (albeit posthuman transhuman persons), having debates in order to generate information, in the never-ending attempt to attain omniscience of this physics—its evolutionary forms, its computational abilities, and the methods of its epistemology—having an eternity to do so. (p.&#160;356)
Because both the Chinese room argument and the construction of social reality deal with Searle and his debates, and because they both use weak and strong to denote a philosophical position, and because both debate the programmability of "the other", it is worth noting the correspondence that "strong AI" is strong social constructionism, and "weak AI" is weak social constructivism.
Strong social constructiv"ism" says "none are able to communicate either a full reality or an accurate ontology, therefore my position must impose, by a sort of divine right, my observer-relative epistemology", whereas weak social constructivism says "none are able to know a full reality, therefore we must cooperate, informing and conveying an objective ontology as best we can."[40]
Weak teleology [edit]
Weak social constructionism sees the underlying, objective, "brute fact" elements of the class of languages and functional assignments of human, metaphysical, reality. Brute facts are all facts that are not institutional (metaphysical, social agreement) facts. The skeptic portrays the weak aspect of social constructivism, and wants to spend effort debating the institutional realities.
Harvard psychologist Steven Pinker[41] writes that "some categories really are social constructions: they exist only because people tacitly agree to act as if they exist. Examples include money, tenure, citizenship, decorations for bravery, and the presidency of the United States."
In a similar vein, Stanley Fish[42] has suggested that baseball's "balls and strikes" are social constructions.[43]:29–31
Both Fish and Pinker agree that the sorts of objects indicated here can be described as part of what John Searle calls "social reality."[44]:22 In particular, they are, in Searle's terms, ontologically subjective but epistemologically objective.[39]:63 "Social facts" are temporally, ontologically, and logically dependent on "brute facts." For example, "money" in the form of its raw materials (rag, pulp, ink) as constituted socially for barter (for example by a banking system) is a social fact of "money" by virtue of (i) collectively willing and intending (ii) to impose some particular function (purpose for which), (iii) by constitutive rules atop the "brute facts." "Social facts have the remarkable feature of having no analogue among physical brute facts" (34). The existence of language is itself constitutive of the social fact (37), which natural or brute facts do not require. Natural or "brute" facts exist independently of language; thus a "mountain" is a mountain in every language and in no language; it simply is what it is.[39]:29, et seq
Searle illustrates the evolution of social facts from brute facts by the constitutive rule: X counts as Y in C. "The Y terms has to assign a new status that the object does not already have just in virtue of satisfying the Y term; and there has to be collective agreement, or at least acceptance, both in the imposition of that status on the stuff referred to by the X term and about the function that goes with that status. Furthermore, because the physical features brute facts specified by the X term are insufficient by themselves to guarantee the fulfillment of the assigned function specified by the Y term, the new status and its attendant functions have to be the sort of things that can be constituted by collective agreement or acceptance."[39]:44
It is true that language is not a "brute fact," that it is an institutional fact, a human convention, a metaphysical reality (that happens to be physically uttered), but Searle points out that there are language-independent thoughts "noninstitutional, primitive, biological inclinations and cognitions not requiring any linguistic devices," and that there are many "brute facts" amongst both humans and animals that are truths that should not be altered in the social constructs because language does not truly constitute them, despite the attempt to institute them for any group's gain: money and property are language dependent, but desires (thirst, hunger) and emotions (fear, rage) are not.[39]:62 (Descartes describes the difference between imagination as a sort of vision, or image, and intellect as conceptualizing things by symbolic manipulation.) Therefore, there is doubt that society or a computer can be completely programmed by language and images, (because there is a programmable, emotive effect of images that derives from the language of judgment towards images).
Finally, against the strong theory and for the weak theory, Searle insists, "it could not be the case, as some have maintained, that all facts are institutional [i.e., social] facts, that there are no brute facts, because the structure of institutional facts reveals that they are logically dependent on brute facts. To suppose that all facts are institutional [i.e., social] would produce an infinite regress or circularity in the account of institutional facts. In order that some facts are institutional, there must be other facts that are brute [i.e., physical, biological, natural]. This is the consequence of the logical structure of institutional facts.".[39]:56
Ian Hacking, Canadian philosopher of science, insists, "the notion that everything is socially constructed has been going the rounds. John Searle [1995] argues vehemently (and in my opinion cogently) against universal constructionism."[15]:24 "Universal social constructionism is descended from the doctrine that I once named linguistic idealism and attributed, only half in jest, to Richard Nixon [Hacking, 1975, p. 182]. Linguistic idealism is the doctrine that only what is talked about exists, nothing has reality until it is spoken of, or written about. This extravagant notion is descended from Berkeley's idea-ism, which we call idealism: the doctrine that all that exists is mental."[15]:24 "They are a part of what John Searle [1995] calls social reality. His book is titled the Construction of Social Reality, and as I explained elsewhere [Hacking, 1996], that is not a social construction book at all."[15]:12
Hacking observes, "the label 'social constructionism' is more code than description"[15]:15 of every Leftist, Marxist, Freudian, and Feminist PostModernist to call into question every moral, sex, gender, power, and deviant claim as just another essentialist claim—including the claim that members of the male and female sex are inherently different, rather than historically and socially constructed. Hacking observes that his 1995 simplistic dismissal of the concept actually revealed to many readers the outrageous implications of the theorists: Is child abuse a real evil, or a social construct, asked Hacking? His dismissive attitude, "gave some readers a way to see that there need be no clash between construction and reality,"[15]:29 inasmuch as "the metaphor of social construction once had excellent shock value, but now it has become tired."[15]:35
Informally, they require human practices to sustain their existence, but they have an effect that is (basically) universally agreed upon. The disagreement lies in whether this category should be called "socially constructed." Ian Hacking[45] argues that it should not. Furthermore, it is not clear that authors who write "social construction" analyses ever mean "social construction" in Pinker's sense. ".[46] If they never do, then Pinker (probably among others) has misunderstood the point of a social constructionist argument.
To understand how weak social constructionism can conclude that metaphysics (a human affair) is not the entire "reality," see the arguments against the study metaphysics. This inability to accurately share the full reality, even given time for a rational conversation, is similarly proclaimed by weak artificial intelligence.
History and development[edit]
Berger and Luckmann[edit]
Constructionism became prominent in the U.S. with Peter L. Berger and Thomas Luckmann's 1966 book, The Social Construction of Reality. Berger and Luckmann argue that all knowledge, including the most basic, taken-for-granted common sense knowledge of everyday reality, is derived from and maintained by social interactions. When people interact, they do so with the understanding that their respective perceptions of reality are related, and as they act upon this understanding their common knowledge of reality becomes reinforced. Since this common sense knowledge is negotiated by people, human typifications, significations and institutions come to be presented as part of an objective reality, particularly for future generations who were not involved in the original process of negotiation. For example, as parents negotiate rules for their children to follow, those rules confront the children as externally produced "givens" that they cannot change. Berger and Luckmann's social constructionism has its roots in phenomenology. It links to Heidegger and Edmund Husserl through the teaching of Alfred Schutz, who was also Berger's PhD adviser.
Narrative turn[edit]
During the 1970s and 1980s, social constructionist theory underwent a transformation as constructionist sociologists engaged with the work of Michel Foucault and others as a narrative turn in the social sciences was worked out in practice. This had a particular impact on the emergent sociology of science and the growing field of science and technology studies. In particular, Karin Knorr-Cetina, Bruno Latour, Barry Barnes, Steve Woolgar, and others used social constructionism to relate what science has typically characterized as objective facts to the processes of social construction, with the goal of showing that human subjectivity imposes itself on those facts we take to be objective, not solely the other way around. A particularly provocative title in this line of thought is Andrew Pickering's Constructing Quarks: A Sociological History of Particle Physics. At the same time, Social Constructionism shaped studies of technology – the Sofield, especially on the Social construction of technology, or SCOT, and authors as Wiebe Bijker, Trevor Pinch, Maarten van Wesel, etc.[47][48] Despite its common perception as objective, mathematics is not immune to social constructionist accounts. Sociologists such as Sal Restivo and Randall Collins, mathematicians including Reuben Hersh and Philip J. Davis, and philosophers including Paul Ernest have published social constructionist treatments of mathematics.
Postmodernism[edit]
Social constructionism can be seen as a source of the postmodern movement, and has been influential in the field of cultural studies. Some have gone so far as to attribute the rise of cultural studies (the cultural turn) to social constructionism. Within the social constructionist strand of postmodernism, the concept of socially constructed reality stresses the ongoing mass-building of worldviews by individuals in dialectical interaction with society at a time. The numerous realities so formed comprise, according to this view, the imagined worlds of human social existence and activity, gradually crystallised by habit into institutions propped up by language conventions, given ongoing legitimacy by mythology, religion and philosophy, maintained by therapies and socialization, and subjectively internalised by upbringing and education to become part of the identity of social citizens.
In the book The Reality of Social Construction, the British sociologist Dave Elder-Vass places the development of social constructionism as one outcome of the legacy of postmodernism. He writes "Perhaps the most widespread and influential product of this process [coming to terms with the legacy of postmodernism] is social constructionism, which has been booming [within the domain of social theory] since the 1980s."[49]
Criticisms[edit]
Social constructionism falls toward the nurture end of the spectrum of the larger nature and nurture debate. Consequently, critics have argued that it generally ignores biological influences on behavior or culture, or suggests that they are unimportant to achieve an understanding of human behavior.[50] The view of most psychologists and social scientists is that behavior is a complex outcome of both biological and cultural influences.[51][52] Other disciplines, such as evolutionary psychology, behavior genetics, behavioral neuroscience, epigenetics, etc., take a nature-nurture interactionism approach to understand behavior or cultural phenomena.
In 1996, to illustrate what he believed to be the intellectual weaknesses of social constructionism and postmodernism, physics professor Alan Sokal submitted an article to the academic journal Social Text deliberately written to be incomprehensible but including phrases and jargon typical of the articles published by the journal. The submission, which was published, was an experiment to see if the journal would "publish an article liberally salted with nonsense if (a) it sounded good and (b) it flattered the editors' ideological preconceptions."[53] The Postmodernism Generator is a computer program that is designed to produce similarly incomprehensible text.[54] In 1999, Sokal, with coauthor Jean Bricmont published the book Fashionable Nonsense, which criticized postmodernism and social constructionism.
Philosopher Paul Boghossian has also written against social constructionism. He follows Ian Hacking's argument that many adopt social constructionism because of its potentially liberating stance: if things are the way that they are only because of our social conventions, as opposed to being so naturally, then it should be possible to change them into how we would rather have them be. He then states that social constructionists argue that we should refrain from making absolute judgements about what is true and instead state that something is true in the light of this or that theory. Countering this, he states:

"But it is hard to see how we might coherently follow this advice. Given that the propositions which make up epistemic systems are just very general propositions about what absolutely justifies what, it makes no sense to insist that we abandon making absolute particular judgements about what justifies what while allowing us to accept absolute general judgements about what justifies what. But in effect this is what the epistemic relativist is recommending."[55]

Later in the same work, Boghossian severely constrains the requirements of relativism. He states that instead of believing that any world view is just as true as any other (cultural relativism), we should believe that:

"If we were to encounter an actual, coherent, fundamental, genuine alternative to our epistemic system, C2, whose track record was impressive enough to make us doubt the correctness of our own system, C1, we would not be able to justify C1 over C2 even by our own lights."

Woolgar and Pawluch [56] argue that constructionsts tend to 'ontological gerrymander' social conditions in and out of their analysis. Following this point, Thibodeaux [57] argued that constructionism can both separate and combine a subject and their effective environment. To resolve this he argued that objective conditions should be used when analyzing how perspectives are motivated.
Social constructionism has been criticized by evolutionary psychologists, including Steven Pinker in his book The Blank Slate.[citation needed] John Tooby and Leda Cosmides used the term "standard social science model" to refer to social-science philosophies that they argue fail to take into account the evolved properties of the brain.[58]
See also[edit]


Consensus reality
Constructivism in international relations
Constructivist epistemology
Epochalism
Ethnomethodology
Imagined Communities
Parametric determinism
Phenomenology
Science and technology studies
Social construction of gender difference
Social epistemology
Symbolic interactionism
Talcott Parsons


References[edit]


^ Leeds-Hurwitz, W. (2009). Social construction of reality. In S. Littlejohn, &amp; K. Foss (Eds.), Encyclopedia of communication theory. (pp. 892-895). Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications, Inc. doi: http://dx.doi.org.ezproxy.fau.edu/10.4135/9781412959384.n344
^ "Social constructionism Facts, information, pictures | Encyclopedia.com articles about Social constructionism". www.encyclopedia.com. Retrieved 2015-10-19.&#160;
^ "Social constructionism Facts, information, pictures | Encyclopedia.com articles about Social constructionism". www.encyclopedia.com. Retrieved 2015-10-19.&#160;
^ http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/phenomenology/
^ a b Fairhurst, Gail T.; Grant, David (2010-05-01). "The Social Construction of Leadership: A Sailing Guide". Management Communication Quarterly 24 (2): 171–210. doi:10.1177/0893318909359697. ISSN&#160;0893-3189.&#160;
^ a b Fairhurst, Gail T.; Grant, David (2010-05-01). "The Social Construction of Leadership: A Sailing Guide". Management Communication Quarterly 24 (2): 171–210. doi:10.1177/0893318909359697. ISSN&#160;0893-3189.&#160;
^ Fairhurst, Gail T.; Grant, David (2010-05-01). "The Social Construction of Leadership: A Sailing Guide". Management Communication Quarterly 24 (2): 171–210. doi:10.1177/0893318909359697. ISSN&#160;0893-3189.&#160;
^ Fairhurst, Gail T.; Grant, David (2010-05-01). "The Social Construction of Leadership: A Sailing Guide". Management Communication Quarterly 24 (2): 171–210. doi:10.1177/0893318909359697. ISSN&#160;0893-3189.&#160;
^ Fairhurst, Gail T.; Grant, David (2010-05-01). "The Social Construction of Leadership: A Sailing Guide". Management Communication Quarterly 24 (2): 171–210. doi:10.1177/0893318909359697. ISSN&#160;0893-3189.&#160;
^ Fairhurst, Gail T.; Grant, David (2010-05-01). "The Social Construction of Leadership: A Sailing Guide". Management Communication Quarterly 24 (2): 171–210. doi:10.1177/0893318909359697. ISSN&#160;0893-3189.&#160;
^ Fairhurst, Gail T.; Grant, David (2010-05-01). "The Social Construction of Leadership: A Sailing Guide". Management Communication Quarterly 24 (2): 171–210. doi:10.1177/0893318909359697. ISSN&#160;0893-3189.&#160;
^ Fairhurst, Gail T.; Grant, David (2010-05-01). "The Social Construction of Leadership: A Sailing Guide". Management Communication Quarterly 24 (2): 171–210. doi:10.1177/0893318909359697. ISSN&#160;0893-3189.&#160;
^ Andy Lock and Tom Strong.2010. Social Constructionism: Sources and Stirrings in Theory and Practice. Cambridge University Press, 12-29
^ Andy Lock and Tom Strong.2010. Social Constructionism: Sources and Stirrings in Theory and Practice. Cambridge University Press
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m Hacking, Ian. The Social Construction of What? . Harvard University Press, 1999; ISBN 0-674-00412-4, Numbering begins with 0 for consistency with Hacking's usage.
^ "Anatomy of a Social Construct". Retrieved 2014-09-16.&#160;
^ Andrew Tom 1999
^ Bannister, D., &amp; Mair, M.M. (1968) The evaluation of personal constructs. London, UK: Academic Press
^ Kelly, G.A. (1955), The psychology of personal constructs. New York, NY: Norton
^ Mair, J.M. (1977), The community of self. In D. Bannister (Ed.), New perspectives in personal construct theory (pp. 125–149). London, UK: Academic Press
^ Neimeyer, R.A., &amp; Levitt, H. (2000), What’s narrative got to do with it? Construction and coherence in accounts of loss. In J. Harvey (Ed.), Loss and trauma (pp. 401–412). Philadelphia, PA: Brunner Routledge
^ Procter, H.G. (1981), Family construct psychology. In S. Walrond-Skinner (Ed.), Family therapy and approaches (pp. 350–367). London, UK: Routledge &amp; Kegan Paul
^ Stojnov, D., &amp; Butt, T. (2002), The relational basis of personal construct psychology. In R. Neimeyer &amp; G. Neimeyer (Eds.), Advances of personal construct theory: New directions and perspectives (pp. 81–113). Westport, CT: Praeger
^ Harré, R., &amp; Gillett, D. (1994). The discursive mind. London, UK: Sage
^ Shotter, J., &amp; Lannamann, J. (2002), The situation of social constructionism: Its imprisonment within the ritual of theory-criticism-and-debate. Theory &amp; Psychology, 12, 577–609.
^ Harré, R. (2002), Public sources of the personal mind: Social constructionism in context. Theory &amp; Psychology, 12, 611–623.
^ Stam, H.J. (2001). Introduction: Social constructionism and its critiques. Theory &amp; Psychology, 11, 291–296
^ Burr, V. (1995), An introduction to social constructionism. London, UK: Routledge
^ Botella, L. (1995). Personal construct psychology, constructivism and postmodern thought. In R.A. Neimeyer &amp; G.J. Neimeyer (Eds.), Advances in personal construct psychology (Vol. 3, pp. 3–35). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
^ Burkitt, I. (1996). Social and personal constructs: A division left unresolved. Theory &amp; Psychology, 6, 71–77.
^ Burr, V. (1992). Construing relationships: Some thoughts on PCP and discourse. In A. Thompson &amp; P. Cummins (Eds.), European perspectives in personal construct psychology: Selected papers from the inaugural conference of the EPCA (pp. 22–35). Lincoln, UK: EPCA.
^ Butt, T.W. (2001). Social action and personal constructs. Theory &amp; Psychology, 11, 75–95.
^ Mancuso, J. (1998). Can an avowed adherent of personal-construct psychology be counted as a social constructions? Journal of Constructivist Psychology, 11, 205–219.
^ Raskin J.D. (2002). Constructivism in psychology: Personal construct psychology, radical constructivism, and social constructionism. American Communication Journal, 5(3), 1–25.
^ Jelena Pavlović (2011-05-11). "Personal construct psychology and social constructionism are not incompatible: Implications of a reframing". Tap.sagepub.com. Retrieved 2012-11-08.&#160;
^ Pavlović, J. (2011). Personal construct psychology and social constructionism are not incompatible: Implications of a reframing Theory &amp; Psychology 21: 396–411
^ Pavlović, J. (2011). Personal construct psychology and social constructionism are not incompatible: Implications of a reframing Theory &amp; Psychology 21: 396–411.
^ Glasersfeld, Ernst von (1995), Radical Constructivism: A Way of Knowing and Learning, London: RoutledgeFalmer; Palincsar, A.S. (1998). Social constructivist perspectives on teaching and learning. Annual Review of Psychology, 49, 345–375.
^ a b c d e f Searle, John (1995). The Construction of Social Reality. New York: The Free Press. p.&#160;62. ISBN&#160;0-684-83179-1.&#160;
^ Searle, John R. (New York: Free Press, 1997) The Constructions of Social Reality (p. 365)
^ Pinker, Steven (Penguin Books, 2002) The Blank Slate: The Modern Denial of Human Nature (p. 202)
^ Fish, Stanley (1996)
^ Hacking, Ian (1999) (pp. 29-31)
^ Hacking, Ian (1999)(p. 22)
^ Hacking, Ian. 1997
^ Peter L. Berger and Thomas Luckmann, The Social Construction of Reality&#160;: A Treatise in the Sociology of Knowledge" (Anchor, 1967; ISBN 0-385-05898-5)
^ Pinch, T. J. (1996). The Social Construction of Technology: a Review. In R. Fox (Ed.), Technological Change; Methods and Themes in the History of Technology (pp. 17 – 35). Amsterdam: Harwood Academic Publishers.
^ Wesel, M. v. (2006). Why we do not always get what we want; The power imbalance in the Social Shaping of Technology (final draft 29 June 2006). Unpublished Master Thesis, Universiteit Maastricht, Maastricht (Look for the latest version here).
^ Dave Elder-Vass. 2012.The Reality of Social Construction. Cambridge University Press, 4
^ Sokal, A., &amp; Bricmont, J. (1999). Fashionable Nonsense: Postmodern Intellectuals' Abuse of Science. NY: Picador.
^ Francsis, D., &amp; Kaufer, D. (2011). Beyond Nature vs. Nurture. The Scientist. 1 October 2011
^ Ridly, M. (2004). The Agile Gene: How Nature Turns on Nurture. NY: Harper.
^ Sokal, Alan D. (May 1996). "A Physicist Experiments With Cultural Studies". Lingua Franca. Retrieved 3 April 2007.&#160;
^ A C Bulhak: On the simulation of postmodernism and mental debility using recursive transition networks, 96/264, Dept Computer Science Technical Reports, Dept Computer Science, Monash Univ, Melbourne Australia, 1–12, 12pp. Technical report CS 96/264
^ Paul Boghossian, Fear of Knowledge: Against Relativism and Conmstructivism, Oxford University Press, 2006, 152pp, hb/pb, ISBN 0-19-928718-X.
^ Woolgar S and Pawluch D. 1985. "Ontological gerrymandering: The anatomy of social problems explanations". Social Problems. 32(3): 214–27.
^ Thibodeaux, Jarrett. 2014. "Three Versions of Constructionism and their Reliance on Social Conditions in Social Problems Research". Sociology. 48(4): 829-837.
^ Barkow, J., Cosmides, L. &amp; Tooby, J. 1992. The adapted mind: Evolutionary psychology and the generation of culture. Oxford: Oxford University Press.


Further reading[edit]
Books[edit]

Peter L. Berger and Thomas Luckmann, The Social Construction of Reality : A Treatise in the Sociology of Knowledge (Anchor, 1967; ISBN 0-385-05898-5).
Joel Best, Images of Issues: Typifying Contemporary Social Problems, New York: Gruyter, 1989
Ian Hacking, The Social Construction of What? Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1999; ISBN 0-674-81200-X
John Searle, The Construction of Social Reality. New York: Free Press, 1995; ISBN 0-02-928045-1 .
Charles Arthur Willard, Liberalism and the Problem of Knowledge: A New Rhetoric for Modern Democracy Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996; ISBN 0-226-89845-8.
Vivien Burr. Social Constructionism, 2nd ed. Routledge 2003]
Wilson, D. S. (2005), "Evolutionary Social Constructivism". In J. Gottshcall and D. S. Wilson, (Eds.), The Literary Animal: Evolution and the Nature of Narrative. Evanston, IL, Northwestern University Press; ISBN 0-8101-2286-3. Full text
Sal Restivo and Jennifer Croissant, "Social Constructionism in Science and Technology Studies" (Handbook of Constructionist Research, ed. J.A. Holstein &amp; J.F. Gubrium (Guilford, NY 2008, 213–229; ISBN 978-1-59385-305-1
Ellul, Jacques. Propaganda: The Formation of Men's Attitudes. Trans. Konrad Kellen &amp; Jean Lerner. New York: Knopf, 1965. New York: Random House/ Vintage 1973
Paul Ernest, (1998) Social Constructivism as a Philosophy of Mathematics; Albany, New York: State University of New York Press
Kenneth Gergen, (2009, 2nd edition), An Invitation to Social Construction. Los Angeles: Sage.
Glasersfeld, Ernst von (1995), Radical Constructivism: A Way of Knowing and Learning. London: RoutledgeFalmer.
Hibberd, Fiona J. (2005), Unfolding Social Constructionism. New York: Springer. ISBN 0-387-22974-4
André Kukla (2000), Social Constructivism and the Philosophy of Science, London: Routledge, ISBN 0-415-23419-0, ISBN 978-0-415-23419-1
Poerksen, Bernhard (2004), The Certainty of Uncertainty: Dialogues Introducing Constructivism. Exeter: Imprint-Academic.
Schmidt, Siegfried J. (2007), Histories and Discourses: Rewriting Constructivism. Exeter: Imprint-Acadenic.
Sheila McNamee and Kenneth Gergen (1999). Relational Responsibility: Resources for Sustainable Dialogue. Thousand Oaks, California: Sage, Inc. ISBN 0-7619-1094-8.
Sheila McNamee and Kenneth Gergen (Eds.) (1992). Therapy as Social Construction. London: Sage ISBN 0-8039-8303-4.
Lowenthal, P., &amp; Muth, R. (2008). Constructivism. In E. F. Provenzo, Jr. (Ed.), Encyclopedia of the social and cultural foundations of education (pp.&#160;177–179). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Paul Boghossian (2006) Fear of Knowledge: Against Relativism and Constructivism. Oxford University Press. Online review: http://ndpr.nd.edu/news/25184/?id=8364
Darin Weinberg. 2014. Contemporary Social Constructionism: Key Themes. Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press

Articles[edit]

Kitsuse JI, Spector M. Toward a sociology of social problems: Social conditions, value-judgements, and social problems, Social Problems, 20(4) 407-19, 1973
Mallon, Ron, "Naturalistic Approaches to Social Construction", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Edward N. Zalta (ed.).
Metzner, Andreas (1998), Constructions of Environmental Issues in Scientific and Public Discourse, in: Mueller, F.; Leupelt, M. (Eds.): Eco Targets, Goal Functions and Orientors. Berlin, Heidelberg, New York (Springer Publishers) 1998, pp.&#160;171–192

External links[edit]


Library resources about
Social constructionism





Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries





 Quotations related to Social constructionism at Wikiquote
Slezak, Peter (2000) "A Critique of Radical Social Constructivism"
Social Construction Therapies Network









v
t
e


Social and political philosophy






Philosophers



Alinsky
Aristotle
Augustine
Aurobindo
Aquinas
Averroes
Azurmendi
Badiou
Bakunin
Baudrillard
Benoist
Bentham
Berlin
Bonald
Bosanquet
Burke
Camus
Chanakya
Chomsky
Cicero
Comte
Confucius
Debord
Đilas
Durkheim
Engels
Foucault
Fourier
Gandhi
Gehlen
Gentile
Al-Ghazali
Gramsci
Grotius
Habermas
Han Fei
Hobbes
Hume
Kant
Kirk
Kropotkin
Le Bon
Le Play
Leibniz
Locke
Luxemburg
Machiavelli
Maistre
Malebranche
Marcuse
Maritain
Marsilius
Marx
Mencius
Michels
Mill
Montesquieu
Möser
Mozi
Muhammad
Negri
Nietzsche
Nozick
Oakeshott
Ortega
Pareto
Plamenatz
Plato
Popper
Rand
Rawls
Renan
Rousseau
Royce
Russell
Santayana
Sarkar
Sartre
Schmitt
Searle
Shang
Smith
Sombart
Spann
Spencer
Spirito
Stirner
Strauss
Taine
Taylor
Thoreau
Vivekananda
Walzer
Žižek








Social theories



Vaisheshika
Anarchism
Authoritarianism
Collectivism
Communism
Communitarianism
Conflict theories
Confucianism
Consensus theory
Conservatism
Contractualism
Culturalism
Gandhism
Individualism
Legalism
Liberalism
Libertarianism
Mohism
National liberalism
Social constructionism
Social constructivism
Social Darwinism
Social determinism
Socialism
Utilitarianism








Social concepts



Civil disobedience
Democracy
Four occupations
Justice
Law
Mandate of Heaven
Peace
Property
Revolution
Rights
Social contract
Society
War
more...








Related articles



Jurisprudence
Philosophy and economics
Philosophy of education
Philosophy of history
Philosophy of love
Philosophy of sex
Philosophy of social science
Social epistemology











Category
Portal
Task Force
















v
t
e


Conformity






Group pressures



Authoritarian personality
Bullying
Collectivism
Coercive persuasion
Consensus reality
Groupthink
Hazing
Herd mentality
Indoctrination
Milieu control
Mobbing
Nationalism
Normalization
Normative social influence
Ostracism
Panopticon
Patriotism
Peer pressure
Peer review
Propaganda
Right-wing authoritarianism
Scapegoating
Social influence
Socialization
Spiral of silence
Teasing
Tyranny of the majority








Conforming oneself



Compliance
Countersignaling
Herd behavior
Internalisation
Social proof
Obedience








Experiments



Asch conformity experiments
Milgram experiment
Stanford prison experiment








Counterconformity



Anti-authoritarianism
Antisocial tendencies
Civil disobedience
Cosmopolitanism
Culture jamming
Deviance
Eclecticism
Eccentricity
Idiosyncrasy
Individualism
Rebellion
Ritual clown
Satire
Shock value















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Social_constructionism&amp;oldid=690036545"					
				Categories: Social constructionismCommunicationCommunication theoryConsensus realityHuman behaviorHuman communicationSocial epistemologySociology of knowledgeSociological theoriesHidden categories: NPOV disputes from December 2012All NPOV disputesWikipedia introduction cleanup from January 2012All pages needing cleanupArticles covered by WikiProject Wikify from January 2012All articles covered by WikiProject WikifyArticles needing cleanup from October 2008All articles needing cleanupCleanup tagged articles without a reason field from October 2008Wikipedia pages needing cleanup from October 2008All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from March 2013Use dmy dates from May 2012				
							
		
		
			