


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Theory of justification
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				

Part of a series on


Certainty




Agnosticism
Approximation
Belief
Certainty
Doubt
Determinism
Epistemology
Fallibilism
Fatalism
Hypothesis
Justification
Nihilism
Probability
Scientific theory
Skepticism
Solipsism
Theory
Truth
Uncertainty







v
t
e





Theory of justification is a part of epistemology that attempts to understand the justification of propositions and beliefs. Epistemologists are concerned with various epistemic features of belief, which include the ideas of justification, warrant, rationality, and probability. Of these four terms, the term that has been most widely used and discussed by the early 21st century is "warrant". Loosely speaking, justification is the reason that someone (properly) holds a belief.
When a claim is in doubt, justification can be used to support the claim and reduce or remove the doubt. Justification can use empiricism (the evidence of the senses), authoritative testimony (the appeal to criteria and authority), or logical deduction.



Contents


1 Subjects of justification
2 Justifications and explanations
3 Justification is a normative activity
4 Theories of justification
5 Justifiers

5.1 Commonly used justifiers


6 Criticisms
7 Notes
8 References
9 External links



Subjects of justification[edit]
Many things can be justified: beliefs, actions, emotions, claims, laws, theories and so on. Epistemology focuses on beliefs. This is in part because of the influence of the definition of knowledge as "justified true belief" often associated with a theory discussed near the end of the Socratic dialogue Theaetetus. More generally, theories of justification focus on the justification of statements or propositions.
Justifications and explanations[edit]
Main articles: Explanation and Argument
Justification is the reason why someone properly holds a belief, the explanation as to why the belief is a true one, or an account of how one knows what one knows. In much the same way arguments and explanations may be confused with each other, as may explanations and justifications. Statements which are justifications of some action take the form of arguments. For example, attempts to justify a theft usually explain the motives (e.g., to feed a starving family).
It is important to be aware when an explanation is not a justification. A criminal profiler may offer an explanation of a suspect's behavior (e.g.; the person lost his or her job, the person got evicted, etc.), and such statements may help us understand why the person committed the crime. An uncritical listener may believe the speaker is trying to gain sympathy for the person and his or her actions, but it does not follow that a person proposing an explanation has any sympathy for the views or actions being explained. This is an important distinction because we need to be able to understand and explain terrible events and behavior in attempting to discourage it.[1]
Justification is a normative activity[edit]
One way of explaining the theory of justification is to say that a justified belief is one that we are "within our rights" in holding. The rights in question are neither political nor moral, however, but intellectual.
In some way, each of us is responsible for what we believe. Beliefs are not typically formed completely at random, and thus we have an intellectual responsibility, or obligation, to try to believe what is true and to avoid believing what is false. An intellectually responsible act is within one's intellectual rights in believing something; performing it, one is justified in one's belief.
Thus, justification is a normative notion. The standard definition is that a concept is normative if it is a concept regarding or depending on the norms, or obligations and permissions (very broadly construed), involved in human conduct. It is generally accepted that the concept of justification is normative, because it is defined as a concept regarding the norms of belief.
Theories of justification[edit]
There are several different views as to what entails justification, mostly focusing on the question "How sure do we need to be that our beliefs correspond to the actual world?" Different theories of justification require different amounts and types of evidence before a belief can be considered justified. Interestingly, theories of justification generally include other aspects of epistemology, such as knowledge.
The main theories of justification include:

Coherentism - Beliefs are justified if they cohere with other beliefs a person holds, each belief is justified if it coheres with the overall system of beliefs.
Externalism - Outside sources of knowledge can be used to justify a belief.
Foundationalism - Basic beliefs justify other, non-basic beliefs.
Foundherentism - A combination of foundationalism and coherentism, proposed by Susan Haack.
Infinitism - Beliefs are justified by infinite chains of reasons.
Internalism - The believer must be able to justify a belief through internal knowledge.

Minority viewpoints[citation needed] include:

Reformed epistemology - Beliefs are warranted by proper cognitive function, proposed by Alvin Plantinga.
Skepticism - A variety of viewpoints questioning the possibility of knowledge.

truth skepticism - Questions the possibility of true knowledge, but not of justified knowledge
epistemological skepticism - Questions the possibility of justified knowledge, but not true knowledge


Evidentialism - Beliefs depend solely on the evidence for them

Justifiers[edit]





This section possibly contains original research. Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations. Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. (June 2014)


If a belief is justified, there is something that justifies it, which can be called its "justifier". If a belief is justified, then it has at least one justifier. An example of a justifier would be an item of evidence. For example, if a woman is aware that her husband returned from a business trip smelling like perfume, and that his shirt has smudged lipstick on its collar, the perfume and the lipstick can be evidence for her belief that her husband is having an affair. In that case, the justifiers are the woman's awareness of the perfume and the lipstick, and the belief that is justified is her belief that her husband is having an affair.
Not all justifiers have to be what can properly be called "evidence"; there may be some substantially different kinds of justifiers available. Regardless, to be justified, a belief has to have a justifier.
Three things that have been suggested as justifiers are:

Beliefs only.
Beliefs together with other conscious mental states.
Beliefs, conscious mental states, and other facts about us and our environment (which one may or may not have access to).

At least sometimes, the justifier of a belief is another belief. When, to return to the earlier example, the woman believes that her husband is having an affair, she bases that belief on other beliefs—namely, beliefs about the lipstick and perfume. Strictly speaking, her belief isn't based on the evidence itself—after all, what if she did not believe it? What if she thought that all of that evidence were just a hoax? What if her husband commonly wears perfume and lipstick on business trips? For that matter, what if the evidence existed, but she did not know about it? Then, of course, her belief that her husband is having an affair wouldn't be based on that evidence, because she did not know it was there at all; or, if she thought that the evidence were a hoax, then surely her belief couldn't be based on that evidence.
Consider a belief P. Either P is justified or P is not justified. If P is justified, then another belief Q may be justified by P. If P is not justified, then P cannot be a justifier for any other belief: neither for Q, nor for Q's negation.
For example, suppose someone might believe that there is intelligent life on Mars, and base this belief on a further belief, that there is a feature on the surface of Mars that looks like a face, and that this face could only have been made by intelligent life. So the justifying belief is: that face-like feature on Mars could only have been made by intelligent life. And the justified belief is: there is intelligent life on Mars.
But suppose further that the justifying belief is itself unjustified. It would in no way be one's intellectual right to suppose that this face-like feature on Mars could have only been made by intelligent life; that view would be irresponsible, intellectually speaking. Thus, such a belief is unjustified because the justifier on which it depends is itself not justified.
Commonly used justifiers[edit]

Abductive reasoning
Deduction
Empiricism
Induction
Occam's Razor
Pragmatism
Probability theory
Scientific method
Logical positivism

Criticisms[edit]
The major opposition against the theory of justification (also called ‘justificationism’ in this context) is nonjustificational criticism (a synthesis of skepticism and absolutism) which is most notably held by some of the proponents of critical rationalism: W. W. Bartley, David Miller and Karl Popper.[2] (But not all proponents of critical rationalism oppose justificationism; it is supported most prominently by John W. N. Watkins.)
In justificationism, criticism consists of trying to show that a claim cannot be reduced to the authority or criteria that it appeals to. That is, it regards the justification of a claim as primary, while the claim itself is secondary. By contrast, nonjustificational criticism works towards attacking claims themselves.
Bartley also refers to a third position, which he calls critical rationalism in a more specific sense, claimed to have been Popper's view in his Open Society. It has given up justification, but not yet adopted nonjustificational criticism. Instead of appealing to criteria and authorities, it attempts to describe and explicate them.
Fogelin claims to detect a suspicious resemblance between the Theories of Justification and Agrippa's five modes leading to the suspension of belief. He concludes that the modern proponents have made no significant progress in responding to the ancient modes of pyrrhonic skepticism.[3]
Notes[edit]


^ Critical Thinking, Parker and Moore
^ David Miller, "Critical Rationalism: A Restatement and Defense, Open Court Publishing, 1994, ISBN 0-8126-9198-9
^ Robert J. Fogelin, Pyrrhonian Reflections on Knowledge and Justification, Oxford University Press, 1994, ISBN 978-0-19-508987-5


References[edit]





This article includes a list of references, but its sources remain unclear because it has insufficient inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (December 2007)



William W. Bartley: Rationality versus the theory of rationality. In Mario Bunge (Ed.): The Critical Approach to Science and Philosophy (The Free Press of Glencoe, 1964)
David Miller: A critique of good reasons. Critical rationalism (1994)
David Miller: Sokal and Bricmont: Back to the Frying Pan. Pli 9 (2000), 156–73.
David Miller: Overcoming the Justificationist Addiction. (2007)
Karl Popper: On the sources of knowledge and ignorance. Conjectures and Refutations (1963).
David Stove. Popper and After: Four Modern Irrationalists at the Wayback Machine (archived October 27, 2009). Oxford: Pergamon Press, 1982.
Swinburne, R: Epistemic justification (2001)

External links[edit]

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry on Foundationalist Theories of Epistemic Justification
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry on Epistemology, 2. What is Justification?
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry on Public Justification
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry on Internalist vs. Externalist Conceptions of Epistemic Justification
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry on Coherentist Theories of Epistemic Justification









v
t
e


Epistemology






Epistemologists



Thomas Aquinas
Augustine of Hippo
William Alston
Robert Audi
A. J. Ayer
George Berkeley
Laurence BonJour
René Descartes
Edmund Gettier
Alvin Goldman
Nelson Goodman
Paul Grice
David Hume
Immanuel Kant
Søren Kierkegaard
Saul Kripke
David Lewis
John Locke
G. E. Moore
Robert Nozick
Alvin Plantinga
Plato
Hilary Putnam
Thomas Reid
Gilbert Ryle
P. F. Strawson
W.V.O. Quine
Bertrand Russell
Timothy Williamson
Ludwig Wittgenstein
Nicholas Wolterstorff
Vienna Circle








Theories



Coherentism
Constructivist epistemology
Contextualism
Determinism
Empiricism
Evolutionary epistemology
Fallibilism
Feminist epistemology
Fideism
Foundationalism
Genetic epistemology
Holism
Infinitism
Innatism
Internalism and externalism
Naïve realism
Naturalized epistemology
Phenomenalism
Positivism
Reductionism
Reliabilism
Representative realism
Rationalism
Skepticism
Theory of Forms
Transcendental idealism
Uniformitarianism








Concepts



A priori knowledge
Analysis
Analytic–synthetic distinction
Belief
Causality
Common sense
Descriptive knowledge
Exploratory thought
Gettier problem
Justification
Knowledge
Induction
Objectivity
Problem of induction
Problem of other minds
Perception
Proposition
Regress argument
Simplicity
Speculative reason
Truth
more...








Related articles



Outline of epistemology
Alethiology
Faith and rationality
Formal epistemology
Meta-epistemology
Philosophy of perception
Philosophy of science
Social epistemology











Portal
Category
Task Force
Stubs
Discussion
















v
t
e


Positivism










Perspectives



Antihumanism
Empiricism
Rationalism
Scientism








Declinations



Legal positivism
Logical positivism&#160;/ Analytic philosophy
Positivist school
Postpositivism
Sociological positivism
Machian positivism (Empirio-criticism)
Rankean historical positivism
Polish positivism
Russian positivism (Empiriomonism)








Principal concepts



Consilience
Demarcation
Evidence
Induction
Justificationism
Pseudoscience
The Critique of Metaphysics
Unity of science
Verificationism








Antitheses



Antipositivism
Confirmation holism
Critical theory
Falsifiability
Geisteswissenschaft
Hermeneutics
Historicism
Historism
Human science
Humanities
Problem of induction
Reflectivism








Related paradigm shifts
in the history of science



Non-Euclidean geometry (1830s)
Heisenberg uncertainty principle (1927)








Related topics



Behavioralism
Critical rationalism
Criticism of science
Epistemological idealism
Epistemology
Holism in anthropology
Instrumentalism
Modernism
Naturalism in literature
Nomothetic–idiographic distinction
Objectivity in science
Operationalism
Phenomenalism
Philosophy of science

Deductive-nomological model
Ramsey sentence
Sense-data theory


Qualitative research
Relationship between religion and science
Sociology
Social science
Structural functionalism
Structuralism
Structuration theory















&#160;
Positivist-related debate










Method



1890s&#160;Methodenstreit (economics)
1909&#160;Werturteilsstreit
1960s&#160;Positivismusstreit
1990s&#160;Science Wars








Contributions



1830&#160;The Course in Positive Philosophy
1848&#160;A General View of Positivism
1886&#160;The Analysis of Sensations
1927&#160;The Logic of Modern Physics
1936&#160;Language, Truth, and Logic
1959&#160;The Two Cultures
2001&#160;The Universe in a Nutshell








Proponents



Richard Avenarius
Auguste Comte
Émile Durkheim
Berlin Circle
Vienna Circle








Criticism



1909&#160;Materialism and Empirio-criticism
1923&#160;History and Class Consciousness
1934&#160;The Logic of Scientific Discovery
1936&#160;The Poverty of Historicism
1942&#160;World Hypotheses
1951&#160;Two Dogmas of Empiricism
1960&#160;Truth and Method
1962&#160;The Structure of Scientific Revolutions
1963&#160;Conjectures and Refutations
1964&#160;One-Dimensional Man
1968&#160;Knowledge and Human Interests
1978&#160;The Poverty of Theory
1980&#160;The Scientific Image
1986&#160;The Rhetoric of Economics








Critics



Theodor W. Adorno
Gaston Bachelard
Mario Bunge
Wilhelm Dilthey
Paul Feyerabend
Hans-Georg Gadamer
Thomas Kuhn
György Lukács
Karl Popper
W. V. O. Quine
Max Weber








Concepts in contention



Knowledge
Phronesis
Truth
Verstehen















Category













					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Theory_of_justification&amp;oldid=688797950"					
				Categories: Critical thinkingMetatheoryJustificationEpistemological theoriesHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from June 2014Articles that may contain original research from June 2014All articles that may contain original researchArticles lacking in-text citations from December 2007All articles lacking in-text citations				
							
		
		
			