


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Thomas More
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				For other uses, see Thomas More (disambiguation).


Sir Thomas More



Sir Thomas More,
by Hans Holbein the Younger, 1527






Lord Chancellor


In office
October 1529&#160;– May 1532


Monarch
Henry VIII


Preceded by
Thomas Wolsey


Succeeded by
Thomas Audley


Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster


In office
31 December 1525&#160;– 3 November 1529


Monarch
Henry VIII


Preceded by
Richard Wingfield


Succeeded by
William FitzWilliam


Speaker of the House of Commons


In office
16 April 1523&#160;– 13 August 1523


Monarch
Henry VIII


Preceded by
Thomas Nevill


Succeeded by
Thomas Audley


Personal details


Born
7 February 1478
London, England


Died
6 July 1535(1535-07-06) (aged&#160;57)
London, England


Resting place
Church of St Peter ad Vincula, London, England
51°30′31″N 0°04′37″W﻿ / ﻿51.508611°N 0.076944°W﻿ / 51.508611; -0.076944


Spouse(s)
Jane Colt (m.&#160;1505)
Alice Harpur (m.&#160;1511)


Children
Margaret
Elizabeth
Cicely
John


Alma mater
University of Oxford
Lincoln's Inn


Religion
Roman Catholic


Signature



Sir Thomas More (/ˈmɔr/; 7 February 1478&#160;– 6 July 1535), venerated by Catholics as Saint Thomas More,[1][2] was an English lawyer, social philosopher, author, statesman and noted Renaissance humanist. He was also a councillor to Henry VIII, and Lord High Chancellor of England from October 1529 to 16 May 1532.[3]
More opposed the Protestant Reformation, in particular the theology of Martin Luther and William Tyndale. He also wrote Utopia, published in 1516, about the political system of an imaginary ideal island nation. More opposed the King's separation from the Catholic Church, refusing to acknowledge Henry as Supreme Head of the Church of England and the annulment of his marriage to Catherine of Aragon. After refusing to take the Oath of Supremacy, he was convicted of treason and beheaded.
Pope Pius XI canonised More in 1935 as a martyr. Pope John Paul II in 2000 declared him the "heavenly Patron of Statesmen and Politicians."[4] Since 1980, the Church of England has remembered More liturgically as a Reformation martyr.[5] The Soviet Union honoured him for the Communistic attitude toward property rights he expressed in Utopia.[6][7][8]



Contents


1 Early life
2 Spiritual life
3 Family life
4 Early political career
5 Chancellorship

5.1 Campaign against the Reformation
5.2 Resignation


6 Trial and execution

6.1 Relics


7 Scholarly and literary work

7.1 History of King Richard III
7.2 Utopia
7.3 Religious polemics
7.4 Correspondence


8 Canonisation

8.1 Catholic Church
8.2 Anglican Communion


9 Legacy

9.1 Communism, Socialism, and resistance to Communism


10 Literature and popular culture
11 Institutions named after More
12 Historic sites

12.1 Westminster Hall
12.2 Crosby Hall
12.3 Chelsea Old Church
12.4 Tower Hill
12.5 St Katharine Docks
12.6 St Dunstan's Church and Roper House, Canterbury


13 Works

13.1 Published during More’s life (with dates of publication)
13.2 Published after More’s death (with likely dates of composition)


14 Translations
15 See also
16 Notes
17 Biographies

17.1 Historiography
17.2 Primary sources


18 External links



Early life[edit]


Saint Thomas More, T.O.S.F.



Medallion of Thomas More



Martyr


Venerated&#160;in
Catholic Church; Church of England; some other churches of the Anglican Communion


Beatified
29 December 1886, Florence, Kingdom of Italy, by Pope Leo XIII


Canonized
19 May 1935, Vatican City, by Pope Pius XI


Feast
22 June (Catholic Church)
6 July (Church of England)


Attributes
dressed in the robe of the Chancellor and wearing the Collar of Esses; axe


Patronage
Adopted children; civil servants; court clerks; difficult marriages; large families; lawyers, politicians, and statesmen; stepparents; widowers; Ateneo de Manila Law School; Diocese of Arlington; Diocese of Pensacola-Tallahassee; Kerala Catholic Youth Movement; University of Malta; University of Santo Tomas Faculty of Arts and Letters


Born in Milk Street in London, on 7 February 1478, Thomas More was the son of Sir John More,[9] a successful lawyer and later judge, and his wife Agnes (née Graunger). More was educated at St Anthony's School, then considered one of London's finest schools.[10] From 1490 to 1492, More served John Morton, the Archbishop of Canterbury and Lord Chancellor of England, as a household page.[11]:xvi Morton enthusiastically supported the "New Learning" (now called the Renaissance), and thought highly of the young More. Believing that More had great potential, Morton nominated him for a place at Oxford University (either in St. Mary's Hall or Canterbury College, both now gone).[12]:38
More began his studies at Oxford in 1492, and received a classical education. Studying under Thomas Linacre and William Grocyn, he became proficient in both Latin and Greek. More left Oxford after only two years—at his father's insistence—to begin legal training in London at New Inn, one of the Inns of Chancery.[11]:xvii[13] In 1496, More became a student at Lincoln's Inn, one of the Inns of Court, where he remained until 1502, when he was called to the Bar.[11]:xvii
Spiritual life[edit]
According to his friend, theologian Desiderius Erasmus of Rotterdam, More once seriously contemplated abandoning his legal career to become a monk.[14][15] Between 1503 and 1504 More lived near the Carthusian monastery outside the walls of London and joined in the monks' spiritual exercises. Although he deeply admired their piety, More ultimately decided to remain a layman, standing for election to Parliament in 1504 and marrying the following year.[11]:xxi
In spite of his choice to pursue a secular career, More continued ascetical practices for the rest of his life, such as wearing a hair shirt next to his skin and occasionally engaging in flagellation.[11]:xxi A tradition of the Third Order of St. Francis honors More as a member of that Order on their calendar of saints.[16]
Family life[edit]




Rowland Lockey after Hans Holbein the Younger, The Family of Sir Thomas More, c. 1594


More married Jane Colt in 1505.[12]:118 She was 5 years, 1 month younger than her husband, quiet and good-natured.[12]:119 Erasmus reported that More wanted to give his young wife a better education than she had previously received at home, and tutored her in music and literature.[12]:119 The couple had four children before Jane died in 1511: Margaret, Elizabeth, Cicely, and John.[12]:132
Going "against friends' advice and common custom," within thirty days More had married one of the many eligible women among his wide circle of friends.[17] He chose a rich widow, Alice Harpur Middleton.[18] The speed of the marriage was so unusual that More had to get a dispensation of the banns, which due to his good public reputation he easily obtained.[17] Alice More lacked Jane's docility; More's friend Andrew Ammonius derided Alice as a "hook-nosed harpy."[19] Erasmus, however, called their marriage happy.[12]:144
More had no children from his second marriage, although he raised Alice's daughter from her previous marriage as his own. More also became the guardian of a young girl named Anne Cresacre, who would eventually marry his son, John More.[12]:146 An affectionate father, More wrote letters to his children whenever he was away on legal or government business, and encouraged them to write to him often.[12]:150[20]:xiv
More insisted upon giving his daughters the same classical education as his son, a highly unusual attitude at the time.[12]:146–47 His eldest daughter, Margaret, attracted much admiration for her erudition, especially her fluency in Greek and Latin.[12]:147 More told his daughter of his pride in her academic accomplishment in September 1522, after he showed the bishop a letter she had written:

When he saw from the signature that it was the letter of a lady, his surprise led him to read it more eagerly ... he said he would never have believed it to be your work unless I had assured him of the fact, and he began to praise it in the highest terms ... for its pure Latinity, its correctness, its erudition, and its expressions of tender affection. He took out at once from his pocket a portague [A Portuguese gold coin] ... to send to you as a pledge and token of his good will towards you.[20]:152

More's decision to educate his daughters set an example for other noble families. Even Erasmus became much more favourable once he witnessed their accomplishments.[12]:149
A portrait of More and his family was painted by Holbein, but it was lost in a fire in the 18th century. More's grandson commissioned a copy, two versions of which survive.
Early political career[edit]




Study for a portrait of Thomas More's family, c. 1527, by Hans Holbein the Younger


In 1504 More was elected to Parliament to represent Great Yarmouth, and in 1510 began representing London.[21]
From 1510, More served as one of the two undersheriffs of the City of London, a position of considerable responsibility in which he earned a reputation as an honest and effective public servant. More became Master of Requests in 1514,[22] the same year in which he was appointed as a Privy Councillor.[23] After undertaking a diplomatic mission to the Holy Roman Emperor, Charles V, accompanying Thomas Wolsey, Cardinal Archbishop of York, to Calais and Bruges, More was knighted and made under-treasurer of the Exchequer in 1521.[23]
As secretary and personal adviser to King Henry VIII, More became increasingly influential: welcoming foreign diplomats, drafting official documents, and serving as a liaison between the King and Lord Chancellor Wolsey. More later served as High Steward for the universities of Oxford and Cambridge.
In 1523 More was elected as knight of the shire (MP) for Middlesex and, on Wolsey's recommendation, the House of Commons elected More its Speaker.[23] In 1525 More became Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, with executive and judicial responsibilities over much of northern England.[23]
Chancellorship[edit]
After Wolsey fell, More succeeded to the office of Chancellor in 1529. He dispatched cases with unprecedented rapidity.
Campaign against the Reformation[edit]
More supported the Catholic Church and saw the Protestant Reformation as heresy, a threat to the unity of both church and society. Believing in the theology, polemics, and ecclesiastical laws of the church, More "heard Luther's call to destroy the Catholic Church as a call to war."[24]
His early actions against the Reformation included aiding Wolsey in preventing Lutheran books from being imported into England, spying on and investigating suspected Protestants, especially publishers, and arresting any one holding in his possession, transporting, or selling the books of the Protestant Reformation. More vigorously suppressed the travelling country ministers who used Tyndale's English translation of the New Testament.[citation needed] It contained controversial translations of certain words—for example Tyndale used "senior" and "elder" rather than "priest" for the Greek "presbyteros"—and some of the marginal glosses challenged Catholic doctrine.[25] It was during this time that most of his literary polemics appeared.




Sir Thomas More is commemorated with a sculpture at the late-19th-century Sir Thomas More House, opposite the Royal Courts of Justice, Carey Street, London.


Rumours circulated during and after More's lifetime regarding ill-treatment of heretics during his time as Lord Chancellor. The popular anti-Catholic polemicist John Foxe, who "placed Protestant sufferings against the background of... the Antichrist"[26] was instrumental in publicising accusations of torture in his famous Book of Martyrs, claiming that More had often personally used violence or torture while interrogating heretics. Later authors, such as Brian Moynahan and Michael Farris, cite Foxe when repeating these allegations.[27] More himself denied these allegations:

Stories of a similar nature were current even in More's lifetime and he denied them forcefully. He admitted that he did imprison heretics in his house – 'theyr sure kepynge' – he called it – but he utterly rejected claims of torture and whipping... 'so helpe me God.'[12]:298

However, in More's "Apology," published in 1533, he writes that he only applied corporal punishment to two heretics: a child who was caned in front of his family for heresy regarding the Eucharist and a "feeble-minded" man who was whipped for disrupting prayers.[28]:404 During More's chancellorship six people were burned at the stake for heresy; they were Thomas Hitton, Thomas Bilney, Richard Bayfield, John Tewkesbery, Thomas Dusgate, and James Bainham.[12]:299–306 Moynahan has argued that More was influential in the burning of Tyndale as More's agents had long pursued him, even though this took place over a year after his own death.[29] Burning at the stake had long been a standard punishment for heresy—about thirty burnings had taken place in the century before More's elevation to Chancellor, and burning continued to be used by both Catholics and Protestants during the religious upheaval of the following decades.[30] Ackroyd notes that More explicitly "approved of Burning".[12]:298 After the case of John Tewkesbury, a London leather-seller found guilty by the Bishop of London, John Stokesley,[31] of harbouring banned books and sentenced to burning for refusing to recant, More declared: he "burned as there was neuer wretche I wene better worthy."[32]
Modern commentators are divided over More's religious actions as Chancellor. While biographers such as Peter Ackroyd, a Catholic English biographer, have taken a relatively tolerant view of More's campaign against Protestantism by placing his actions within the turbulent religious climate of the time, other eminent historians, such as Richard Marius, an American scholar of the Reformation, have been more critical, believing that persecutions—including More's zealous and well-documented advocacy of extermination for Protestants—were a betrayal of More's earlier humanist convictions.[28]:386–406 Some Protestants take a different view—in 1980, despite being a fierce opponent of the English Reformation that created the Church of England, More was added to the Church of England's calendar of Saints and Heroes of the Christian Church, jointly with John Fisher, to be commemorated every 6 July (the date of More's execution) as "Thomas More, Scholar, and John Fisher, Bishop of Rochester, Reformation Martyrs, 1535".[5] When honouring him by making him patron saint of statesmen and politicians in October 2000 Pope John Paul II stated: "It can be said that he demonstrated in a singular way the value of a moral conscience... even if, in his actions against heretics, he reflected the limits of the culture of his time".[4]
Resignation[edit]
As the conflict over supremacy between the Papacy and the King reached its apogee, More continued to remain steadfast in supporting the supremacy of the Pope as Successor of Peter over that of the King of England. In 1530, More refused to sign a letter by the leading English churchmen and aristocrats asking Pope Clement VII to annul Henry's marriage to Catherine of Aragon, and also quarrelled with Henry VIII over the heresy laws. In 1531, Henry had isolated More by purging most clergy who supported the papal stance from senior positions in the church. Parliament's reinstatement of the charge of praemunire in 1529 had made it a crime to support in public or office the claim of any authority outside the realm (such as the Papacy) to have a legal jurisdiction superior to the King's. In 1531, a royal decree required the clergy to take an oath acknowledging the King as "Supreme Head" of the Church in England. As a layperson, More did not need to take the oath and the clergy, after some initial resistance, took the oath with the addition of the clause "as far as the law of Christ allows." However, More saw he could not render the support Henry expected from his Lord Chancellor for the policy the King was developing to support the annulment of his marriage with Catherine. In 1532 he petitioned the King to relieve him of his office, alleging failing health. Henry granted his request.
Trial and execution[edit]
In 1533, More refused to attend the coronation of Anne Boleyn as the Queen of England. Technically, this was not an act of treason, as More had written to Henry acknowledging Anne's queenship and expressing his desire for the King's happiness and the new Queen's health.[33] Despite this, his refusal to attend was widely interpreted as a snub against Anne, and Henry took action against him.
Shortly thereafter, More was charged with accepting bribes, but the charges had to be dismissed for lack of any evidence. In early 1534, More was accused of conspiring with the "Holy Maid of Kent," Elizabeth Barton, a nun who had prophesied against the king's annulment, but More was able to produce a letter in which he had instructed Barton not to interfere with state matters.[citation needed]
On 13 April 1534, More was asked to appear before a commission and swear his allegiance to the parliamentary Act of Succession. More accepted Parliament's right to declare Anne Boleyn the legitimate Queen of England, but he steadfastly refused to take the oath of supremacy of the Crown in the relationship between the kingdom and the church in England. Holding fast to the teaching of papal supremacy, More refused to take the oath and furthermore publicly refused to uphold Henry's annulment from Catherine. John Fisher, Bishop of Rochester, refused the oath along with More. The oath reads:[34]

...By reason whereof the Bishop of Rome and See Apostolic, contrary to the great and inviolable grants of jurisdictions given by God immediately to emperors, kings and princes in succession to their heirs, hath presumed in times past to invest who should please them to inherit in other men's kingdoms and dominions, which thing we your most humble subjects, both spiritual and temporal, do most abhor and detest...

With his refusal to support the King's annulment, More's enemies had enough evidence to have the King arrest him on treason. Four days later, Henry had More imprisoned in the Tower of London. There More prepared a devotional Dialogue of Comfort against Tribulation. While More was imprisoned in the Tower, Thomas Cromwell made several visits, urging More to take the oath, which More continued to refuse.




Site of scaffold at Tower Hill where More was executed by decapitation



Commemorative plaque at the site of the ancient scaffold at Tower Hill, with Sir Thomas More listed among other notables executed at the site.



On 1 July 1535, More was tried before a panel of judges that included the new Lord Chancellor, Sir Thomas Audley, as well as Anne Boleyn's father, brother, and uncle. He was charged with high treason for denying the validity of the Act of Supremacy and was tried under the following section of the Treason Act 1534:

If any person or persons, after the first day of February next coming, do maliciously wish, will or desire, by words or writing, or by craft imagine, invent, practise, or attempt any bodily harm to be done or committed to the king's most royal person, the queen's, or their heirs apparent, or to deprive them or any of them of their dignity, title, or name of their royal estates ...
That then every such person and persons so offending ... shall have and suffer such pains of death and other penalties, as is limited and accustomed in cases of high treason.[35]

More, relying on legal precedent and the maxim "qui tacet consentire videtur" (literally, who (is) silent is seen to consent), understood that he could not be convicted as long as he did not explicitly deny that the King was Supreme Head of the Church, and he therefore refused to answer all questions regarding his opinions on the subject.
Thomas Cromwell, at the time the most powerful of the King's advisors, brought forth the Solicitor General, Richard Rich, to testify that More had, in his presence, denied that the King was the legitimate head of the church. This testimony was characterised by More as being extremely dubious. Witnesses Richard Southwell and Mr. Palmer both denied having heard the details of the reported conversation, and as More himself pointed out:

Can it therefore seem likely to your Lordships, that I should in so weighty an Affair as this, act so unadvisedly, as to trust Mr. Rich, a Man I had always so mean an Opinion of, in reference to his Truth and Honesty, ... that I should only impart to Mr. Rich the Secrets of my Conscience in respect to the King's Supremacy, the particular Secrets, and only Point about which I have been so long pressed to explain my self? which I never did, nor never would reveal; when the Act was once made, either to the King himself, or any of his Privy Councillors, as is well known to your Honours, who have been sent upon no other account at several times by his Majesty to me in the Tower. I refer it to your Judgments, my Lords, whether this can seem credible to any of your Lordships.[36]

The jury took only fifteen minutes, however, to find More guilty.




William Frederick Yeames, The meeting of Sir Thomas More with his daughter after his sentence of death, 1872


After the jury's verdict was delivered and before his sentencing, More spoke freely of his belief that "no temporal man may be the head of the spirituality". He was sentenced to be hanged, drawn and quartered (the usual punishment for traitors who were not the nobility), but the King commuted this to execution by decapitation. The execution took place on 6 July 1535. When he came to mount the steps to the scaffold, he is widely quoted as saying (to the officials): "I pray you, I pray you, Mr Lieutenant, see me safe up and for my coming down, I can shift for myself"; while on the scaffold he declared that he died "the king's good servant, but God's first."[37]
Relics[edit]

Another comment he is believed to have made to the executioner is that his beard was completely innocent of any crime, and did not deserve the axe; he then positioned his beard so that it would not be harmed.[38] More asked that his foster/adopted daughter Margaret Clement (née Giggs) be given his headless corpse to bury.[39] He was buried at the Tower of London, in the chapel of St Peter ad Vincula in an unmarked grave. His head was fixed upon a pike over London Bridge for a month, according to the normal custom for traitors. His daughter Margaret (Meg) Roper rescued it, possibly by bribery, before it could be thrown in the River Thames.[citation needed]
The skull is believed to rest in the Roper Vault of St Dunstan's Church, Canterbury, though some researchers[who?] have claimed it might be within the tomb he erected for More in Chelsea Old Church (see below). The evidence,[clarification needed] however, seems to be in favour of its placement in St Dunstan's, with the remains of his daughter, Margaret Roper, and her husband's family, whose vault it was.[citation needed]
Among other surviving relics is his hair shirt, presented for safe keeping by Margaret Clement (1508–70), his adopted daughter.[40] This was long in the custody of the community of Augustinian canonesses who until 1983 lived at the convent at Abbotskerswell Priory, Devon. It is now preserved at Syon Abbey, near South Brent.
Scholarly and literary work[edit]
History of King Richard III[edit]
Between 1512 and 1519 More worked on a History of King Richard III, which he never finished but which was published after his death. The History is a Renaissance biography, remarkable more for its literary skill and adherence to classical precepts than for its historical accuracy.[citation needed] Some consider it an attack on royal tyranny, rather than on Richard III himself or the House of York.[citation needed] More uses a more dramatic writing style than had been typical in medieval chronicles; Richard is limned as an outstanding, archetypal tyrant.
The History of King Richard III was written and published in both English and Latin, each written separately, and with information deleted from the Latin edition to suit a European readership.[citation needed] It greatly influenced William Shakespeare's play Richard III. Contemporary historians attribute the unflattering portraits of Richard III in both works to both authors' allegiance to the reigning Tudor dynasty that wrested the throne from Richard III in the Wars of the Roses.[citation needed] More's version barely mentions King Henry VII, the first Tudor king, perhaps because he had persecuted his father, Sir John More.[citation needed] Clements Markham suggests that the actual author of the work was Archbishop Morton and that More was simply copying or perhaps translating the work.[41]
Utopia[edit]
Main article: Utopia (book)
More's best known and most controversial work, Utopia is a novel written in Latin. More completed and Erasmus published the book in Leuven in 1516, but it was only translated into English and published in his native land in 1551 (long after More's execution), and the 1684 translation became the most commonly cited. More (also a character in the book) and the narrator/traveller, Raphael Hythlodaeus (whose name alludes both to the healer archangel Raphael, and 'speaker of nonsense', the surname's Greek meaning), discuss modern ills in Antwerp, as well as describe the political arrangements of the imaginary island country of Utopia (Greek pun on 'ou-topos' [no place], 'eu-topos' [good place]) among themselves as well as to Pieter Gillis and Hieronymus van Busleyden. Utopia's original edition included a symmetrical "Utopian alphabet" omitted by later editions, but which may have been an early attempt at cryptography or precursor of shorthand.
Utopia contrasts the contentious social life of European states with the perfectly orderly, reasonable social arrangements of Utopia and its environs (Tallstoria, Nolandia, and Aircastle). In Utopia, there are no lawyers because of the laws' simplicity and because social gatherings are in public view (encouraging participants to behave well), communal ownership supplants private property, men and women are educated alike, and there is almost complete religious toleration (except for atheists, who are allowed but despised). More may have used monastic communalism (rather than the biblical communalism in the Acts of the Apostles) as his model, although other concepts such as legalizing euthanasia remain far outside Church doctrine. Hythlodaeus asserts that a man who refuses to believe in a god or an afterlife could never be trusted, because he would not acknowledge any authority or principle outside himself. Some take the novel's principal message to be the social need for order and discipline rather than liberty. Ironically, Hythlodaeus, who believes philosophers should not get involved in politics, addresses More's ultimate conflict between his humanistic beliefs and courtly duties as the King's servant, pointing out that one day those morals will come into conflict with the political reality.
Utopia gave rise to a literary genre, Utopian and dystopian fiction, which features ideal societies or perfect cities, or their opposite. Early works influenced by Utopia included New Atlantis by Francis Bacon, Erewhon by Samuel Butler, and Candide by Voltaire. Although Utopianism combined classical concepts of perfect societies (Plato and Aristotle) with Roman rhetorical finesse (cf. Cicero, Quintilian, epideictic oratory), the Renaissance genre continued into the Age of Enlightenment and survives in modern science fiction.
Religious polemics[edit]
In 1520 the reformer Martin Luther published three works in quick succession: An Appeal to the Christian Nobility of the German Nation (Aug.), Concerning the Babylonish Captivity of the Church (Oct.), and On the Liberty of a Christian Man (Nov.).[12]:225 In these books, Luther set out his doctrine of salvation through grace alone, rejected certain Catholic practices, and attacked abuses and excesses within the Catholic Church.[12]:225–6 In 1521, Henry VIII formally responded to Luther’s criticisms with the Assertio, written with More's assistance. Pope Leo X rewarded the English king with the title 'Fidei defensor' ("Defender of the Faith") for his work combating Luther’s heresies.[12]:226–7
Martin Luther then attacked Henry VIII in print, calling him a "pig, dolt, and liar".[12]:227 At the king's request, More composed a rebuttal: the Responsio ad Lutherum was published at the end of 1523. In the Responsio, More defended papal supremacy, the sacraments, and other Church traditions. More’s language, like Luther’s, was virulent: he branded Luther an "ape", a "drunkard", and a "lousy little friar" amongst other insults.[12]:230 Writing as Rosseus, More offers to "throw back into your paternity's shitty mouth, truly the shit-pool of all shit, all the muck and shit which your damnable rottenness has vomited up".[23]
Confronting Luther confirmed More's theological conservatism. He thereafter avoided any hint of criticism of Church authority.[12]:230 In 1528, More published another religious polemic, A Dialogue Concerning Heresies, that asserted the Catholic Church was the one true church, established by Christ and the Apostles, and affirmed the validity of its authority, traditions and practices.[12]:279–81 In 1529, the circulation of Simon Fish’s Supplication for the Beggars prompted More to respond with The Supplication of Souls.
In 1531, a year after More's father died, William Tyndale published An Answer unto Sir Thomas More’s Dialogue in response to More’s Dialogue Concerning Heresies. More responded with a half million words: the Confutation of Tyndale’s Answer. The Confutation is an imaginary dialogue between More and Tyndale, with More addressing each of Tyndale’s criticisms of Catholic rites and doctrines.[12]:307–9 More, who valued structure, tradition and order in society as safeguards against tyranny and error, vehemently believed that Lutheranism and the Protestant Reformation in general were dangerous, not only to the Catholic faith but to the stability of society as a whole.[12]:307–9
Correspondence[edit]
Most major humanists were prolific letter writers, and Thomas More was no exception. However, as in the case of his friend Erasmus of Rotterdam, only a small portion of his correspondence (about 280 letters) survived. These include everything from personal letters to official government correspondence (mostly in English), letters to fellow humanist scholars (in Latin), several epistolary tracts, verse epistles, prefatory letters (some fictional) to several of More's own works, letters to More's children and their tutors (in Latin), and the so-called "prison-letters" (in English) which he exchanged with his oldest daughter, Margaret Roper while he was imprisoned in the Tower of London awaiting execution.[24] More also engaged in controversies, most notably with the French poet Germain de Brie, which culminated in the publication of de Brie's Antimorus (1519). Erasmus intervened, however, and ended the dispute.[25]
More also wrote about more spiritual matters. They include: A Treatise on the Passion (a/k/a Treatise on the Passion of Christ), A Treatise to Receive the Blessed Body (a/k/a Holy Body Treaty), and De Tristitia Christi (a/k/a The Agony of Christ). More handwrote the last which reads in the Tower of London while awaiting his execution. This last manuscript, saved from the confiscation decreed by Henry VIII, passed by the will of his daughter Margaret to Spanish hands through Fray Pedro de Soto, confessor of Emperor Charles V. More's friend Luis Vives received it in Valencia, where it remains in the collection of Real Colegio Seminario del Corpus Christi Museum.
Canonisation[edit]




Statue of Thomas More at the Ateneo Law School chapel.


Catholic Church[edit]
Pope Leo XIII beatified Thomas More, John Fisher and 52 other English Martyrs on 29 December 1886. Pope Pius XI canonised More and Fisher on 19 May 1935, and More's feast day was established as 9 July. Since 1970 the General Roman Calendar has celebrated More with St John Fisher on 22 June (the date of Fisher's execution). In 2000, Pope John Paul II declared More "the heavenly Patron of Statesmen and Politicians".[4]
Anglican Communion[edit]
In 1980, despite their opposing the English Reformation, More and Fisher were jointly added as martyrs of the reformation to the Church of England's calendar of "Saints and Heroes of the Christian Church", to be commemorated every 6 July (the date of More's execution) as "Thomas More, Scholar, and John Fisher, Bishop of Rochester, Reformation Martyrs, 1535".[5]
More is also listed in the calendars of saints of some of the other churches in the Anglican Communion including:

The Anglican Church of Australia has "July 6: John Fisher and Thomas More, martyrs (died 1535)".
The Anglican Church of Brazil has "July 6: Thomas More, Martyr, 1535".
The Anglican Church of Canada has "July 6 Thomas More died 1535 Commemoration" in its Book of Alternative Services Calendar, and has "July 6 The Octave Day of St Peter and St Paul, and Thomas More, Chancellor of England, Martyr 1535." in the July section of its Book of Common Prayer Calendar.
The Anglican Church of Southern Africa has "July 6: Thomas More, Martyr, 1535".

Among those on which More is not listed are the calendars of the Episcopal Church in the United States, the Scottish Episcopal Church and the Anglican Church in Hong Kong and Macau.
Legacy[edit]
The steadfastness and courage with which More maintained his religious convictions, and his dignity during his imprisonment, trial, and execution, contributed much to More's posthumous reputation, particularly among Roman Catholics. However, his zealous and brutal persecution of Protestants while Lord Chancellor contravenes modern notions of religious liberty as discussed below. Many historians[who?] consider More's treason conviction unjust, or at least his execution heavy-handed.[citation needed] His friend Erasmus defended More's character as "more pure than any snow" and described his genius as "such as England never had and never again will have."[42] Upon learning of More's execution, Emperor Charles V said: "Had we been master of such a servant, we would rather have lost the best city of our dominions than such a worthy councillor."[43] G. K. Chesterton, a Roman Catholic convert from the Church of England, predicted More "may come to be counted the greatest Englishman, or at least the greatest historical character in English history."[44] Hugh Trevor-Roper called More "the first great Englishman whom we feel that we know, the most saintly of humanists, the most human of saints, the universal man of our cool northern renaissance."[45]
Jonathan Swift, an Anglican, wrote that More was "a person of the greatest virtue this kingdom ever produced".[46][47][48] Some consider Samuel Johnson that quote's author, although neither his writings nor Boswell's contain such.[49][50] The metaphysical poet John Donne, also honoured as a saint by Anglicans, was More's great-great-nephew.[51]
While Roman Catholic scholars maintain that More used irony in Utopia, and that he remained an orthodox Christian, Marxist theoretician Karl Kautsky considered the book a shrewd critique of economic and social exploitation in pre-modern Europe; More thus influenced the early development of socialist ideas.[52] Others thought Utopia mythologised Indian cultures in the New World at a time when the Catholic Church was still debating internally its view toward those decidedly non-Christian cultures.[citation needed]
Several authors have criticised More for his campaign against Protestantism. Brian Moynahan, in his book God's Messenger: William Tyndale, Thomas More and the Writing of the English Bible, criticised More's intolerance, as does Michael Farris in his book From Tyndale to Madison. Richard Marius also criticised More for Anti-Protestantism and intolerance.[citation needed] Jasper Ridley, who wrote biographies of Henry VIII and Mary Tudor, goes much further in his dual biography of More and Cardinal Wolsey, The Statesman and the Fanatic, describing More as "a particularly nasty sado-masochistic pervert."[page&#160;needed] Joanna Denny in her 2004 biography of Anne Boleyn also criticised More.
Communism, Socialism, and resistance to Communism[edit]
Having been praised "as a Communist hero by Karl Marx, Friedrich Engels, and Karl Kautsky" because of the Communist attitude to property in his Utopia,[6] under Soviet Communism the name of Thomas More was in ninth position from the top[7] of Moscow's Stele of Freedom (also known as the Obelisk of Revolutionary Thinkers),[8] as one of the most influential thinkers "who promoted the liberation of humankind from oppression, arbitrariness, and exploitation."[7] This monument was erected in 1918 in Aleksndrovsky Garden near the Kremlin at Lenin's suggestion.[6][7][8] It was dismantled on 2 July 2013, during Vladimir Putin's third term as President of post-Communist Russia.[8]
Utopia also inspired Socialists such as William Morris.[53]
Many see More's communism or socialism as purely satirical.[53] In 1888, while praising More's communism, Karl Kautsky pointed out that "perplexed" historians and economists often saw the name Utopia (which means "no place") as "a subtle hint by More that he himself regarded his communism as an impracticable dream".[54]
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, the Russian Nobel Prize-winning anti-Communist author, and survivor and historian of the Soviet prison camps, argued that Soviet communism needed enslavement and forced labour to survive, and that this had been " ...foreseen as far back as Thomas More, the great-grandfather of socialism, in his Utopia".[55]
In 2008, More was portrayed on stage in Hong Kong as an allegorical symbol of the Pan-democracy camp resisting Chinese Communism in a translated and modified version of Robert Bolt's play A Man for All Seasons .[56]
Literature and popular culture[edit]
William Roper's biography of More was one of the first biographies in Modern English.
More was portrayed as a wise and honest statesman in the 1592 play Sir Thomas More, which was probably written in collaboration by Henry Chettle, Anthony Munday, William Shakespeare, and others, and which survives only in fragmentary form after being censored by Edmund Tylney, Master of the Revels in the government of Queen Elizabeth I (any direct reference to the Act of Supremacy was censored out).
The 20th-century agnostic playwright Robert Bolt portrayed Thomas More as the tragic hero of his 1960 play A Man for All Seasons. The title is drawn from what Robert Whittington in 1520 wrote of More:

More is a man of an angel's wit and singular learning. I know not his fellow. For where is the man of that gentleness, lowliness and affability? And, as time requireth, a man of marvelous mirth and pastimes, and sometime of as sad gravity. A man for all seasons.[45]

In 1966, the play was made into the successful film A Man for All Seasons directed by Fred Zinnemann, adapted for the screen by the playwright himself, and starring Paul Scofield in an Oscar-winning performance. Scofield, an actor known for many acclaimed performances in Classical theatre, later called Sir Thomas More, "The most difficult part I played."[57]
The film won the Academy Award for Best Picture for that year. In 1988, Charlton Heston starred in and directed a made-for-television film that followed Bolt's original play almost verbatim, restoring for example the commentaries of "the common man".
Catholic science fiction writer R. A. Lafferty wrote his novel Past Master as a modern equivalent to More's Utopia, which he saw as a satire. In this novel, Thomas More travels through time to the year 2535, where he is made king of the world "Astrobe", only to be beheaded after ruling for a mere nine days. One character compares More favourably to almost every other major historical figure: "He had one completely honest moment right at the end. I cannot think of anyone else who ever had one."
Karl Zuchardt's novel, Stirb du Narr! ("Die you fool!"), about More's struggle with King Henry, portrays More as an idealist bound to fail in the power struggle with a ruthless ruler and an unjust world.
The novelist Hilary Mantel's portrays More as an unsympathetic persecutor of Protestants, and an ally of the Habsburg empire, in her 2009 novel Wolf Hall, told from the perspective of a sympathetically portrayed Thomas Cromwell. Literary critic James Wood calls More "cruel in punishment, evasive in argument, lusty for power, and repressive in politics".[50]
Aaron Zelman's non-fiction book The State Versus the People includes a comparison of Utopia with Plato's Republic. Zelman is undecided as to whether More was being ironic in his book or was genuinely advocating a police state. Zelman comments, "More is the only Christian saint to be honoured with a statue at the Kremlin."[citation needed] By this Zelman implies that Utopia influenced Vladimir Lenin's Bolsheviks, despite their brutal repression of organised religion.
Other biographers, such as Peter Ackroyd, have offered a more sympathetic picture of More as both a sophisticated philosopher and man of letters, as well as a zealous Catholic who believed in the authority of the Holy See over Christendom.
The protagonist of Walker Percy's novels, Love in the Ruins and The Thanatos Syndrome, is "Dr Thomas More", a reluctant Catholic and descendant of More.
More is the focus of the Al Stewart song "A Man For All Seasons" from the 1978 album Time Passages, and of the Far song "Sir", featured on the limited editions and 2008 re-release of their 1994 album Quick. In addition, the song "So Says I" by indie rock outfit The Shins alludes to the socialist interpretation of More's Utopia.
Jeremy Northam depicts More in the television series The Tudors as a peaceful man, as well as a devout Roman Catholic and loving family patriarch. He also shows More loathing Protestantism, burning both Martin Luther's books and English Protestants who have been convicted of heresy. The portrayal has unhistorical aspects, such as that More neither personally caused nor attended Simon Fish's execution (since Fish actually died of bubonic plague in 1531 before he could stand trial), although More's The Supplycatyon of Soulys, published in October 1529, addressed Fish's Supplication for the Beggars.[58][59] Indeed, there is no evidence that More ever attended the execution of any heretic.[citation needed] The series also neglected to show More's avowed insistence that Richard Rich's testimony about More disputing the King's title as Supreme Head of the Church of England was perjured.
In 2002, More was placed at number 37 in the BBC's poll of the 100 Greatest Britons.[60]
Institutions named after More[edit]
Main article: List of institutions named after Thomas More
Historic sites[edit]





This section does not cite any references (sources). Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2015)


Westminster Hall[edit]
A plaque in the middle of the floor of London's Westminster Hall commemorates More's trial for treason and condemnation to execution in that original part of the Palace of Westminster.[61] The building, which houses Parliament, would have been well known to More, who served several terms as a member and became Speaker of the House of Commons before his appointment as England's Lord Chancellor.
Crosby Hall[edit]
The Crown confiscated More's home and estate along the Thames in Chelsea after his execution. Crosby Hall, which was part of More's London residence, was eventually relocated and reconstructed in Chelsea by conservation architect Walter Godfrey in 1910. Rebuilt in the 1990s, the white stone building stands amid modern brick structures that attempt to recapture the style of More's former manor on the site. Crosby Hall is privately owned and closed to the public. The modern structures face the Thames and include an entry way that displays More's arms, heraldic beasts, and a Latin maxim. Apartment buildings and a park cover the former gardens and orchard; Roper's Garden is the park atop one of More's gardens, sunken as his was believed to be. No other remnants exist of the More estate.
Chelsea Old Church[edit]




Thomas More statue, Chelsea Old Church


Across a small park and Old Church Street from Crosby Hall is Chelsea Old Church, an Anglican church whose southern chapel More commissioned and in which he sang with the parish choir. Except for his chapel, the church was largely destroyed in the Second World War and rebuilt in 1958. The capitals on the medieval arch connecting the chapel to the main sanctuary display symbols associated with More and his office. On the southern wall of the sanctuary is the tomb and epitaph he erected for himself and his wives, detailing his ancestry and accomplishments in Latin, including his role as peacemaker between the Christian nations of Europe as well as a curiously altered portion about his curbing heresy. When More served Mass, he would leave by the door just to the left of it. He is not, however, buried here, nor is it entirely certain which of his family may be. It is open to the public at specific times. Outside the church, facing the River Thames, is a statue by L. Cubitt Bevis erected in 1969, commemorating More as "saint", "scholar", and "statesman"; the back displays his coat-of-arms. Nearby, on Upper Cheyne Row, the Roman Catholic Church of Our Most Holy Redeemer &amp; St. Thomas More honours the martyr.
Tower Hill[edit]
A plaque and small garden commemorate the famed execution site on Tower Hill, London, just outside the Tower of London, as well as all those executed there, many as religious martyrs or as prisoners of conscience. More's corpse, minus his head, was unceremoniously buried in an unmarked mass grave beneath the Royal Chapel of St. Peter Ad Vincula, within the walls of the Tower of London, as was the custom for traitors executed at Tower Hill. The chapel is accessible to Tower visitors.
St Katharine Docks[edit]
Thomas More is commemorated by a stone plaque near St Katharine Docks, just east of the Tower where he was executed. The street in which it is situated was formerly called Nightingale Lane, a corruption of "Knighten Guild", derived from the original owners of the land. It is now renamed Thomas More Street in his honour.[62]
St Dunstan's Church and Roper House, Canterbury[edit]
St Dunstan's Church, an Anglican parish church in Canterbury, possesses More's head, rescued by his daughter Margaret Roper, whose family lived in Canterbury down and across the street from their parish church. A stone immediately to the left of the altar marks the sealed Roper family vault beneath the Nicholas Chapel, itself to the right of the church's sanctuary or main altar. St Dunstan's Church has carefully investigated, preserved and sealed this burial vault. The last archaeological investigation revealed that the suspected head of More rests in a niche separate from the other bodies, possibly from later interference.[citation needed] Displays in the chapel record the archaeological findings in pictures and narratives. Catholics donated stained glass to commemorate the events in More's life. A small plaque marks the former home of William and Margaret Roper; another house nearby and entitled Roper House is now a home for the deaf.
Works[edit]
Note: The reference "CW" is to the relevant volume of the Yale Edition of the Complete Works of St. Thomas More (New Haven and London 1963–1997)
Published during More’s life (with dates of publication)[edit]

A Merry Jest (c. 1516) (CW 1)
Utopia (1516) (CW 4)
Latin Poems (1518, 1520) (CW 3, Pt.2)
Letter to Brixius (1520) (CW 3, Pt. 2, App C)
Responsio ad Lutherum (The Answer to Luther, 1523) (CW 5)
A Dialogue Concerning Heresies (1529, 1530) (CW 6)
Supplication of Souls (1529) (CW 7)
Letter Against Frith (1532) (CW 7)
The Confutation of Tyndale's Answer (1532, 1533) (CW 8)
Apology (1533) (CW 9)
Debellation of Salem and Bizance (1533) (CW 10)
The Answer to a Poisoned Book (1533) (CW 11)

Published after More’s death (with likely dates of composition)[edit]

The History of King Richard III (c. 1513–1518) (CW 2 &amp; 15)
The Four Last Things (c. 1522) (CW 1)
A Dialogue of Comfort Against Tribulation (1534) (CW 12)
Treatise Upon the Passion (1534) (CW 13)
Treatise on the Blessed Body (1535) (CW 13)
Instructions and Prayers (1535) (CW 13)
De Tristitia Christi (1535) (CW 14)

Translations[edit]

Translations of Lucian (many dates 1506–1534) (CW 3, Pt.1)
The Life of Pico della Mirandola, by Gianfrancesco Pico della Mirandola (c. 1510) (CW 1)

See also[edit]




Saints portal




English Reformation

Notes[edit]


^ St. Thomas More, 1478–1535 at Savior.org
^ Homily at the Canonization of St. Thomas More at The Center for Thomas More Studies at the University of Dallas, 2010, citing text "Recorded in The Tablet, June 1, 1935, pp. 694–695"
^ Linder, Douglas O. The Trial of Sir Thomas More: A Chronology at University Of Missouri-Kansas City (UMKC) School Of Law
^ a b c Apostolic letter issued motu proprio proclaiming Saint Thomas More Patron of Statesmen and Politicians, 31 October 2000 Vatican.va
^ a b c "Holy Days". Worship – The Calendar. Church of England. 2011. Retrieved 20 April 2011.&#160;
^ a b c Margaret L. King (2014). Renaissance Humanism: An Anthology of Sources. Hackett Publishing. p.&#160;157. ISBN&#160;9781624661464. Retrieved 20 December 2014. Hailed as a Communist hero by Karl Marx, Friedrich Engels, and Karl Kautsky, More's contribution to "the liberation of humankind" is commemorated, at Lenin's suggestion, on a monument erected in 1918 in Aleksndrovsky Garden near the Kremlin.[12]...[12] J.A.Guy, Thomas More (London, New York: Oxford University Press, 2000), 95-96&#160;
^ a b c d "The Center for Thomas More Studies - Art &gt; Gallery &gt; Moscow". The Center for Thomas More Studies at The University of Dallas. 2010. Retrieved 20 December 2014. This monument, suggested by Lenin and built in 1918, lists Thomas More (ninth from the top) among the most influential thinkers "who promoted the liberation of humankind from oppression, arbitrariness, and exploitation." It is in Aleksndrovsky Garden near the Kremlin.&#160;
^ a b c d afoniya (10 July 2013). "On the removal of a Moscow statue". WordPress. Retrieved 20 December 2014. What was known as the Stele of Freedom or the Obelisk of Revolutionary Thinkers has been dismantled apparently to be reinstalled in some months time as a monument to the Romanov Dynasty. This historically symbolic act was carried out on July 2 completely unannounced ... The obelisk was one of the most interesting statues historically and ideologically because of the kind of names that it had on the statue. This was not simply a case of Marx, Engels, Lenin. It was (it seems) the first revolutionary monument to be opened after the revolution of 1917 and, in a non-dogmatic spirit, it included the names of anarchists, reformist socialists and even that of Thomas More.&#160;
^ Jokinen, A. (13 June 2009). "The Life of Sir Thomas More." Luminarium. Retrieved on: 19 September 2011.
^ "Sir Thomas More". The Biography Channel website. 2014. Retrieved 30 January 2014.&#160;
^ a b c d e Rebhorn, Wayne A, ed. (2005). "Introduction". Utopia. Classics. New York: Barnes &amp; Noble.&#160;.
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w Ackroyd, Peter (1999). The Life of Thomas More. New York: Anchor Books.&#160;. Cite error: Invalid &lt;ref&gt; tag; name "Ackroyd" defined multiple times with different content (see the help page).
^ Harpsfield, Nicholas (1931). "The Life and Death of Sr Thomas More". London: Early English Text Society. pp.&#160;12–3.&#160;.
^ Erasmus, Desiderius. "Letter to Ulrich von Hutten". In Adams, Robert M. Utopia. New York: WW Norton &amp; Co. p.&#160;125.&#160;
^ "Erasmus to Ulrich von Hutten" (PDF). The Center for Thomas More Studies. Biographical Accounts: Erasmus' Letters about More. Thomasmorestudies.org. Retrieved 8 March 2014.&#160;
^ "Franciscan Calendar". Tau Cross Region of the Secular Franciscan Order.&#160;
^ a b Gerard B. Wegemer (1995). Thomas More: A Portrait of Courage. Scepter Publishing.&#160;
^ Maddison, the Rev. Canon, A.R., M.A., F.S.A., editor, Lincolnshire Pedigrees, Harleian Society, London, 1903, p.5.
^ Lawrence, Raymond J. (2007). Sexual Liberation: The Scandal of Christendom. Greenwood Publishing Group. p.&#160;63. ISBN&#160;9780275993733.&#160;
^ a b More, St Thomas (1961). Rogers, Elizabeth Frances, ed. Selected Letters. New Haven and London: Yale University Press.&#160;.
^ "History of Parliament". History of Parliament Trust. Retrieved 13 October 2011.&#160;
^ Magnusson (ed.) Chambers Biographical Dictionary (1990) p. 1039
^ a b c d e Rebhorn, W. A. (ed.) p. xviii
^ a b Gerard B. Wegemer, Portrait of Courage, p. 136.
^ a b Moynahan, Brian, God's Bestseller: William Tyndale, Thomas More, and the Writing of the English Bible – A Story of Martyrdom and Betrayal, St Martin's Press; 1st ed. (23 August 2003).
^ Diarmaid MacCulloch, 277.
^ Farris, Michael (2007). "From Tyndale to Madison".&#160;.
^ a b Marius, Richard (1999). Thomas More: A Biography, Harvard University Press
^ Moynahan, B., William Tyndale: If God Spare My Life, Abacus, London, 2003.
^ Guy, John A. Tudor England Oxford, 1988. p 26
^ "John Tewkesbury (1531)". UK Wells. Retrieved 10 December 2014. Having failed in this the Bishop of London, Stokesley, tried him and sentenced him to be burned.&#160;
^ More, Thomas (1973). Schuster, LA; Marius, RC; Lusardi, JP; Schoeck, RJ, eds. The Confutation of Tyndale's Answer. Complete Works 8. Yale. p.&#160;20.&#160;.
^ Ives, Eric W (2004), The Life and Death of Anne Boleyn, p.&#160;47, [More wrote on the subject of the Boleyn marriage that] [I] neither murmur at it nor dispute upon it, nor never did nor will. ...I faithfully pray to God for his Grace and hers both long to live and well, and their noble issue too...&#160;
^ Elton, Geoffrey Rudolph (1982). "The Crown". The Tudor constitution: documents and commentary (2nd ed.). Cambridge, Cambridgeshire: Cambridge University Press. p.&#160;7. ISBN&#160;0-521-24506-0. OCLC&#160;7876927. Retrieved 24 July 2009.&#160;
^ "Annotated original text".&#160;
^ "The Trial of Sir THOMAS MORE Knight, Lord Chancellor of England, for High-Treason in denying; the King's Supremacy, May 7, 1535. the 26th of Henry VIII.".&#160;
^ "Account of trial". Retrieved 27 July 2007.&#160;
^ Hume, David (1813), The History of England, p.&#160;632&#160;.
^ Guy, John, A Daughter's Love: Thomas &amp; Margaret More, London: Fourth Estate, 2008, ISBN 978-0-00-719231-1, p. 266.
^ "St. Thomas More". Catholic Encyclopaedia.&#160;.
^ Markham, Clements (1906). Richard III: His Life and Character. p.&#160;168.&#160;
^ Daniel J. Boorstin (1999). The Seekers: The Story of Man's Continuing Quest to Understand His World. Random House Digital, Inc. p.&#160;154. ISBN&#160;9780375704758.&#160;
^ Quoted in Britannica – The Online Encyclopedia, article: Sir Thomas More
^ Chesterton, G. K. (1929). The Fame of Blessed Thomas More. London: Sheed &amp; Ward. p.&#160;63.&#160;
^ a b Cited in Marvin O'Connell, "A Man for all Seasons: an Historian's Demur," Catholic Dossier 8 no. 2 (March–April 2002): 16–19 online
^ Writings on Religion and the Church, Chapter 14 "Concerning that Universal Hatred which prevails against the Clergy" by Jonathan Swift, 1736
^ Jonathan Swift, Prose Works of Jonathan Swift v. 13, Oxford UP, 1959, p.&#160;123)
^ "Reputation". Thomas More Studies.&#160;.
^ Kenny, Jack (2011). "A Man of Enduring Conscience". Resource Center. Catholic Culture via Trinity Communications.&#160;
^ a b Chambers, R. W. (1929). Sir Thomas More's Fame Among His Countrymen. London: Sheed &amp; Ward. p.&#160;13.&#160;
^ Colclough, "Donne, John (1572–1631)", Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, Oxford University Press
^ Thomas More and his Utopia (1888)
^ a b "St. Thomas More". Catholic Encyclopaedia. 1913. The whole work is really an exercise of the imagination with much brilliant satire upon the world of More's own day. ... there can be no doubt that he would have been delighted at entrapping William Morris, who discovered in it a complete gospel of Socialism&#160;
^ Kautsky, Karl (1888). Thomas More and his Utopia. Retrieved January 16, 2015. Part III. UTOPIA ... Chapter V. THE AIM OF UTOPIA ... Historians and economists who are perplexed by Utopia perceive in this name a subtle hint by More that he himself regarded his communism as an impracticable dream.&#160;
^ Bloom, Harold; Hobby, Blake (2010). Enslavement and Emancipation. Infobase Publishing. pp.&#160;173–174. ISBN&#160;9781604134414. Retrieved 20 January 2015. Moreover, Solzhenitsyn insists that the Soviet system cannot survive without the camps, that Soviet communism requires enslavement and forced labour. " ...foreseen as far back as Thomas More, the great-grandfather of socialism, in his Utopia [,the] labor of zeks was needed for degrading and particularly heavy work, which no one, under socialism, would wish to perform" (Gulag, Vol 3." 578).&#160;
^ Chen, Chapman (2011). Pekka Kujamäki, ed. "Postcolonial Hong Kong Drama Translation" in "Beyond Borders: Translations Moving Languages, Literatures and Cultures". Volume 39 of TransÜD. Arbeiten zur Theorie und Praxis des Übersetzens und Dolmetschens. Frank &amp; Timme GmbH, Berlin. pp.&#160;47–54. ISBN&#160;9783865963567. Retrieved January 8, 2015.&#160;
^ Gary O'Connor (2002), Paul Scofield: An Actor for All Seasons, Applause Books. Page 150.
^ Online Text Version of Fish's Supplycacion for the Beggar
^ see Fish, Simon. "Supplycacion for the Beggar." 1529 in Carroll, Gerald L. and Joseph B. Murray. The Yale Edition of the Complete Works of St. Thomas More. Vol. 7. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1990, pp. 1–10. See also Pineas, Rainer. "Thomas More’s Controversy with Simon Fish." Studies in English Literature, 1500–1900, Vol. 7, No. 1, The English Renaissance, Winter, 1967, 13–14.
^ Sue Parrill, William Baxter Robison (2013). "The Tudors on Film and Television", p. 92. McFarland,
^ "Westminster Hall". The Center for Thomas More Studies. 2010. Retrieved 4 July 2015.&#160;
^ "St Katharine's Dock". Exploring East London. Retrieved 4 November 2015.&#160;


Biographies[edit]

Ackroyd, Peter (1999). The Life of Thomas More.&#160;
Basset, Bernard, SJ (1965). Born for Friendship: The Spirit of Sir Thomas More. London: Burns &amp; Oates.&#160;
Berglar, Peter (2009). Thomas More: A Lonely Voice against the Power of the State. New York: Scepter Publishers. ISBN&#160;978-1-59417-073-7.&#160; (Note: this is a 2009 translation (from the original German, by Hector de Cavilla) of Berglar's 1978 work Die Stunde des Thomas Morus – Einer gegen die Macht. Freiburg 1978; Adamas-Verlag, Köln 1998, ISBN 3-925746-78-1)
Brady, Charles A. (1953). Stage of Fools: A Novel of Sir Thomas More. Dutton.&#160;
Brémond, Henri (1904) - Le Bienheureux Thomas More 1478-1535 (1904) as Sir Thomas More (1913) translated by Henry Child;

1920 edition published by R. &amp; T. Washbourne Limited, OCLC&#160;1224822 and 749455885;
Paperback edition by Kessinger Publishing, LLC (26 May 2006) with ISBN 1428619046, ISBN 978-1428619043;
published in French in Paris by Gabalda, 1920, OCLC&#160;369064822




(Note: Brémond is frequently cited in Berglar (2009))


Chambers, RW (1935). Thomas More. Harcourt, Brace.&#160;
Guy, John (1980). The Public Career of Sir Thomas More. ISBN&#160;978-0-300-02546-0.&#160;
——— (2000). Thomas More. ISBN&#160;978-0-340-73138-3.&#160;
——— (2009). A Daughter's Love: Thomas More and His Daughter Meg.&#160;
Marius, Richard (1984). Thomas More: A Biography.&#160;
——— (1999). Thomas More: a biography. Harvard University Press. ISBN&#160;978-0-674-88525-7.&#160;
More, Cresacre (1828). The Life of Sir Thomas More by His Great-Grandson.&#160;.
Reynolds, EE (1964). The Trialet of St Thomas More.&#160;
——— (1965). Thomas More and Erasmus.&#160;
Ridley, Jasper (1983). Statesman and Saint: Cardinal Wolsey, Sir Thomas More, and the Politics of Henry VIII. ISBN&#160;0-670-48905-0.&#160;
Roper, William (2003), Wegemer, Gerard B; Smith, Stephen W, eds., The Life of Sir Thomas More (1556) (PDF), Center for Thomas More Studies&#160;.
Wegemer, Gerard (1985). Thomas More: A Portrait of Courage. ISBN&#160;978-1-889334-12-7.&#160;
——— (1996), Thomas More on Statesmanship&#160;.

Historiography[edit]

Gushurst-Moore, André (2004), "A Man for All Eras: Recent Books on Thomas More", Political Science Reviewer 33: 90–143&#160;.
Guy, John (2000), "The Search for the Historical Thomas More", History Review: 15+&#160;.

Primary sources[edit]

More, Thomas (1963–1997), Yale Edition of the Complete Works of St. Thomas More, New Haven and London&#160; Amazon links.
——— (2010), Logan, George M; Adams, Robert M, eds., Utopia, Critical Editions (3rd ed.), Norton&#160;.
——— (2003), Thornton, John F, ed., Saint Thomas More: Selected Writings&#160;.
——— (2001), da Silva, Álvaro, ed., The Last Letters of Thomas More&#160;.
——— (2004), Wegemer, Gerald B; Smith, Stephen W, eds., A Thomas More Source Book, Catholic University of America Press&#160;.

External links[edit]



Wikiquote has quotations related to: Thomas More





Wikisource has original works written by or about:
Thomas More





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Thomas More.



Archival material relating to Thomas More listed at the UK National Archives
Portraits of Sir Thomas More at the National Portrait Gallery, London
The Center for Thomas More Studies at the University of Dallas
Thomas More Chambers – The Chambers of Mr Geoffrey Cox QC, MP.
Thomas More Studies database: contains several of More's English works, including dialogues, early poetry and letters, as well as journal articles and biographical material
Works by Thomas More at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about Thomas More at Internet Archive
Works by Thomas More at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 

Sir Thomas More, or, Colloquies on the Progress and Prospects of Society at Project Gutenberg

Sir Thomas More by William Shakespeare (spurious and doubtful works) at Project Gutenberg
Wood, James, Sir Thomas More: A Man for One Season (essay)&#160;. Presents a critical view of More's anti-Protestantism
More and The History of Richard&#160;III
Kautsky, Karl, Thomas More and his Utopia, Marxists&#160;.
Thomas More and Utopias – a learning resource from the British Library
Wegemer, Gerard, Integrity and Conscience in the Life and Thought of Thomas More&#160;.
&#160;"St. Thomas More". Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company. 1913.&#160;
body and head of Thomas More at Find A Grave
Patron Saints Index entry – Saint Thomas More biography, prayers, quotes, Catholic devotions to him.
Trial of Sir Thomas More[dead link] at the University of Missouri-Kansas City (UMKC) School of Law
John Fisher and Thomas More: Martyrs of England and Wales



Political offices


Preceded&#160;by
Sir Thomas Neville
Speaker of the House of Commons
1523
Succeeded&#160;by
Sir Thomas Audley


Preceded&#160;by
Sir Richard Wingfield
Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster
1525–1529
Succeeded&#160;by
Sir William Fitzwilliam


Preceded&#160;by
Thomas Wolsey
Lord Chancellor
1529–1532
Succeeded&#160;by
Sir Thomas Audley
(Keeper of the Great Seal)&#160;










v
t
e


Speakers of the House of Commons






House of Commons
of England





14th century




Hungerford
De la Mare
Pickering
Guildesborough
Waldegrave
Pickering
Bussy
Cheney
Doreward
Savage
Redford









15th century




Esturmy
Tiptoft
Chaucer
Stourton
Hungerford
Chaucer
Redman
Beauchamp
Flower
Hunt
Chaucer
Baynard
Russell
Walton
Vernon
Tyrell
Alington
Bowes
Burley
Tresham
Say
Popham
Oldhall
Thorpe
Charlton
Wenlock
Tresham
Green
Strangeways
Wood
Catesby
Lovell
Mordaunt
Fitzwilliam
Empson
Drury
Englefield









16th century




Dudley
Sheffield
Nevill
More
Audley
Wingfield
Rich
Hare
Moyle
Baker
Dyer
Pollard
Broke
Higham
Cordell
Gargrave
Williams
Onslow
Wray
Bell
Popham
Puckering
Snagge
Coke
Yelverton









17th century




Croke
Phelips
Crewe
Richardson
Crewe
Finch
Finch
Glanville
Lenthall
Pelham
Rous (Barebones Parliament)
Widdrington (2nd Protectorate Parliament)
Chute (3rd Protectorate Parliament)
Long (3rd Protectorate Parliament)
Bampfield (3rd Protectorate Parliament)
Grimston
Turnour
Charlton
Seymour
Sawyer
Gregory
Williams
Trevor
Powle
Foley
Littleton









18th century




Harley
Smith














House of Commons
of Great Britain





18th century




Smith
R.&#160;Onslow
Bromley
Hanmer
Compton
A.&#160;Onslow
Cust
Norton
Cornwall
Grenville
Addington











House of Commons
of the United Kingdom





19th century




Addington
Mitford
Abbot
Manners-Sutton
Abercromby
Shaw-Lefevre
Denison
Brand
Peel
Gully









20th century




Lowther
Whitley
FitzRoy
Brown
Morrison
Hylton-Foster
King
Lloyd
Thomas
Weatherill
Boothroyd









21st century




Martin
Bercow



















v
t
e


Catholic Church







Organizations, papacy, teachings and liturgical traditions






History



Jesus
Twelve Apostles
Early Christianity
History of the papacy
Ecumenical Councils
Missions
Great Schism of East
Crusades
Great Schism of West
Protestant Reformation
Counter-Reformation
Catholic Church by country
Vatican City

index













Hierarchy



Pope
Cardinals
Patriarchs
Major Archbishops
Primates
Metropolitans
Archbishops
Diocesan Bishops
Coadjutor Bishops
Auxiliary Bishops
Titular Bishops
Bishops Emeriti
Priesthood








Theology



Body and Soul
Divine Grace
Dogma
One, Holy, Catholic and Apostolic Church
Original sin
Saints

list


Salvation
Sermon on the Mount
The Ten Commandments
Trinity
Worship








Sacraments



Baptism
Confirmation
Eucharist
Penance
Anointing of the Sick

Last rites


Holy Orders
Matrimony








Mariology



Roman Catholic Mariology
Assumption
History of Mariology
Immaculate Conception
Mariology of the popes
Mariology of the saints
Mother of God
Perpetual Virginity
Veneration








Doctors
of the Church







Gregory the Great
Ambrose
Augustine of Hippo
Jerome
John Chrysostom
Basil of Caesarea
Gregory of Nazianzus
Athanasius of Alexandria
Cyril of Alexandria
Cyril of Jerusalem
John of Damascus
Bede the Venerable
Ephrem the Syrian
Thomas Aquinas
Bonaventure
Anselm of Canterbury
Isidore of Seville
Peter Chrysologus
Leo the Great
Peter Damian
Bernard of Clairvaux
Hilary of Poitiers
Alphonsus Liguori
Francis de Sales
Peter Canisius
John of the Cross
Robert Bellarmine
Albertus Magnus
Anthony of Padua
Lawrence of Brindisi
Teresa of Ávila
Catherine of Siena
Thérèse of Lisieux
John of Ávila
Hildegard of Bingen
Gregory of Narek











Pope Francis



Conclave
Inauguration
Theology
Canonizations
Visits








Preceding popes



Pope Benedict XVI
Pope John Paul II
Pope John Paul I
Pope Paul VI
Pope John XXIII
Pope Pius XII
Pope Pius XI
Pope Benedict XV
Pope Pius X
Pope Leo XIII
(more)








Religious institutes
and similar



Assumptionists
Augustinians
Benedictines
Capuchin Order
Carmelites
Carthusians
Congregations of Holy Cross
Dominican Order
Franciscan orders
Jesuits
Oratory of Saint Philip Neri








International Associations
of the Faithful



International Federation of Catholic Parochial Youth Movements
International Federation of Catholic Universities
International Kolping Society
Schoenstatt Movement
International Union of Catholic Esperantists
Sant'Egidio Community
(more)








Vatican II



Definition of the Church
Dei verbum
Gaudium et spes
Lumen gentium
Nostra aetate
Sacrosanctum Concilium








Particular Churches



Albanian
Armenian
Belarusian
Bulgarian
Chaldean
Coptic
Croatian
Eritrean
Ethiopian
Georgian
Greek
Hungarian
Italo-Albanian
Latin
Macedonian
Maronite
Melkite
Romanian
Russian
Ruthenian
Slovak
Syriac
Syro-Malabar
Syro-Malankara
Ukrainian








Liturgical rites



Alexandrian
Ambrosian
Anglican Use
Antiochian
Armenian
Byzantine
East Syrian
Mozarabic
Ordinariate Use
Roman
Sarum











 Catholicism portal
 Pope portal
















v
t
e


History of the Catholic Church






General



History of the Catholic Church
History of Christianity
History of the Papacy
History of the Roman Curia
Timeline of the Catholic Church
Art in Roman Catholicism
Catholic Ecumenical Councils
Catholic religious institutes
Christian monasticism
Papal States
Role of the Christian Church in civilization








Church beginnings



Jesus
Twelve Apostles
Saint Peter
Paul the Apostle
Saint Stephen
John the Apostle
Great Commission
Council of Jerusalem
Apostolic Age
Apostolic Fathers
Ignatius of Antioch
Irenaeus
Pope Victor I
Tertullian









Constantine to
Pope Gregory I




Constantine the Great and Christianity
Arianism
Archbasilica of St. John Lateran
First Council of Nicaea
Pope Sylvester I
First Council of Constantinople
Biblical canon
Jerome
Vulgate
First Council of Ephesus
Council of Chalcedon
Benedict of Nursia
Second Council of Constantinople
Pope Gregory I
Gregorian chant








Early Middle Ages



Third Council of Constantinople
Saint Boniface
Byzantine Iconoclasm
Second Council of Nicaea
Charlemagne
Pope Leo III
Fourth Council of Constantinople
East–West Schism








High Middle Ages



Pope Urban II
Investiture Controversy
Crusades
First Council of the Lateran
Second Council of the Lateran
Third Council of the Lateran
Pope Innocent III
Latin Empire
Francis of Assisi
Fourth Council of the Lateran
Inquisition
First Council of Lyon
Second Council of Lyon
Bernard of Clairvaux
Thomas Aquinas








Late Middle Ages



Pope Boniface VIII
Avignon Papacy
Pope Clement V
Council of Vienne
Knights Templar
Catherine of Siena
Pope Alexander VI









Protestant Reformation
Counter-Reformation




Protestant Reformation
Counter-Reformation
Thomas More
Pope Leo X
Society of Jesus
Ignatius of Loyola
Francis Xavier
Dissolution of the Monasteries
Council of Trent
Pope Pius V
Tridentine Mass
Teresa of Ávila
John of the Cross
Philip Neri
Robert Bellarmine









Baroque Period to the
French Revolution




Pope Innocent XI
Pope Benedict XIV
Suppression of the Society of Jesus
Anti-clericalism
Pope Pius VI
Shimabara Rebellion
Edict of Nantes
Dechristianisation of France during the French Revolution








19th century



Pope Pius VII
Pope Pius IX
Dogma of the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary
Our Lady of La Salette
Our Lady of Lourdes
First Vatican Council
Papal infallibility
Pope Leo XIII
Mary of the Divine Heart
Prayer of Consecration to the Sacred Heart
Rerum novarum








20th century



Pope Pius X
Our Lady of Fátima
Persecutions of the Catholic Church and Pius XII
Pope Pius XII
Pope Pius XII Consecration to the Immaculate Heart of Mary
Dogma of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary
Lateran Treaty
Pope John XXIII
Second Vatican Council
Pope Paul VI
Pope John Paul I
Pope John Paul II
World Youth Day

1995
2000










21st century



Catholic Church sexual abuse cases
Pope Benedict XVI
World Youth Day

2002
2005
2008
2011
2013


Pope Francis








By country or region



Belize
Brazil
Canada
Cuba
France
Germany
Great Britain
Haiti
Hispano-America
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Mexico
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Spain
United States
Vatican City
Venezuela
Vietnam











Catholicism Portal
Pope Portal
















v
t
e


History of Catholic theology









Theologians
Teachings
Heresies








General history



History of the Catholic Church
Early Christianity
History of the Papacy
Ecumenical Councils
Timeline of the Catholic Church
History of Christianity
History of Christian theology











Church beginnings



Paul
Clement of Rome
First Epistle of Clement
Didache
Ignatius of Antioch
Polycarp
Epistle of Barnabas
Shepherd of Hermas
Justin Martyr
Epistle to Diognetus
Irenaeus
Montanism
Tertullian
Origen
Antipope Novatian
Cyprian









Constantine to
Pope Gregory I




Eusebius
Athanasius of Alexandria
Arianism
Pelagianism
Nestorianism
Monophysitism
Ephrem the Syrian
Hilary of Poitiers
Cyril of Jerusalem
Basil of Caesarea
Gregory Nazianzus
Gregory of Nyssa
Ambrose
John Chrysostom
Jerome
Augustine of Hippo
John Cassian
Cyril of Alexandria
Peter Chrysologus
Pope Leo I
Boethius
Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite
Pope Gregory I








Early Middle Ages



Isidore of Seville
Maximus the Confessor
Monothelitism
Ecthesis
Bede
John of Damascus
Iconoclasm
Transubstantiation dispute
Predestination disputes
Paulinus II of Aquileia
Alcuin
Rabanus Maurus
Paschasius Radbertus
John Scotus Eriugena








High Middle Ages



Roscellinus
Gregory of Narek
Berengar of Tours
Peter Damian
Anselm of Canterbury
Joachim of Fiore
Peter Abelard
Decretum Gratiani
Bernard of Clairvaux
Peter Lombard
Anselm of Laon
Hildegard of Bingen
Hugh of Saint Victor
Dominic de Guzmán
Robert Grosseteste
Francis of Assisi
Anthony of Padua
Bonaventure
Albertus Magnus
Thomas Aquinas
Thomism
Roger Bacon








Mysticism and reforms



Ramon Llull
Duns Scotus
Dante Alighieri
William of Ockham
Richard Rolle
Catherine of Siena
Brigit of Sweden
Meister Eckhart
Johannes Tauler
Walter Hilton
The Cloud of Unknowing
Heinrich Seuse
Geert Groote
Devotio Moderna
Julian of Norwich
Thomas à Kempis
Nicholas of Kues
Marsilio Ficino
Girolamo Savonarola
Giovanni Pico della Mirandola









Protestant Reformation
Counter-Reformation




Desiderius Erasmus
Thomas Cajetan
Thomas More
John Fisher
Johann Eck
Francisco de Vitoria
Ignatius of Loyola
Francisco de Osuna
John of Avila
Francis Xavier
Teresa of Ávila
Luis de León
John of the Cross
Petrus Canisius
Luis de Molina
Molinism
Robert Bellarmine
Francisco Suárez
Lawrence of Brindisi
Francis de Sales









Baroque Period to
French Revolution




Tommaso Campanella
Pierre de Bérulle
Mary of Jesus of Ágreda
Jean-Jacques Olier
Louis Thomassin
Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet
François Fénelon
Cornelius Jansen
Jansenism
Blaise Pascal
Nicolas Malebranche
Giambattista Vico
Alphonsus Liguori
Louis de Montfort
Maria Gaetana Agnesi
Alfonso Muzzarelli
Johann Michael Sailer
Clemens Maria Hofbauer








19th century



Joseph Görres
Ignaz von Döllinger
John Henry Newman
Jaime Balmes
Gaetano Sanseverino
Giovanni Maria Cornoldi
Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler
Giuseppe Pecci
Joseph Hergenröther
Tommaso Maria Zigliara
Modernism
Léon Bloy
Friedrich von Hügel
George Tyrrell
Maurice Blondel
Thérèse of Lisieux








20th–21st century



G. K. Chesterton
Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange
Joseph Maréchal
Pierre Teilhard de Chardin
Jacques Maritain
Étienne Gilson
Gabriel Marcel
Marie-Dominique Chenu
Romano Guardini
Edith Stein
Henri de Lubac
Gabriel Roschini
Josemaría Escrivá
Adrienne von Speyr
Karl Rahner
Yves Congar
Bernard Lonergan
Emmanuel Mounier
Jean Daniélou
Hans Urs von Balthasar
Edward Schillebeeckx
Thomas Merton
Raimondo Spiazzi
René Girard
Pope Benedict XVI
Johann Baptist Metz
Henri Nouwen
Walter Kasper
Jean-Luc Marion
Tomáš Halík











Catholicism portal
Pope portal













Authority control



WorldCat
VIAF: 29541174
LCCN: n79056176
ISNI: 0000 0001 2125 8375
GND: 118641158
SELIBR: 352158
SUDOC: 027161625
BNF: cb11926532q (data)
BPN: 42465456
ULAN: 500250228
NLA: 50892220
NDL: 00450481
NKC: jn19990005823
ICCU: IT\ICCU\CFIV\052646
BNE: XX934011















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Thomas_More&amp;oldid=691537949"					
				Categories: 1478 births1535 deaths16th-century Christian saints16th-century English writers16th-century historians16th-century Latin-language writers16th-century novelists16th-century Roman Catholic martyrsAnglican saintsAnti-ProtestantismChancellors of the Duchy of LancasterChristian humanistsEarly modern philosophersEnglish Catholic poetsEnglish non-fiction writersEnglish religious writersEnglish Renaissance humanistsEnglish Roman Catholic saintsEnglish saintsExecuted philosophersExecuted writersExecutions at the Tower of LondonCreators of writing systemsLord Chancellors of EnglandMembers of Lincoln's InnMembers of the Privy Council of EnglandPeople educated at Magdalen College School, OxfordPeople associated with the University of OxfordChristian martyrs executed by decapitationPeople executed under the Tudors for treason against EnglandPeople from the City of LondonPrisoners in the Tower of LondonRoman Catholic philosophersRoman Catholic writersEarly modern Christian devotional writersCanonizations by Pope Pius XIUtopian socialistsUtopistsThird Order of Saint FrancisFranciscan martyrsFranciscan saintsPeople executed by Tudor England by decapitationPeople from London executed by decapitationPeople executed under Henry VIII of EnglandEnglish MPs 1504English MPs 1510English MPs 1523Speakers of the House of Commons of EnglandMembers of the Parliament of England for the City of LondonBurials at St. Peter ad Vincula (London)More familyBritish male poetsEnglish male novelistsHidden categories: Pages with reference errorsPages with duplicate reference namesUse British English from May 2012Use dmy dates from July 2012All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from March 2012Articles with unsourced statements from January 2013Articles with unsourced statements from February 2015All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from February 2015Wikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2015Articles with unsourced statements from June 2014Articles with unsourced statements from December 2013Articles with unsourced statements from August 2009Articles with unsourced statements from July 2013Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from April 2015Articles with unsourced statements from April 2011Articles with unsourced statements from September 2014Articles needing additional references from July 2015All articles needing additional referencesArticles with unsourced statements from August 2008Commons category with local link same as on WikidataArticles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource referenceAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from February 2015AC with 14 elementsWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with BPN identifiersWikipedia articles with ULAN identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiersWikipedia articles with SBN identifiers				
							
		
		
			