


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Three Treasures (Taoism)
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				




This article includes a list of references, but its sources remain unclear because it has insufficient inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (June 2015)





This article contains Chinese text. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Chinese characters.




Part of a series on


Taoism







Theories


Dao (Tao)
De (Te)


Wuji
Taiji
Yin-Yang


Wu wei
Ziran
Xian


Wu Xing
Qi








Practices


Three Treasures


Taoist meditation


Taoist diet


Neidan


Taoist sexual practices








Texts


I Ching
Laozi (Tao Te Ching)
Zhuangzi
Liezi
Daozang








Deities


Hongjun Laozu
Three Pure Ones


Guan Shengdi
Eight Immortals
Yellow Emperor
Li Hong
Xiwangmu
Jade Emperor


Other deities








People


Laozi
Zhuangzi
Zhang Daoling
Zhang Jue
Ge Hong
Chen Tuan








Schools


Wudoumi
Tianshi
Shangqing
Lingbao
Quanzhen (Longmen)
Zhengyi
Wuliu
Yao Taoism








Holy places


Taoist temple


Grotto-heavens


Mount Penglai








Organisations


Chinese Taoist Association


Celestial Master


Daoshi






Portal Taoism





v
t
e





The Three Treasures or Three Jewels (Chinese: 三寶; pinyin: sānbǎo; Wade–Giles: san-pao) are basic virtues in Taoism. Although the Tao Te Ching originally used sanbao to mean "compassion", "frugality", and "humility", the term was later used to translate the Three Jewels (Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha) in Chinese Buddhism, and to mean the Three Treasures (jing, qi, and shen) in Traditional Chinese Medicine.



Contents


1 Tao Te Ching

1.1 Chinese terminology
1.2 English translations


2 Other meanings
3 References
4 External links



Tao Te Ching[edit]
Sanbao "three treasures" first occurs in Tao Te Ching chapter 67, which Lin Yutang (1948:292) says contains Laozi's "most beautiful teachings":

天下皆謂我道大，似不肖。夫唯大，故似不肖。若肖久矣。其細也夫！我有三寶，持而保之。一曰慈，二曰儉，三曰不敢為天下先。慈故能勇；儉故能廣；不敢為天下先，故能成器長。今舍慈且勇；舍儉且廣；舍後且先；死矣！夫慈以戰則勝，以守則固。天將救之，以慈衛之。 [1]


Every one under heaven says that our Way is greatly like folly. But it is just because it is great, that it seems like folly. As for things that do not seem like folly — well, there can be no question about their smallness!
Here are my three treasures. Guard and keep them! The first is pity; the second, frugality; the third, refusal to be 'foremost of all things under heaven'.
For only he that pities is truly able to be brave;
Only he that is frugal is able to be profuse.
Only he that refuses to be foremost of all things
Is truly able to become chief of all Ministers.
At present your bravery is not based on pity, nor your profusion on frugality, nor your vanguard on your rear; and this is death. But pity cannot fight without conquering or guard without saving. Heaven arms with pity those whom it would not see destroyed. (tr. Waley 1958:225)
Arthur Waley describes these Three Treasures as, "The three rules that formed the practical, political side of the author's teaching (1) abstention from aggressive war and capital punishment, (2) absolute simplicity of living, (3) refusal to assert active authority."
Chinese terminology[edit]
The first of the Three Treasures is ci (Chinese: 慈; pinyin: cí; Wade–Giles: tz'u; literally: "compassion, tenderness, love, mercy, kindness, gentleness, benevolence"), which is also a Classical Chinese term for "mother" (with "tender love, nurturing " semantic associations). Tao Te Ching chapters 18 and 19 parallel ci ("parental love") with xiao (孝 "filial love; filial piety"). Wing-tsit Chan (1963:219) believes "the first is the most important" of the Three Treasures, and compares ci with Confucianist ren (仁 "humaneness; benevolence"), which the Tao Te Ching (e.g., chapters 5 and 38) mocks.
The second is jian (Chinese: 儉; pinyin: jiǎn; Wade–Giles: chien; literally: "frugality, moderation, economy, restraint, be sparing"), a practice that the Tao Te Ching (e.g., chapter 59) praises. Ellen M. Chen (1989:209) believes jian is "organically connected" with the Taoist metaphor pu (樸 "uncarved wood; simplicity"), and "stands for the economy of nature that does not waste anything. When applied to the moral life it stands for the simplicity of desire."
The third treasure is a six-character phrase instead of a single word: Bugan wei tianxia xian 不敢為天下先 "not dare to be first/ahead in the world". Chen notes that

The third treasure, daring not be at the world's front, is the Taoist way to avoid premature death. To be at the world's front is to expose oneself, to render oneself vulnerable to the world's destructive forces, while to remain behind and to be humble is to allow oneself time to fully ripen and bear fruit. This is a treasure whose secret spring is the fear of losing one's life before one's time. This fear of death, out of a love for life, is indeed the key to Taoist wisdom. (1989:209)

In the Mawangdui Silk Texts version of the Tao Te Ching, this traditional "Three Treasures" chapter 67 is chapter 32, following the traditional last chapter (81, 31). Based upon this early silk manuscript, Robert G. Henricks (1989:160) concludes that "Chapters 67, 68, and 69 should be read together as a unit." Besides some graphic variants and phonetic loan characters, like ci (兹 "mat, this") for ci (慈 "compassion, love", clarified with the "heart radical" 心), the most significant difference with the received text is the addition of heng (恆, "constantly, always") with "I constantly have three …" (我恆有三) instead of "I have three …" (我有三).
English translations[edit]
The language of the Tao Te Ching is notoriously difficult to translate, as illustrated by the diverse English renditions of "Three Treasures" below.

Translations of the Three Treasures

Translation
Sanbao 三寶
Ci 慈
Jian 儉
Bugan wei tianxia xian 不敢為天下先


Balfour (1884:41)
three things which I regard as precious
compassion
frugality
not venturing to take precedence of others — modesty


Legge (1891:110)
three precious things
gentleness
economy
shrinking from taking precedence of others


Lin (1948:291)
Three Treasures
Love
Moderation
Never be the first in the world


Erkes (1950:117)
three jewels
kindness
thriftiness
not daring to play the first part in the empire


Waley (1934:225)
three treasures
pity
frugality
refusal to be 'foremost of all things under heaven'


Wu (1961:97)
Three Treasures
Mercy
Frugality
Not daring to be First in the World


Chan (1963:219)
three treasures
deep love
frugality
not to dare to be ahead of the world


Lau (1963:129)
three treasures
compassion
frugality
not daring to take the lead in the empire


English &amp; Feng (1972:n.p.)
three treasures which I hold and keep
mercy
economy
daring not to be ahead of others — humility


Wieger &amp; Bryce (1984:34)
three things
charity
simplicity
humility


Mitchell (1988:110)
three treasures which I preserve and treasure
compassion
frugality
daring not to be first in the world


Henricks (1989:38)
three treasures
compassion
frugality
not presuming to be at the forefront in the world


Chen (1989:208)
three treasures
motherly love
frugality
daring not be at the world's front


Mair (1990:41)
three treasures
compassion
frugality
not daring to be ahead of all under heaven


Muller (2004:n.p.)
three treasures
compassion
frugality
not daring to put myself ahead of everybody


A consensus translation of the Three Treasures could be: compassion or love, frugality or simplicity, and humility or modesty.
Other meanings[edit]
In addition to these Taoist "Three Treasures", Chinese sanbao can also refer to the Three Treasures in Traditional Chinese Medicine or the Three Jewels in Buddhism. Victor H. Mair (1990:110) notes that Chinese Buddhists chose the Taoist term sanbao to translate Sanskrit triratna or ratnatraya ("three jewels"), and "It is not at all strange that the Taoists would take over this widespread ancient Indian expression and use it for their own purposes."
Erik Zürcher, who studied influences of Buddhist doctrinal terms in Daoism, noted (1980:115) two later meanings of sanbao: Dao 道 "the Way", jing 經 "the Scriptures", and shi 師 "the Master" seems to be patterned after Buddhist usage; Tianbao jun 天寶君 "Lord of Celestial Treasure", Lingbao jun 靈寶君 "Lord of Numinous Treasure", and Shenbao jun 神寶君 "Lord of Divine Treasure" are the Sanyuan 三元 "Three Primes" of the Lingbao School.
References[edit]


^ 中國哲學書電子化計劃



Balfour, Frederic H., 1884, Taoist Texts: Ethical, Political, and Speculative, Trubner.
Chan, Wing-Tsit, 1963, The Way of Lao Tzu, Bobbs-Merrill.
Chen, Ellen M., 1989, The Te Tao Ching: A New Translation with Commentary, Paragon House.
English, Jane and Gia-Fu Feng, 1972, Tao Te Ching, Vintage Books.
Erkes, Eduard, 1950, Ho-Shang-Kung's Commentary on Lao-tse, Artibus Asiae.
Henricks, Robert G., 1989, Lao-tzu: Te-Tao Ching, A New Translation Based on the Recently Discovered Ma-wang-tui Texts, Ballantine.
Lau, D.C., 1963, Tao Te Ching, Penguin Books.
Legge, James, 1891, The Texts of Taoism, 2 vols (Sacred Books of China 39 and 40), Clarendon Press, 1891.
Lin Yutang, 1948, The Wisdom of Laotse, Random House.
Mair, Victor H., 1990, Tao Te Ching: The Classic Book of Integrity and the Way, by Lao Tzu; an entirely new translation based on the recently discovered Ma-wang-tui manuscripts, Bantam Books.
Mitchell, Stephen, 1988, Tao Te Ching, Harper Collins.
Muller, Charles, 2004, Daode jing.
Waley, Arthur, 1934, The Way and Its Power: A Study of the Tao Te Ching and its Place in Chinese Thought, Allen &amp; Unwin.
Wieger, Léon, 1984. Wisdom of the Daoist Masters, tr. Derek Bryce. Llanerch Enterprises.
Wu, John C.H., 1961, Tao Teh Ching, St. John's University Press.
Zürcher, Erik, 1980, "Buddhist Influence on Early Taoism: A Survey of Scriptural Evidence," T'oung Pao 66.1/3, pp.&#160;84–147.

External links[edit]

Tao Teh Ching 67, 29 translations, St. Xenophon Library








					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Three_Treasures_(Taoism)&amp;oldid=668240465"					
				Categories: Cultural listsChinese mythologyChinese philosophyChinese folk religionTaoismVirtueHidden categories: Articles lacking in-text citations from June 2015All articles lacking in-text citationsArticles containing Chinese-language text				
							
		
		
			