


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Tommaso Campanella
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				

Tommaso Campanella
OP



Tommaso Campanella depicted by Francesco Cozza



Born
(1568-09-05)5 September 1568
Stignano


Died
21 May 1639(1639-05-21) (aged&#160;70)


Nationality
Italian


Occupation
philosopher, theologian, astrologer, poet


Years&#160;active
1597=1634






Tommaso Campanella's house at Stilo






Former Dominican convent at Placanica


Tommaso Campanella OP (Italian:&#160;[tomˈmazo kampaˈnɛlla]; 5 September 1568 – 21 May 1639), baptized Giovanni Domenico Campanella, was a Dominican friar, Italian philosopher, theologian, astrologer, and poet.
Biography[edit]
Born in Stignano (in the county of Stilo) in the province of Reggio di Calabria in Calabria, southern Italy, Campanella was a child prodigy. Son of a poor and illiterate cobbler, he entered the Dominican Order before the age of fifteen, taking the name of fra' Tommaso in honour of Thomas Aquinas. He studied theology and philosophy with several masters.
Early on, he became disenchanted with the Aristotelian orthodoxy and attracted by the empiricism of Bernardino Telesio (1509–1588), who taught that knowledge is sensation and that all things in nature possess sensation. Campanella wrote his first work, Philosophia sensibus demonstrata ("Philosophy demonstrated by the senses"), published in 1592, in defence of Telesio.[1]
In Naples he was also initiated in astrology; astrological speculations would become a constant feature in his writings. Campanella's heterodox views, especially his opposition to the authority of Aristotle, brought him into conflict with the ecclesiastical authorities. Denounced to the Inquisition and cited before the Holy Office in Rome, he was confined in a convent until 1597.
After his liberation, Campanella returned to Calabria, where he was accused of leading a conspiracy against the Spanish rule in his hometown of Stilo. Campanella's aim was to establish a society based on the community of goods and wives, for on the basis of the prophecies of Joachim of Fiore and his own astrological observations, he foresaw the advent of the Age of the Spirit in the year 1600. Betrayed by two of his fellow conspirators, he was captured and incarcerated in Naples, where he was tortured on the rack.[2] He made a full confession and would have been put to death if he had not feigned madness and set his cell on fire. He was tortured further (a total of seven times) and then, crippled and ill, was sentenced to life imprisonment.[3][4][page&#160;needed]




Metaphysica, 1638


Campanella spent twenty-seven years imprisoned in Naples, often in the worst conditions. During his detention, he wrote his most important works: The Monarchy of Spain (1600), Political Aphorisms (1601), Atheismus triumphatus (Atheism Conquered, 1605–1607), Quod reminiscetur (1606?), Metaphysica (1609–1623), Theologia (1613–1624), and his most famous work, The City of the Sun (originally written in Italian in 1602; published in Latin in Frankfurt (1623) and later in Paris (1638).
He defended Galileo Galilei in his first trial with his work The Defense of Galileo (written in 1616, published in 1622).[5] During the time before his second trial, September 25, 1632, Campanella wrote to Galileo that:[6]

I felt great disgust upon understanding that theologians of the Congregation are to prohibit the Dialogues of your truly, and no person will be (in that council) who knows mathematics, or about recondite things. Be warned that while yours truly does state the thoroughly-forbidden opinion of the motion of the earth, you are not obliged to believe the reasons of those who contradict you. This rule is theological, and the validity is like that of the second Council of Nicaea which decreed that Angelorum imagines depingi debent, quam‘am vere corporei sunt (Images of angels must be depicted as they are in the flesh): while this decree is valid, the reason is not, since all scholars in our day accept that angels are incorporeal. There are other very reasons. I doubt violence to people who do not know. The present Pope likely has not made his mind in this case...but for my part, I will write and warn the Grand Duke of Tuscany, that if they put Dominicans, Jesuits, Theatines, and secular priests against your books in this council, they should also admit the Father Castelli and me.

Campanella was finally released from his prison in 1626, through Pope Urban VIII, who personally interceded on his behalf with Philip IV of Spain. Taken to Rome and held for a time by the Holy Office, Campanella was restored to full liberty in 1629. He lived for five years in Rome, where he was Urban's advisor in astrological matters.
In 1634, however, a new conspiracy in Calabria, led by one of his followers, threatened fresh troubles. With the aid of Cardinal Barberini and the French Ambassador de Noailles, he fled to France, where he was received at the court of Louis XIII with marked favour. Protected by Cardinal Richelieu and granted a liberal pension by the king, he spent the rest of his days in the convent of Saint-Honoré in Paris. His last work was a poem celebrating the birth of the future Louis XIV (Ecloga in portentosam Delphini nativitatem).
References[edit]


^ Chisholm 1911.
^ C. Dentice di Accadia, Tommaso Campanella, 1921, pp. 43-44 (in Italian)
^ Tommaso Campanella Biography
^ Norman Douglas, The Death of Western Culture
^ Apologia pro Galileo, Published in Latin by Impensis Godefridi Tampachii, Typis Erasmi Kemfferi in Frankfort, Germany.
^ Memorie y lettera inedita di Galileo Galilei, Second part, published in Modena, 1821, page 144. Il Padre Tommaso Campanella al Galileo. (Libreria Nelli) Roma 25 Settembre 1632. Con gran disgusto mio ho sentito che si fa Congregazione di Teologi irati, a proibire i Dialoghi di V. S.; e non ci entra persona. che sappia matematica, nè cose recondite. Avverta che mentre V.S. asserisce che fu ben proibita l’opinione del moto della terra, non è obbligata a creder che anche e ragioni de’ contraddicenti sien buone. Questa è regola teologica; e si prova perchè nel Concilio Niceno secondo fu decretato che Angelorum imagines depingi debent, quom‘am vere corporei sunt: il decreto è valido, e non la ragione; giacchè tutti i scolastici dicono che gli Angeli sono incorporei a tempo nostro. Ci son altri fondamenti assai. Dubito di violenza di gente che non sa. Il Padre Nostro fa fracassi contra, e dice ex ora Papa: ma tu non è informato, nè può pensare a questo. V. S. per mio‘ avviso faccia scriver dal Gran Duca, che siccome mettono Domenicani e Gesuiti e Teatini e Preti secolari in questa Congregazione contro i vostri libri, ammettano anche il Padre Castelli e me.



Attributipon


&#160;This article&#160;incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:&#160;Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Campanella, Tommaso". Encyclopædia Britannica 5 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.&#160;

External links[edit]



Wikiquote has quotations related to: Tommaso Campanella





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Tommaso Campanella.



Tommaso Campanella entry by Germana Ernst in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
Works by Tommaso Campanella at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about Tommaso Campanella at Internet Archive
Works by Tommaso Campanella at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
Peter Forshaw (2010) 'Astrology, Ritual and Revolution in the Works of Tommaso Campanella (1568-1639)'.
Works in English translations

The City of the Sun; A Poetical Dialogue between a Grandmaster of the Knights Hospitallers and a Genoese Sea-Captain, his guest. Translated to English by editor Henry Morley, Project Gutenberg.
City of the Sun (text derived from Ideal Commonwealths, P.F. Collier &amp; Son, New York. 1901. Displayed by eBooks@Adelaide University of Adelaide Library, South Australia)
Ideal Commonwealths; Contains excerpts from City of the Sun and short biography, by Editor: Henry Morley, Professor of English Literature at University College, London; Fifth Edition, 1890, Project Gutenberg.
Sonnets of Michelangelo Buonarrotti and Tommaso Campanella, 1878; translated into Rhymed English, by John Addington Symonds, author of Renaissance in Italy.











v
t
e


History of Catholic theology









Theologians
Teachings
Heresies








General history



History of the Catholic Church
Early Christianity
History of the Papacy
Ecumenical Councils
Timeline of the Catholic Church
History of Christianity
History of Christian theology











Church beginnings



Paul
Clement of Rome
First Epistle of Clement
Didache
Ignatius of Antioch
Polycarp
Epistle of Barnabas
Shepherd of Hermas
Justin Martyr
Epistle to Diognetus
Irenaeus
Montanism
Tertullian
Origen
Antipope Novatian
Cyprian









Constantine to
Pope Gregory I




Eusebius
Athanasius of Alexandria
Arianism
Pelagianism
Nestorianism
Monophysitism
Ephrem the Syrian
Hilary of Poitiers
Cyril of Jerusalem
Basil of Caesarea
Gregory Nazianzus
Gregory of Nyssa
Ambrose
John Chrysostom
Jerome
Augustine of Hippo
John Cassian
Cyril of Alexandria
Peter Chrysologus
Pope Leo I
Boethius
Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite
Pope Gregory I








Early Middle Ages



Isidore of Seville
Maximus the Confessor
Monothelitism
Ecthesis
Bede
John of Damascus
Iconoclasm
Transubstantiation dispute
Predestination disputes
Paulinus II of Aquileia
Alcuin
Rabanus Maurus
Paschasius Radbertus
John Scotus Eriugena








High Middle Ages



Roscellinus
Gregory of Narek
Berengar of Tours
Peter Damian
Anselm of Canterbury
Joachim of Fiore
Peter Abelard
Decretum Gratiani
Bernard of Clairvaux
Peter Lombard
Anselm of Laon
Hildegard of Bingen
Hugh of Saint Victor
Dominic de Guzmán
Robert Grosseteste
Francis of Assisi
Anthony of Padua
Bonaventure
Albertus Magnus
Thomas Aquinas
Thomism
Roger Bacon








Mysticism and reforms



Ramon Llull
Duns Scotus
Dante Alighieri
William of Ockham
Richard Rolle
Catherine of Siena
Brigit of Sweden
Meister Eckhart
Johannes Tauler
Walter Hilton
The Cloud of Unknowing
Heinrich Seuse
Geert Groote
Devotio Moderna
Julian of Norwich
Thomas à Kempis
Nicholas of Kues
Marsilio Ficino
Girolamo Savonarola
Giovanni Pico della Mirandola









Protestant Reformation
Counter-Reformation




Desiderius Erasmus
Thomas Cajetan
Thomas More
John Fisher
Johann Eck
Francisco de Vitoria
Ignatius of Loyola
Francisco de Osuna
John of Avila
Francis Xavier
Teresa of Ávila
Luis de León
John of the Cross
Petrus Canisius
Luis de Molina
Molinism
Robert Bellarmine
Francisco Suárez
Lawrence of Brindisi
Francis de Sales









Baroque Period to
French Revolution




Tommaso Campanella
Pierre de Bérulle
Mary of Jesus of Ágreda
Jean-Jacques Olier
Louis Thomassin
Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet
François Fénelon
Cornelius Jansen
Jansenism
Blaise Pascal
Nicolas Malebranche
Giambattista Vico
Alphonsus Liguori
Louis de Montfort
Maria Gaetana Agnesi
Alfonso Muzzarelli
Johann Michael Sailer
Clemens Maria Hofbauer








19th century



Joseph Görres
Ignaz von Döllinger
John Henry Newman
Jaime Balmes
Gaetano Sanseverino
Giovanni Maria Cornoldi
Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler
Giuseppe Pecci
Joseph Hergenröther
Tommaso Maria Zigliara
Modernism
Léon Bloy
Friedrich von Hügel
George Tyrrell
Maurice Blondel
Thérèse of Lisieux








20th–21st century



G. K. Chesterton
Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange
Joseph Maréchal
Pierre Teilhard de Chardin
Jacques Maritain
Étienne Gilson
Gabriel Marcel
Marie-Dominique Chenu
Romano Guardini
Edith Stein
Henri de Lubac
Gabriel Roschini
Josemaría Escrivá
Adrienne von Speyr
Karl Rahner
Yves Congar
Bernard Lonergan
Emmanuel Mounier
Jean Daniélou
Hans Urs von Balthasar
Edward Schillebeeckx
Thomas Merton
Raimondo Spiazzi
René Girard
Pope Benedict XVI
Johann Baptist Metz
Henri Nouwen
Walter Kasper
Jean-Luc Marion
Tomáš Halík











Catholicism portal
Pope portal













Authority control



WorldCat
VIAF: 7387920
LCCN: n79059383
ISNI: 0000 0001 2098 8843
GND: 11863819X
SELIBR: 180973
SUDOC: 026764261
BNF: cb11894959n (data)
NLA: 35025126
NDL: 00435159
NKC: jn19990001311
ICCU: IT\ICCU\CFIV\003037
BNE: XX1165951















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tommaso_Campanella&amp;oldid=691317526"					
				Categories: 1568 births1639 deathsPeople from the Province of Reggio CalabriaItalian philosophersItalian theologiansItalian male writersItalian astrologersItalian DominicansUtopistsPeople from the Vallata dello Stilaro Allaro16th-century writers17th-century Italian writers17th-century philosophersItalian expatriates in FranceCritics of atheismHidden categories: Articles with hCardsWikipedia articles needing page number citations from February 2013Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource referenceWikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia BritannicaCommons category with local link same as on WikidataWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiersWikipedia articles with SBN identifiers				
							
		
		
			