


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Vaisheshika
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								  (Redirected from Vaisesika)
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				

Part of a series on


Hindu philosophy







Nyaya


Akṣapāda Gotama
Jayanta Bhatta
Raghunatha Siromani








Vaisheshika


Kanada








Samkhya


Kapila








Yoga


Patanjali
Gorakshanath
Gautama Buddha
Mahavatar Babaji
Maharishi Mahesh Yogi
K. Pattabhi Jois
Prabhat Ranjan Sarkar
Baba Hari Dass
Vishuddhananda Paramahansa
Nigamananda Paramahansa
Sri Aurobindo
Trailanga
Lahiri Mahasaya
Sai Baba of Shirdi
Sivananda Saraswati
Swami Vivekananda
Tirumalai Krishnamacharya
Paramahansa Yogananda








Mimamsa


Jaimini
Kumārila Bhaṭṭa
Prabhākara








Vedanta



Schools of Vedanta





Advaita Vedanta
Vishishtadvaita
Dvaita
Dvaitadvaita
Achintya Bheda Abheda
Bhedabheda





Advaita Vedanta





Gaudapada
Adi Shankara
Vācaspati Miśra
Vidyaranya
Sadananda
Madhusūdana Sarasvatī
Ramakrishna
Vivekananda
Ramana Maharshi
Siddharudha Swami
Narayana Guru
Sivananda Saraswati
Dayananda Saraswati (Arsha Vidya)
Chinmayananda Saraswati
Nisargadatta Maharaj
Dayananda Saraswati
Nigamananda Paramahansa





Vishishtadvaita





Nammalvar
Alvars
Yamunacharya
Ramanuja
Vedanta Desika
Pillai Lokacharya
Manavala Mamunigal





Dvaita





Madhvacharya
Jayatirtha
Vyasatirtha
Sripadaraja
Vadirajatirtha
Raghavendra Swami





Achintya Bheda Abheda





Chaitanya Mahaprabhu
Jiva Goswami
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati
Prabhupada





Dvaitadvaita




Nimbarka




Shuddhadvaita




Vallabha Acharya











Shaivism - Tantra



Schools of Shaivism/Tantra





Pratyabhijña
Pashupata
Siddhanta





Persons





Abhinavagupta
Nigamananda Paramahansa
Ramprasad Sen
Kamalakanta Bhattacharya
Bamakhepa
Anandamayi Ma
Ramana Maharshi












Sant Mat (Bhakti movement)


Purandara Dasa
Kanaka Dasa
Jagannatha Dasa
Vijaya Dasa
Gopala Dasa
Basava
Allama Prabhu
Akka Mahadevi
Jñāneśvar
Sankardev
Jayadeva
Namdev
Ramananda
Kabir
Tulsidas
Ravidas
Meera
Narsinh Mehta
Surdas
Samarth Ramdas
Tukaram
Eknath
Janabai
Brahmanand Swami
Tukdoji Maharaj
Tyagaraja
Annamacharya
Kancherla Gopanna
Nayanars
Muthuswami Dikshitar
Syama Sastri








Academic philosophy


Ananda Coomaraswamy
Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan








Hindu philosophy
Hindu philosophical concepts
Hindu philosophers
Indian philosophy







v
t
e





Vaisheshika or Vaiśeṣika (Sanskrit: वैशेषिक) is one of the six orthodox schools of Hinduism (Vedic systems) from ancient India. In its early stages, the Vaiśeṣika was an independent philosophy with its own metaphysics, epistemology, logic, ethics, and soteriology.[1] Over time, the Vaiśeṣika system became similar in its philosophical procedures, ethical conclusions and soteriology to the Nyāya school of Hinduism, but retained its difference in epistemology and metaphysics.
The epistemology of Vaiśeṣika school of Hinduism, like Buddhism, accepted only two reliable means to knowledge - perception and inference.[2][3] Vaiśeṣika school and Buddhism both consider their respective scriptures as indisputable and valid means to knowledge, the difference being that the scriptures held to be a valid and reliable source by Vaiśeṣikas were the Vedas.
Vaisheshika school is known for its insights in naturalism,[4] and it is a form of atomism in natural philosophy.[5] It postulated that all objects in the physical universe are reducible to paramāṇu (atoms), and one's experiences are derived from the interplay of substance (a function of atoms, their number and their spatial arrangements), quality, activity, commonness, particularity and inherence.[6] Knowledge and liberation was achievable by complete understanding of the world of experience, according to Vaiśeṣika school of Hinduism.[6]
Vaiśeṣika darshana was founded by Kaṇāda Kashyapa around the 2nd century BC.[6]



Contents


1 Overview
2 Epistemology

2.1 Syllogism


3 Literature of Vaisheshika
4 The Categories or Padārtha
5 The atomic theory
6 Later developments
7 Views by the Vedanta School
8 See also
9 Notes
10 References
11 Further reading
12 External links



Overview[edit]
Although the Vaisheshika system developed independently from the Nyaya school of Hinduism, the two became similar and are often studied together. In its classical form, however, the Vaishesika school differed from the Nyaya in one crucial respect: where Nyaya accepted four sources of valid knowledge, the Vaishesika accepted only two.[2][3]
The epistemology of Vaiśeṣika school of Hinduism accepted only two reliable means to knowledge - perception and inference.[2]
Vaisheshika espouses a form of atomism, that the reality is composed of four substances (earth, water, air, fire). Each of these four are of two types, explains Ganeri,[5] atomic (paramāṇu) and composite. An atom is that which is indestructible (anitya), indivisible, and has a special kind of dimension, called “small” (aṇu). A composite is that which is divisible into atoms. Whatever human beings perceive is composite, and even the smallest perceptible thing, namely, a fleck of dust, has parts, which are therefore invisible.[5] The Vaiśeṣikas visualized the smallest composite thing as a “triad” (tryaṇuka) with three parts, each part with a “dyad” (dyaṇuka). Vaiśeṣikas believed that a dyad has two parts, each of which is an atom. Size, form, truths and everything that human beings experience as a whole is a function of atoms, their number and their spatial arrangements.
Vaisheshika postulated that what one experiences is derived from dravya (substance: a function of atoms, their number and their spatial arrangements), guna (quality), karma (activity), samanya (commonness), vishesha (particularity) and samavaya (inherence, inseparable connectedness of everything).[6][7]
Epistemology[edit]
Hinduism identifies six Pramāṇas as epistemically reliable means to accurate knowledge and to truths:[8] Pratyakṣa (perception), Anumāna (inference), Upamāna (comparison and analogy), Arthāpatti (postulation, derivation from circumstances), Anupalabdi (non-perception, negative/cognitive proof) and Śabda (word, testimony of past or present reliable experts).[2][3][9] Of these Vaiśeṣika epistemology considered only pratyakṣa (perception) and anumāna (inference) as reliable means of valid knowledge.[10] Nyaya school, related to Vaiśeṣika, accepts four out of these six.[2]

Pratyakṣa (प्रत्यक्ष) means perception. It is of two types: external and internal. External perception is described as that arising from the interaction of five senses and worldly objects, while internal perception is described by this school as that of inner sense, the mind.[11][12] The ancient and medieval texts of Hinduism identify four requirements for correct perception:[13] Indriyarthasannikarsa (direct experience by one's sensory organ(s) with the object, whatever is being studied), Avyapadesya (non-verbal; correct perception is not through hearsay, according to ancient Indian scholars, where one's sensory organ relies on accepting or rejecting someone else's perception), Avyabhicara (does not wander; correct perception does not change, nor is it the result of deception because one's sensory organ or means of observation is drifting, defective, suspect) and Vyavasayatmaka (definite; correct perception excludes judgments of doubt, either because of one's failure to observe all the details, or because one is mixing inference with observation and observing what one wants to observe, or not observing what one does not want to observe).[13] Some ancient scholars proposed "unusual perception" as pramāṇa and called it internal perception, a proposal contested by other Indian scholars. The internal perception concepts included pratibha (intuition), samanyalaksanapratyaksa (a form of induction from perceived specifics to a universal), and jnanalaksanapratyaksa (a form of perception of prior processes and previous states of a 'topic of study' by observing its current state).[14] Further, the texts considered and refined rules of accepting uncertain knowledge from Pratyakṣa-pranama, so as to contrast nirnaya (definite judgment, conclusion) from anadhyavasaya (indefinite judgment).[15]


Anumāna (अनुमान) means inference. It is described as reaching a new conclusion and truth from one or more observations and previous truths by applying reason.[16] Observing smoke and inferring fire is an example of Anumana.[11] In all except one Hindu philosophies,[17] this is a valid and useful means to knowledge. The method of inference is explained by Indian texts as consisting of three parts: pratijna (hypothesis), hetu (a reason), and drshtanta (examples).[18] The hypothesis must further be broken down into two parts, state the ancient Indian scholars: sadhya (that idea which needs to proven or disproven) and paksha (the object on which the sadhya is predicated). The inference is conditionally true if sapaksha (positive examples as evidence) are present, and if vipaksha (negative examples as counter-evidence) are absent. For rigor, the Indian philosophies also state further epistemic steps. For example, they demand Vyapti - the requirement that the hetu (reason) must necessarily and separately account for the inference in "all" cases, in both sapaksha and vipaksha.[18][19] A conditionally proven hypothesis is called a nigamana (conclusion).[20]

Syllogism[edit]
The syllogism of the Vaiśeṣika school was similar to that of the Nyāya school of Hinduism, but the names given by Praśastapāda to the 5 members of syllogism are different.[21]
Literature of Vaisheshika[edit]
The earliest systematic exposition of the Vaisheshika is found in the Vaiśeṣika Sūtra of Kaṇāda (or Kaṇabhaksha). This treatise is divided into ten books. The two commentaries on the Vaiśeṣika Sūtra, Rāvaṇabhāṣya and Bhāradvājavṛtti are no more extant. Praśastapāda’s Padārthadharmasaṁgraha (c. 4th century) is the next important work of this school. Though commonly known as bhāṣya of Vaiśeṣika Sūtra, this treatise is basically an independent work on the subject. The next Vaisheshika treatise, Candra’s Daśapadārthaśāstra (648) based on Praśastapāda’s treatise is available only in Chinese translation. The earliest commentary available on Praśastapāda’s treatise is Vyomaśiva’s Vyomavatī (8th century). The other three commentaries are Śridhara’s Nyāyakandalī (991), Udayana’s Kiranāvali (10th century) and Śrivatsa’s Līlāvatī (11th century). Śivāditya’s Saptapadārthī which also belongs to the same period, presents the Nyāya and the Vaiśeṣika principles as a part of one whole. Śaṁkara Miśra’s Upaskāra on Vaiśeṣika Sūtra is also an important work.[22]
The Categories or Padārtha[edit]
According to the Vaisheshika school, all things which exist, which can be cognised, and which can be named are padārthas (literal meaning: the meaning of a word), the objects of experience. All objects of experience can be classified into six categories, dravya (substance), guṇa (quality), karma (activity), sāmānya (generality), viśeṣa (particularity) and samavāya (inherence). Later Vaiśeṣikas (Śrīdhara and Udayana and Śivāditya) added one more category abhava (non-existence). The first three categories are defined as artha (which can perceived) and they have real objective existence. The last three categories are defined as budhyapekṣam (product of intellectual discrimination) and they are logical categories.[23]
1.Dravya (substance): The substances are conceived as 9 in number. They are, pṛthvī (earth), ap (water), tejas (fire), vāyu (air), ākaśa (ether), kāla (time), dik (space), ātman (self or soul) and manas (mind). The first five are called bhūtas, the substances having some specific qualities so that they could be perceived by one or the other external senses.[24]
2.Guṇa (quality): The Vaiśeṣika Sūtra mentions 17 guṇas (qualities), to which Praśastapāda added another 7. While a substance is capable of existing independently by itself, a guṇa(quality) cannot exist so. The original 17 guṇas (qualities) are, rūpa (colour), rasa (taste), gandha (smell), sparśa (touch), saṁkhyā (number), parimāṇa (size/dimension/quantity), pṛthaktva (individuality), saṁyoga (conjunction/accompaniments), vibhāga (disjunction), paratva (priority), aparatva (posteriority), buddhi (knowledge), sukha (pleasure), duḥkha (pain), icchā (desire), dveṣa (aversion) and prayatna (effort). To these Praśastapāda added gurutva (heaviness), dravatva (fluidity), sneha (viscosity), dharma (merit), adharma (demerit), śabda (sound) and saṁskāra (faculty).[25]
3.Karma (activity): The karmas (activities) like guṇas (qualities) have no separate existence, they belong to the substances. But while a quality is a permanent feature of a substance, an activity is a transient one. Ākāśa (ether), kāla (time), dik (space) and ātman (self), though substances, are devoid of karma (activity).[26]
4.Sāmānya (generality): Since there are plurality of substances, there will be relations among them. When a property is found common to many substances, it is called sāmānya.[27]
5.Viśeṣa (particularity): By means of viśeṣa, we are able to perceive substances as different from one another. As the ultimate atoms are innumerable so are the viśeṣas.[28]
6.Samavāya (inherence): Kaṇāda defined samavāya as the relation between the cause and the effect. Praśastapāda defined it as the relationship existing between the substances that are inseparable, standing to one another in the relation of the container and the contained. The relation of samavāya is not perceivable but only inferable from the inseparable connection of the substances.[29]
The atomic theory[edit]
The early Vaiśeṣika texts presented the following syllogism to prove that all objects i.e. the four bhūtas, pṛthvī (earth), ap (water), tejas (fire) and vāyu (air) are made of indivisible paramāṇus (atoms): Assume that the matter is not made of indivisible atoms, and that it is continuous. Take a stone. One can divide this up into infinitely many pieces (since matter is continuous). Now, the Himalayan mountain range also has infinitely many pieces, so one may build another Himalayan mountain range with the infinite number of pieces that one has. One begins with a stone and ends up with the Himalayas, which is a paradox - so the original assumption that matter is continuous must be wrong, and so all objects must be made up of a finite number of paramāṇus (atoms).
According to the Vaiśeṣika school, the trasareṇu (dust particles visible in the sunbeam coming through a small window hole) are the smallest mahat (perceivable) particles and defined as tryaṇukas (triads). These are made of three parts, each of which are defined as dvyaṇuka (dyad). The dvyaṇukas are conceived as made of two parts, each of which are defined as paramāṇu (atom). The paramāṇus (atoms) are indivisible and eternal, they can neither be created nor destroyed.[30] Each paramāṇu (atom) possesses its own distinct viśeṣa (individuality).[31]
The measure of the partless atoms is known as parimaṇḍala parimāṇa. It is eternal and it cannot generate the measure of any other substance. Its measure is its own absolutely.[32]
Later developments[edit]
Over the centuries, the school became closely identified with the Nyaya school of Indian philosophy, as nyāya-vaiśeṣika.
The school suffered a natural decline in India after the 15th century.[citation needed]
Views by the Vedanta School[edit]





This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2015)


The Vaisheshikas say that the visible universe is created from an original stock of atoms (janim asataḥ). As Kaṇāda's Vaiśeṣika Sūtra (7.1.26) states, nityaṃ parimaṇḍalam (that which is of the smallest size, the atom, is eternal), he and his followers also postulate eternality for other, nonatomic entities, including the souls who become embodied, and even a Supreme Soul. But in Vaiśeṣika cosmology the souls and the Supersoul play only token roles in the atomic production of the universe. The Brahma Sutra (2.2.12) says ubhayathāpi na karmatas tad-abhavaḥ. According to this sūtra, one cannot claim that, at the time of creation, atoms first combine together because they are impelled by some karmic impulse adhering in the atoms themselves, since atoms by themselves, in their primeval state before combining into complex objects, have no ethical responsibility that might lead them to acquire pious and sinful reactions. Nor can the initial combination of atoms be explained as a result of the residual karma of the living entities who lie dormant prior to creation, since these reactions are each jiva's own and cannot be transferred from them even to other jīvas, what to speak of inert atoms.
See also[edit]

Darshanas
Hindu philosophy
Hinduism
Nyaya (philosophy)
Padārtha
Vaiśeṣika Sūtra
Atomism
Naturalism (philosophy)

Notes[edit]


^ Amita Chatterjee (2011), Nyāya-vaiśeṣika Philosophy, The Oxford Handbook of World Philosophy, doi:10.1093/oxfordhb/9780195328998.003.0012
^ a b c d e DPS Bhawuk (2011), Spirituality and Indian Psychology (Editor: Anthony Marsella), Springer, ISBN 978-1-4419-8109-7, page 172
^ a b c

Eliott Deutsche (2000), in Philosophy of Religion&#160;: Indian Philosophy Vol 4 (Editor: Roy Perrett), Routledge, ISBN 978-0815336112, pages 245-248;
John A. Grimes, A Concise Dictionary of Indian Philosophy: Sanskrit Terms Defined in English, State University of New York Press, ISBN 978-0791430675, page 238


^ Dale Riepe (1996), Naturalistic Tradition in Indian Thought, ISBN 978-8120812932, pages 227-246
^ a b c Analytical philosophy in early modern India J Ganeri, Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
^ a b c d Oliver Leaman, Key Concepts in Eastern Philosophy. Routledge, ISBN 978-0415173629, 1999, page 269.
^ M Hiriyanna (1993), Outlines of Indian Philosophy, Motilal Banarsidass, ISBN 978-8120810860, pages 228-237
^ P Bilimoria (1993), Pramāṇa epistemology: Some recent developments, in Asian philosophy - Volume 7 (Editor: G Floistad), Springer, ISBN 978-94-010-5107-1, pages 137-154
^ Gavin Flood, An Introduction to Hinduism, Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0521438780, page 225
^ Chattopadhyaya 1986, p.&#160;170
^ a b MM Kamal (1998), The Epistemology of the Carvaka Philosophy, Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies, 46(2): 13-16
^ B Matilal (1992), Perception: An Essay in Indian Theories of Knowledge, Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0198239765
^ a b Karl Potter (1977), Meaning and Truth, in Encyclopedia of Indian Philosophies, Volume 2, Princeton University Press, Reprinted in 1995 by Motilal Banarsidass, ISBN 81-208-0309-4, pages 160-168
^ Karl Potter (1977), Meaning and Truth, in Encyclopedia of Indian Philosophies, Volume 2, Princeton University Press, Reprinted in 1995 by Motilal Banarsidass, ISBN 81-208-0309-4, pages 168-169
^ Karl Potter (1977), Meaning and Truth, in Encyclopedia of Indian Philosophies, Volume 2, Princeton University Press, Reprinted in 1995 by Motilal Banarsidass, ISBN 81-208-0309-4, pages 170-172
^ W Halbfass (1991), Tradition and Reflection, State University of New York Press, ISBN 0-7914-0362-9, page 26-27
^ Carvaka school is the exception
^ a b James Lochtefeld, "Anumana" in The Illustrated Encyclopedia of Hinduism, Vol. 1: A-M, Rosen Publishing. ISBN 0-8239-2287-1, page 46-47
^ Karl Potter (2002), Presuppositions of India's Philosophies, Motilal Banarsidass, ISBN 81-208-0779-0
^ Monier Williams (1893), Indian Wisdom - Religious, Philosophical and Ethical Doctrines of the Hindus, Luzac &amp; Co, London, page 61
^ Radhakrishnan 2006, p.&#160;75ff
^ Radhakrishnan 2006, pp.&#160;180–81
^ Radhakrishnan 2006, pp.&#160;183–86
^ Chattopadhyaya 1986, p.&#160;169
^ Radhakrishnan 2006, p.&#160;204
^ Radhakrishnan 2006, pp.&#160;208–09
^ Radhakrishnan 2006, p.&#160;209
^ Radhakrishnan 2006, p.&#160;215
^ Radhakrishnan 2006, pp.&#160;216–19
^ Chattopadhyaya 1986, pp.&#160;169–70
^ Radhakrishnan 2006, p.&#160;202
^ Dasgupta 1975, p.&#160;314


References[edit]

Chattopadhyaya, D. (1986), Indian Philosophy: A Popular Introduction, People’s Publishing House, New Delhi, ISBN&#160;81-7007-023-6&#160;.
Dasgupta, Surendranath (1975), A History of Indian Philosophy, Vol. I, Motilal Banarsidass, Delhi, ISBN 978-81-208-0412-8&#160;.


Radhakrishnan, S. (2006), Indian Philosophy, Vol. II, Oxford University Press, New Delhi, ISBN&#160;0-19-563820-4&#160;.

Further reading[edit]

Bimal Matilal (1977), A History of Indian Literature - Nyāya-Vaiśeṣika, Otto Harrassowitz Verlag, ISBN 978-3447018074, OCLC&#160;489575550
Gopi Kaviraj (1961), Gleanings from the history and bibliography of the Nyaya-Vaisesika literature, Indian Studies: Past &amp; Present, Volume 2, Number 4, OCLC&#160;24469380

External links[edit]

A summary of Vaisheshika physics
Shastra Nethralaya - Vaisheshika
GRETIL e-text of the Vaiśeṣika Sūtras









v
t
e


Indian philosophy






Topics



Atheism
Atomism
Idealism
Logic
Monotheism
Vedic philosophy








Āstika



Samkhya
Nyaya
Vaisheshika
Yoga
Mīmāṃsā
Vedanta

Acintya bheda abheda
Advaita
Bhedabheda
Dvaita
Dvaitadvaita
Shuddhadvaita
Vishishtadvaita


Shaiva

Pratyabhijña
Pashupata Shaivism
Shaiva Siddhanta










Nāstika



Cārvāka
Ājīvika
Jain

Anekantavada
Syādvāda


Buddhist

Śūnyatā
Madhyamaka
Yogacara
Sautrāntika
Svatantrika










Texts



Vedas
Vedangas
Vedantasara
Upanishads

primary
Whole list...


Bhagavad Gita
Buddhist texts
Jain Agamas
Yoga Sutras of Patanjali
Nyāya Sūtras
Vaiśeṣika Sūtra
Samkhyapravachana Sutra
Purva Mimamsa Sutras
Brahma Sutra
Panchadasi
Shiva Sutras
Arthashastra
Abhinavabharati
Yoga Vasistha
More...








Philosophers



Avatsara
Yajnavalkya
Gargi Vachaknavi
Patanjali
Kanada
Kapila
Brihadratha Ikshvaku
Jaimini
Vyasa
Chanakya
Akshapada Gotama
Nagarjuna
Padmasambhava
Vasubandhu
Gaudapada
Adi Shankara
Swami Vivekananda
Dayananda Saraswati
Ramanuja
Vedanta Desika
Raikva
Sadananda
Sakayanya
Satyakama Jabala
Madhvacharya
Vidyaranya
More...








Concepts



Abhava
Abhasavada
Abheda
Adarsana
Advaita
Aham
Aishvarya
Akrodha
Aksara
Anatta
Ananta
Anavastha
Anupalabdhi
Apauruṣheyā
Asiddhatva
Asatkalpa
Ātman
Avyakta
Brahman
Brahmi sthiti
Bhuman
Bhumika
Chaitanya
Chidabhasa
Cittabhumi
Devatas
Dharma
Dhi
Dravya
Dhrti
Ekagrata
Guṇa
Hitā
Idam
Ikshana
Ishvaratva
Jivatva
Karma
Kasaya
Kshetrajna
Lakshana
Mithyatva
Mokṣa
Nididhyasana
Nirvāṇa
Padārtha
Paramatman
Paramananda
Parameshashakti
Parinama-vada
Pradhana
Prajna
Prakṛti
Pratibimbavada
Pratītyasamutpāda
Puruṣa
Rājamaṇḍala
Ṛta
Sakshi
Samadhi
Saṃsāra
Sankalpa
Satya
Satkaryavada
Shabda Brahman
Sphoṭa
Sthiti
Śūnyatā
Sutram
Svātantrya
Iccha-mrityu
Syādvāda
Taijasa
Tajjalan
Tanmatra
Tyāga
Uparati
Upekkhā
Utsaha
Vivartavada
Viraj
Yoga
More...















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Vaisheshika&amp;oldid=679403064"					
				Categories: Ancient Indian philosophyĀstikaAtomismEpistemologyHindu philosophyLogicMetaphysicsHidden categories: EngvarB from April 2015Use dmy dates from April 2015Articles containing Sanskrit-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from January 2015Articles needing additional references from January 2015All articles needing additional references				
							
		
		
			