


		
		
		
			

							
						

			Validity
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				For other uses, see Validity (disambiguation).
In logic, an argument is valid if and only if it takes a form that makes it impossible for the premises to be true and the conclusion nevertheless to be false.[1] It is not required that a valid argument have premises that are actually true,[2] but to have premises that, if they were true, would guarantee the truth of the argument's conclusion. A formula is valid if and only if it is true under every interpretation, and an argument form (or schema) is valid if and only if every argument of that logical form is valid.



Contents


1 Validity of arguments
2 Valid formula
3 Validity of statements
4 Validity and soundness
5 Satisfiability and validity
6 Preservation
7 n-Validity

7.1 ω-Validity


8 See also
9 References
10 External links



Validity of arguments[edit]
An argument is valid if and only if the truth of its premises entails the truth of its conclusion and each step, sub-argument, or logical operation in the argument is valid. Under such conditions it would be self-contradictory to affirm the premises and deny the conclusion. The corresponding conditional of a valid argument is a logical truth and the negation of its corresponding conditional is a contradiction. The conclusion is a logical consequence of its premises.
An argument that is not valid is said to be "invalid".
An example of a valid argument is given by the following well-known syllogism:

All men are mortal.
Socrates is a man.
Therefore, Socrates is mortal.

What makes this a valid argument is not that it has true premises and a true conclusion, but the logical necessity of the conclusion, given the two premises. The argument would be just as valid were the premises and conclusion false. The following argument is of the same logical form but with false premises and a false conclusion, and it is equally valid:

All cups are green.
Socrates is a cup.
Therefore, Socrates is green.

No matter how the universe might be constructed, it could never be the case that these arguments should turn out to have simultaneously true premises but a false conclusion. The above arguments may be contrasted with the following invalid one:

All men are immortal.
Socrates is a man.
Therefore, Socrates is mortal.

In this case, the conclusion contradicts the deductive logic of the preceding premises, rather than deriving from it. Therefore, the argument is logically 'invalid', even though the conclusion could be considered 'true' in general terms. The premise 'All men are immortal' would likewise be deemed false outside of the framework of classical logic. However, within that system 'true' and 'false' essentially function more like mathematical states such as binary 1s and 0s than the philosophical concepts normally associated with those terms.
A standard view is that whether an argument is valid is a matter of the argument's logical form. Many techniques are employed by logicians to represent an argument's logical form. A simple example, applied to two of the above illustrations, is the following: Let the letters 'P', 'Q', and 'S' stand, respectively, for the set of men, the set of mortals, and Socrates. Using these symbols, the first argument may be abbreviated as:

All P are Q.
S is a P.
Therefore, S is a Q.

Similarly, the third argument becomes:

All P are not Q.
S is a P.
Therefore, S is a Q.

An argument is termed formally valid if it has structural self-consistency, i.e. if when the operands between premises are all true the derived conclusion is always also true. In the third example, the initial premises cannot logically result in the conclusion and is therefore categorized as an invalid argument.
Valid formula[edit]
Main article: Well-formed formula
A formula of a formal language is a valid formula if and only if it is true under every possible interpretation of the language. In propositional logic, they are tautologies.
Validity of statements[edit]
A statement can be called valid, i.e. logical truth, if it is true in all interpretations.
Validity and soundness[edit]
Validity of deduction is not affected by the truth of the premise or the truth of the conclusion. The following deduction is perfectly valid:

All animals live on Mars.
All humans are animals.
Therefore, all humans live on Mars.

The problem with the argument is that it is not sound. In order for a deductive argument to be sound, the deduction must be valid and all the premises true.
Satisfiability and validity[edit]
Main article: Satisfiability
Model theory analyzes formulae with respect to particular classes of interpretation in suitable mathematical structures. On this reading, formula is valid if all such interpretations make it true. An inference is valid if all interpretations that validate the premises validate the conclusion. This is known as semantic validity.[3]
Preservation[edit]
In truth-preserving validity, the interpretation under which all variables are assigned a truth value of 'true' produces a truth value of 'true'.
In a false-preserving validity, the interpretation under which all variables are assigned a truth value of 'false' produces a truth value of 'false'.[4]




Preservation properties
Logical connective sentences


True and false preserving:
Proposition &#160;•  Logical conjunction (AND,  ) &#160;•  Logical disjunction (OR,  )


True preserving only:
Tautology (  ) &#160;•  Biconditional (XNOR,  ) &#160;•  Implication (  ) &#160;•  Converse implication (  )


False preserving only:
Contradiction (  )&#160;•  Exclusive disjunction (XOR,  ) &#160;•  Nonimplication (  ) &#160;•  Converse nonimplication (  )


Non-preserving:
Negation (  ) &#160;•  Alternative denial (NAND,  )&#160;• Joint denial (NOR,  )




n-Validity[edit]
A formula A of a first order language  is n-valid iff it is true for every interpretation of  that has a domain of exactly n members.
ω-Validity[edit]
A formula of a first order language is ω-valid if and only if it is true for every interpretation of the language and it has a domain with an infinite number of members.
See also[edit]




Logic portal




Entailment
Grounds of validity of scientific reasoning
Reductio ad absurdum
Mathematical fallacies
Soundness

References[edit]


^ http://www.iep.utm.edu/val-snd/
^ Beall, Jc and Restall, Greg, "Logical Consequence", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2014 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = &lt;http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2014/entries/logical-consequence/&gt;
^ L. T. F. Gamut, Logic, Language, and Meaning: Introduction to logic, 1991, p. 115
^ Robert Cogan,"Critical thinking: step by step", University Press of America, 1998, p48 [1]



Barwise, Jon; Etchemendy, John. Language, Proof and Logic (1999): 42.
Beer, Francis A. "Validities: A Political Science Perspective", Social Epistemology 7, 1 (1993): 85-105.

External links[edit]



Find more about
Validity
at Wikipedia's sister projects




Definitions from Wiktionary










v
t
e


Logic









Outline
History








Fields



Argumentation theory
Axiology
Critical thinking
Logic in computer science
Mathematical logic
Metalogic
Metamathematics
Non-classical logic
Philosophical logic
Philosophy of logic
Set theory








Foundations



Abduction
Analytic and synthetic propositions
Antinomy
A priori and a posteriori
Deduction
Definition
Description
Induction
Inference
Logical form
Logical consequence
Logical truth
Name
Necessity and sufficiency
Meaning
Paradox
Possible world
Presupposition
Probability
Reason
Reasoning
Reference
Semantics
Statement
Strict implication
Substitution
Syntax
Truth
Validity








Lists




topics



Mathematical logic
Boolean algebra
Set theory








other



Logicians
Rules of inference
Paradoxes
Fallacies
Logic symbols














Portal
Category
WikiProject&#160;(talk)
changes
















v
t
e


Mathematical logic






General



Formal language
Formation rule
Formal system
Deductive system
Formal proof
Formal semantics
Well-formed formula
Set
Element
Class
Classical logic
Axiom
Natural deduction
Rule of inference
Relation
Theorem
Logical consequence
Axiomatic system
Type theory
Symbol
Syntax
Theory








Traditional logic



Proposition
Inference
Argument
Validity
Cogency
Syllogism
Square of opposition
Venn diagram









Propositional
calculus
Boolean logic




Boolean functions
Propositional calculus
Propositional formula
Logical connectives
Truth tables








Predicate logic



First-order
Quantifiers
Predicate
Second-order
Monadic predicate calculus








Naive set theory



Set
Empty set
Enumeration
Extensionality
Finite set
Infinite set
Subset
Power set
Countable set
Uncountable set
Recursive set
Domain
Range
Map
Function
Relation
Ordered pair








Set theory



Foundations of mathematics
Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory
Axiom of choice
General set theory
Kripke–Platek set theory
Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel set theory
Morse–Kelley set theory
Tarski–Grothendieck set theory








Model theory



Model
Interpretation
Non-standard model
Finite model theory
Truth value
Validity








Proof theory



Formal proof
Deductive system
Formal system
Theorem
Logical consequence
Rule of inference
Syntax








Computability
theory



Recursion
Recursive set
Recursively enumerable set
Decision problem
Church–Turing thesis
Computable function
Primitive recursive function















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Validity&amp;oldid=691517024"					
				Categories: ArgumentsConcepts in logicDeductive reasoningLogical truth				
							
		
		
			