


		
		
		
			

							
						

			William James
									
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
								
												
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				
				This article is about the philosopher and psychologist.  For other people with the same name, see William James (disambiguation).


William James



James in the 1890s



Born
(1842-01-11)January 11, 1842
New York City, New York


Died
August 26, 1910(1910-08-26) (aged&#160;68)
Tamworth, New Hampshire


Alma&#160;mater
Harvard University





Era
19th/20th century philosophy


Region
Western Philosophy


School
Pragmatism
Functional psychology
Radical empiricism



Main interests

Pragmatism, psychology, philosophy of religion, epistemology, meaning



Notable ideas

The Will to Believe Doctrine, the pragmatic theory of truth, radical empiricism, James–Lange theory of emotion, psychologist's fallacy, brain usage theory




Influences


Peirce, Hume, African Spir,[1] Swedenborg, Schiller, Hartley, Renouvier, Helmholtz, Janet, Mach








Influenced


Dewey, Husserl, Schiller, Bergson, Santayana, Putnam, Rorty, Wittgenstein, Cohen, Durkheim, Du Bois, Russell, Edwin Holt, Carter






William James (January 11, 1842 – August 26, 1910) was an American philosopher and psychologist who was also trained as a physician. The first educator to offer a psychology course in the United States,[2] James was one of the leading thinkers of the late nineteenth century and is believed by many to be one of the most influential philosophers the United States has ever produced, while others have labelled him the "Father of American psychology".[3][4][5] Along with Charles Sanders Peirce and John Dewey, he is considered to be one of the major figures associated with the philosophical school known as pragmatism, and is also cited as one of the founders of functional psychology. A Review of General Psychology survey, published in 2002, ranked James as the 14th most cited psychologist of the 20th century.[6] He also developed the philosophical perspective known as radical empiricism. James' work has influenced intellectuals such as Émile Durkheim, W. E. B. Du Bois, Edmund Husserl, Bertrand Russell, Ludwig Wittgenstein, Hilary Putnam, and Richard Rorty,[7] and has even influenced Presidents, such as Jimmy Carter.
Born into a wealthy family, James was the son of the Swedenborgian theologian Henry James Sr and the brother of both the prominent novelist Henry James, and the diarist Alice James. James wrote widely on many topics, including epistemology, education, metaphysics, psychology, religion, and mysticism. Among his most influential books are The Principles of Psychology, which was a groundbreaking text in the field of psychology, Essays in Radical Empiricism, an important text in philosophy, and The Varieties of Religious Experience, which investigated different forms of religious experience, which also included the then theories on Mind cure.[8]



Contents


1 Early life
2 Career
3 Family
4 Writings
5 Epistemology

5.1 Pragmatism and "cash value"
5.2 Will to believe doctrine


6 Free will
7 Philosophy of religion
8 Instincts
9 Theory of emotion

9.1 William James' bear


10 Philosophy of history
11 View on spiritualism and associationism
12 Jamesian theory of self

12.1 Material self
12.2 Social self
12.3 Spiritual self
12.4 Pure ego


13 Works by James

13.1 Collections


14 See also
15 References
16 Sources
17 External links



Early life[edit]
William James was born at the Astor House in New York City. He was the son of Henry James Sr., a noted and independently wealthy Swedenborgian theologian well acquainted with the literary and intellectual elites of his day. The intellectual brilliance of the James family milieu and the remarkable epistolary talents of several of its members have made them a subject of continuing interest to historians, biographers, and critics.
William James received an eclectic trans-Atlantic education, developing fluency in both German and French. Education in the James household encouraged cosmopolitanism. The family made two trips to Europe while William James was still a child, setting a pattern that resulted in thirteen more European journeys during his life. His early artistic bent led to an apprenticeship in the studio of William Morris Hunt in Newport, Rhode Island, but he switched in 1861 to scientific studies at the Lawrence Scientific School of Harvard University.
In his early adulthood, James suffered from a variety of physical ailments, including those of the eyes, back, stomach, and skin. He was also tone deaf.[9] He was subject to a variety of psychological symptoms which were diagnosed at the time as neurasthenia, and which included periods of depression during which he contemplated suicide for months on end. Two younger brothers, Garth Wilkinson (Wilky) and Robertson (Bob), fought in the Civil War. The other three siblings (William, Henry, and Alice James) all suffered from periods of invalidism.




William James in Brazil, 1865


He took up medical studies at Harvard Medical School in 1864 (according to his brother Henry James). He took a break in the spring of 1865 to join naturalist Louis Agassiz on a scientific expedition up the Amazon River, but aborted his trip after eight months, as he suffered bouts of severe seasickness and mild smallpox. His studies were interrupted once again due to illness in April 1867. He traveled to Germany in search of a cure and remained there until November 1868; at that time he was 26 years old. During this period, he began to publish; reviews of his works appeared in literary periodicals such as the North American Review.
James finally earned his M.D. degree in June 1869 but he never practiced medicine. What he called his "soul-sickness" would only be resolved in 1872, after an extended period of philosophical searching. He married Alice Gibbens in 1878. In 1882 he joined the Theosophical Society.[10]
James's time in Germany proved intellectually fertile, helping him find that his true interests lay not in medicine but in philosophy and psychology. Later, in 1902 he would write: "I originally studied medicine in order to be a physiologist, but I drifted into psychology and philosophy from a sort of fatality. I never had any philosophic instruction, the first lecture on psychology I ever heard being the first I ever gave".[11]
Career[edit]
James interacted with a wide array of writers and scholars throughout his life, including his godfather Ralph Waldo Emerson, his godson William James Sidis, as well as Charles Sanders Peirce, Bertrand Russell, Josiah Royce, Ernst Mach, John Dewey, Macedonio Fernández, Walter Lippmann, Mark Twain, Horatio Alger, Jr., G. Stanley Hall, Henri Bergson and Sigmund Freud.
James spent almost all of his academic career at Harvard. He was appointed instructor in physiology for the spring 1873 term, instructor in anatomy and physiology in 1873, assistant professor of psychology in 1876, assistant professor of philosophy in 1881, full professor in 1885, endowed chair in psychology in 1889, return to philosophy in 1897, and emeritus professor of philosophy in 1907.
James studied medicine, physiology, and biology, and began to teach in those subjects, but was drawn to the scientific study of the human mind at a time when psychology was constituting itself as a science. James's acquaintance with the work of figures like Hermann Helmholtz in Germany and Pierre Janet in France facilitated his introduction of courses in scientific psychology at Harvard University. He taught his first experimental psychology course at Harvard in the 1875–1876 academic year.[12]
During his Harvard years, James joined in philosophical discussions and debates with Charles Peirce, Oliver Wendell Holmes, and Chauncey Wright that evolved into a lively group informally known as The Metaphysical Club in 1872. Louis Menand (2001) suggested that this Club provided a foundation for American intellectual thought for decades to come. James joined the Anti-Imperialist League in 1898, in opposition to the U.S. annexation of the Philippines.




William James and Josiah Royce, near James's country home in Chocorua, New Hampshire in September 1903. James's daughter Peggy took the picture. On hearing the camera click, James cried out: "Royce, you're being photographed! Look out! I say Damn the Absolute!"


Among James's students at Harvard University were luminaries such as Boris Sidis, Theodore Roosevelt, George Santayana, W. E. B. Du Bois, G. Stanley Hall, Ralph Barton Perry, Gertrude Stein, Horace Kallen, Morris Raphael Cohen, Walter Lippmann, Alain Locke, C. I. Lewis, and Mary Whiton Calkins. Antiquarian bookseller Gabriel Wells tutored under him at Harvard in the late 1890s.[13]
Following his January, 1907 retirement from Harvard, James continued to write and lecture, publishing Pragmatism, A Pluralistic Universe, and The Meaning of Truth. James was increasingly afflicted with cardiac pain during his last years. It worsened in 1909 while he worked on a philosophy text (unfinished but posthumously published as Some Problems in Philosophy). He sailed to Europe in the spring of 1910 to take experimental treatments which proved unsuccessful, and returned home on August 18. His heart failed on August 26, 1910 at his home in Chocorua, New Hampshire. He was buried in the family plot in Cambridge Cemetery, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
He was one of the strongest proponents of the school of functionalism in psychology and of pragmatism in philosophy. He was a founder of the American Society for Psychical Research, as well as a champion of alternative approaches to healing. He challenged his professional colleagues not to let a narrow mindset prevent an honest appraisal of those beliefs.
In an empirical study by Haggbloom et al. using six criteria such as citations and recognition, James was found to be the 14th most eminent psychologist of the 20th Century.[14]
Family[edit]
William James was the son of Henry James (Senior) of Albany, and Mary Robertson Walsh. He had four siblings: Henry (the novelist), Garth Wilkinson, Robertson, and Alice. William became engaged to Alice Howe Gibbens on May 10, 1878; they were married on July 10. They had 5 children: Henry (born May 18, 1878), William (born June 17, 1882), Herman (born 1884, died in infancy), Margaret (born March, 1887) and Alexander (born December 22, 1890).
Writings[edit]
William James wrote voluminously throughout his life. A non-exhaustive bibliography of his writings, compiled by John McDermott, is 47 pages long.[15] (See below for a list of his major writings and additional collections)
He gained widespread recognition with his monumental The Principles of Psychology (1890), totaling twelve hundred pages in two volumes, which took twelve years to complete. Psychology: The Briefer Course, was an 1892 abridgement designed as a less rigorous introduction to the field. These works criticized both the English associationist school and the Hegelianism of his day as competing dogmatisms of little explanatory value, and sought to re-conceive the human mind as inherently purposive and selective.
President Jimmy Carter's Moral Equivalent of War Speech, on April 17, 1977, equating the United States' 1970's energy crisis, oil crisis and the changes and sacrifices Carter's proposed plans would require with the "moral equivalent of war," may have borrowed its title, much of its theme and the memorable phrase from James' classic essay "The Moral Equivalent of War" derived from his last speech, delivered at Stanford University in 1906, in which "James considered one of the classic problems of politics: how to sustain political unity and civic virtue in the absence of war or a credible threat...." and "...sounds a rallying cry for service in the interests of the individual and the nation." [16] [17] [18]
Epistemology[edit]




Portrait of William James by John La Farge, circa 1859


James defined true beliefs as those that prove useful to the believer. His pragmatic theory of truth was a synthesis of correspondence theory of truth and coherence theory of truth, with an added dimension. Truth is verifiable to the extent that thoughts and statements correspond with actual things, as well as the extent to which they "hang together," or cohere, as pieces of a puzzle might fit together; these are in turn verified by the observed results of the application of an idea to actual practice.[19][20]
"The most ancient parts of truth . . . also once were plastic. They also were called true for human reasons. They also mediated between still earlier truths and what in those days were novel observations. Purely objective truth, truth in whose establishment the function of giving human satisfaction in marrying previous parts of experience with newer parts played no role whatsoever, is nowhere to be found. The reasons why we call things true is the reason why they are true, for 'to be true' means only to perform this marriage-function," he wrote.[21]
"Anything short of God is not rational, anything more than God is not possible" he wrote.
He writes, "First, it is essential that God be conceived as the deepest power in the universe, and second, he must be conceived under the form of a mental personality."
He also writes, "A God who can relish such superfluities of horror is no God for human beings to appeal to. ...In other words the "Absolute" with his one purpose, is not the man-like God of common people."
James held a world view in line with pragmatism, declaring that the value of any truth was utterly dependent upon its use to the person who held it. Additional tenets of James's pragmatism include the view that the world is a mosaic of diverse experiences that can only be properly interpreted and understood through an application of "radical empiricism." Radical empiricism, not related to the everyday scientific empiricism, asserts that the world and experience can never be halted for an entirely objective analysis, if nothing else the mind of the observer and simple act of observation will affect the outcome of any empirical approach to truth as the mind and its experiences, and nature are inseparable. James's emphasis on diversity as the default human condition—over and against duality, especially Hegelian dialectical duality—has maintained a strong influence in American culture. James's description of the mind-world connection, which he described in terms of a "stream of consciousness", had a direct and significant impact on avant-garde and modernist literature and art, notably in the case of James Joyce.
In What Pragmatism Means, James writes that the central point of his own doctrine of truth is, in brief, that "Truths emerge from facts, but they dip forward into facts again and add to them; which facts again create or reveal new truth (the word is indifferent) and so on indefinitely. The 'facts' themselves meanwhile are not true. They simply are. Truth is the function of the beliefs that start and terminate among them." Richard Rorty made the contested claim that James did not mean to give a theory of truth with this statement and that we should not regard it as such. However, other pragmatism scholars such as Susan Haack and Howard Mounce do not share Rorty's instrumentalist interpretation of James.[22]
In The Meaning of Truth, James seems to speak of truth in relativistic terms: "The critic's [sc., the critic of pragmatism] trouble...seems to come from his taking the word 'true' irrelatively, whereas the pragmatist always means 'true for him who experiences the workings.' "[23] However, James responded to critics accusing him of relativism, scepticism or agnosticism, and of believing only in relative truths. To the contrary, he supported an epistemological realism position.[24]
Pragmatism and "cash value"[edit]
From the introduction to William James's Pragmatism by Bruce Kuklick, p.xiv.

James went on to apply the pragmatic method to the epistemological problem of truth. He would seek the meaning of 'true' by examining how the idea functioned in our lives. A belief was true, he said, if it worked for all of us, and guided us expeditiously through our semihospitable world. James was anxious to uncover what true beliefs amounted to in human life, what their "cash value" was, and what consequences they led to. A belief was not a mental entity which somehow mysteriously corresponded to an external reality if the belief were true. Beliefs were ways of acting with reference to a precarious environment, and to say they were true was to say they were efficacious in this environment. In this sense the pragmatic theory of truth applied Darwinian ideas in philosophy; it made survival the test of intellectual as well as biological fitness.

Will to believe doctrine[edit]
Main article: The Will to Believe
In William James's lecture of 1896 titled "The Will to Believe", James defends the right to violate the principle of evidentialism in order to justify hypothesis venturing. This idea foresaw 20th century objections to evidentialism and sought to ground justified belief in an unwavering principle that would prove more beneficial. Through his philosophy of pragmatism William James justifies religious beliefs by using the results of his hypothetical venturing as evidence to support the hypothesis' truth. Therefore, this doctrine allows one to assume belief in a god and prove its existence by what the belief brings to one's life.
Free will[edit]
In The Will to Believe, James simply asserted that his will was free. As his first act of freedom, he said, he chose to believe his will was free. He was encouraged to do this by reading Charles Renouvier, whose work convinced James to convert from monism to pluralism. In his diary entry of April 30, 1870, James wrote,

I think that yesterday was a crisis in my life. I finished the first part of Renouvier's second Essais and see no reason why his definition of free will—"the sustaining of a thought because I choose to when I might have other thoughts"—need be the definition of an illusion. At any rate, I will assume for the present—until next year—that it is no illusion. My first act of free will shall be to believe in free will.[25]

In 1884 James set the terms for all future discussions of determinism and compatibilism in the free will debates with his lecture to Harvard Divinity School students published as "The Dilemma of Determinism." In this talk he defined the common terms "hard determinism" and "soft determinism" (now more commonly called "compatibilism").

"Old-fashioned determinism was what we may call hard determinism. It did not shrink from such words as fatality, bondage of the will, necessitation, and the like. Nowadays, we have a soft determinism which abhors harsh words, and, repudiating fatality, necessity, and even predetermination, says that its real name is freedom; for freedom is only necessity understood, and bondage to the highest is identical with true freedom."[26]

James called compatibilism a "quagmire of evasion,"[26] just as the ideas of Thomas Hobbes and David Hume — that free will was simply freedom from external coercion — were called a "wretched subterfuge" by Immanuel Kant.
James described chance as neither hard nor soft determinism, but "indeterminism". He said

"The stronghold of the determinist argument is the antipathy to the idea of chance...This notion of alternative possibility, this admission that any one of several things may come to pass is, after all, only a roundabout name for chance." [27]

James asked the students to consider his choice for walking home from Lowell Lecture Hall after his talk.

"What is meant by saying that my choice of which way to walk home after the lecture is ambiguous and matter of chance?...It means that both Divinity Avenue and Oxford Street are called but only one, and that one either one, shall be chosen."[28]

With this simple example, James laid out a two-stage decision process with chance in a present time of random alternatives, leading to a choice of one possibility that transforms an ambiguous future into a simple unalterable past. James’ two-stage model separates chance (undetermined alternative possibilities) from choice (the free action of the individual, on which randomness has no effect). Subsequent thinkers using this model include Henri Poincaré, Arthur Holly Compton, and Karl Popper.
Philosophy of religion[edit]




Excerpt.


James did important work in philosophy of religion. In his Gifford Lectures at the University of Edinburgh he provided a wide-ranging account of The Varieties of Religious Experience (1902) and interpreted them according to his pragmatic leanings. Some of the important claims he makes in this regard:

Religious genius (experience) should be the primary topic in the study of religion, rather than religious institutions—since institutions are merely the social descendant of genius.
The intense, even pathological varieties of experience (religious or otherwise) should be sought by psychologists, because they represent the closest thing to a microscope of the mind—that is, they show us in drastically enlarged form the normal processes of things.
In order to usefully interpret the realm of common, shared experience and history, we must each make certain "over-beliefs" in things which, while they cannot be proven on the basis of experience, help us to live fuller and better lives.

James investigated mystical experiences throughout his life, leading him to experiment with chloral hydrate (1870), amyl nitrite (1875), nitrous oxide (1882), and peyote (1896).[citation needed] James claimed that it was only when he was under the influence of nitrous oxide that he was able to understand Hegel.[29] He concluded that while the revelations of the mystic hold true, they hold true only for the mystic; for others, they are certainly ideas to be considered, but can hold no claim to truth without personal experience of such. American Philosophy: An Encyclopedia classes him as one of several figures who "took a more pantheist or pandeist approach by rejecting views of God as separate from the world."[30]
Instincts[edit]
See also: Instinct
Like Sigmund Freud, James was influenced by Charles Darwin's theory of natural selection.[31] At the core of James' theory of psychology, as defined in The Principles of Psychology (1890), was a system of "instincts."[31] James wrote that humans had many instincts, even more than other animals.[31] These instincts, he said, could be overridden by experience and by each other, as many of the instincts were actually in conflict with each other.[31] In the 1920s, however, psychology turned away from evolutionary theory and embraced radical behaviorism.[31]
Theory of emotion[edit]
James is one of the two namesakes of the James–Lange theory of emotion, which he formulated independently of Carl Lange in the 1880s. The theory holds that emotion is the mind's perception of physiological conditions that result from some stimulus. In James's oft-cited example, it is not that we see a bear, fear it, and run; we see a bear and run; consequently, we fear the bear. Our mind's perception of the higher adrenaline level, heartbeat, etc. is the emotion.
This way of thinking about emotion has great consequences for the philosophy of aesthetics. Here is a passage from his great work, The Principles of Psychology, that spells out those consequences:

[W]e must immediately insist that aesthetic emotion, pure and simple, the pleasure given us by certain lines and masses, and combinations of colors and sounds, is an absolutely sensational experience, an optical or auricular feeling that is primary, and not due to the repercussion backwards of other sensations elsewhere consecutively aroused. To this simple primary and immediate pleasure in certain pure sensations and harmonious combinations of them, there may, it is true, be added secondary pleasures; and in the practical enjoyment of works of art by the masses of mankind these secondary pleasures play a great part. The more classic one's taste is, however, the less relatively important are the secondary pleasures felt to be, in comparison with those of the primary sensation as it comes in. Classicism and romanticism have their battles over this point.

The theory of emotion was also independently developed in Italy by the Anthropologist Giuseppe Sergi,.[32][33] In order to give due credit, such a theory should be called the James-Lange-Sergi theory of emotion.
William James' bear[edit]
From Joseph LeDoux's description of William James's Emotion [34]

Why do we run away if we notice that we are in danger? Because we are afraid of what will happen if we don't. This obvious answer to a seemingly trivial question has been the central concern of a century-old debate about the nature of our emotions.


It all began in 1884 when William James published an article titled "What Is an Emotion?"[35] The article appeared in a philosophy journal called Mind, as there were no psychology journals yet. It was important, not because it definitively answered the question it raised, but because of the way in which James phrased his response. He conceived of an emotion in terms of a sequence of events that starts with the occurrence of an arousing stimulus {the sympathetic nervous system or the parasympathetic nervous system}; and ends with a passionate feeling, a conscious emotional experience. A major goal of emotion research is still to elucidate this stimulus-to-feeling sequence—to figure out what processes come between the stimulus and the feeling.


James set out to answer his question by asking another: do we run from a bear because we are afraid or are we afraid because we run? He proposed that the obvious answer, that we run because we are afraid, was wrong, and instead argued that we are afraid because we run:




Our natural way of thinking about... emotions is that the mental perception of some fact excites the mental affection called emotion, and that this latter state of mind gives rise to the bodily expression. My thesis on the contrary is that the bodily changes follow directly the PERCEPTION of the exciting fact, and that our feeling of the same changes as they occur is the emotion (called 'feeling' by Damasio).




The essence of James's proposal was simple. It was premised on the fact that emotions are often accompanied by bodily responses (racing heart, tight stomach, sweaty palms, tense muscles, and so on; sympathetic nervous system) and that we can sense what is going on inside our body much the same as we can sense what is going on in the outside world. According to James, emotions feel different from other states of mind because they have these bodily responses that give rise to internal sensations, and different emotions feel different from one another because they are accompanied by different bodily responses and sensations. For example, when we see James's bear, we run away. During this act of escape, the body goes through a physiological upheaval: blood pressure rises, heart rate increases, pupils dilate, palms sweat, muscles contract in certain ways (evolutionary, innate defense mechanisms). Other kinds of emotional situations will result in different bodily upheavals. In each case, the physiological responses return to the brain in the form of bodily sensations, and the unique pattern of sensory feedback gives each emotion its unique quality. Fear feels different from anger or love because it has a different physiological signature {the parasympathetic nervous system for love}. The mental aspect of emotion, the feeling, is a slave to its physiology, not vice versa: we do not tremble because we are afraid or cry because we feel sad; we are afraid because we tremble and are sad because we cry.

Philosophy of history[edit]
One of the long-standing schisms in the philosophy of history concerns the role of individuals in social change.
One faction sees individuals (as seen in Dickens' A Tale of Two Cities and Thomas Carlyle's The French Revolution, A History) as the motive power of history, and the broader society as the page on which they write their acts. The other sees society as moving according to holistic principles or laws, and sees individuals as its more-or-less willing pawns. In 1880, James waded into this controversy with "Great Men, Great Thoughts, and the Environment," an essay published in the Atlantic Monthly. He took Carlyle's side, but without Carlyle's one-sided emphasis on the political/military sphere, upon heroes as the founders or overthrowers of states and empires.
A philosopher, according to James, must accept geniuses as a given entity the same way as a biologist accepts as an entity Darwin's ‘spontaneous variations.’ The role of an individual will depend on the degree of its conformity with the social environment, epoch, moment, etc.[36]
James introduces a notion of receptivities of the moment. The societies' mutations from generation to generation are determined (directly or indirectly) mainly by the acts or examples of individuals whose genius was so adapted to the receptivities of the moment or whose accidental position of authority was so critical that they became ferments, initiators of movements, setters of precedent or fashion, centers of corruption, or destroyers of other persons, whose gifts, had they had free play, would have led society in another direction.[37]
View on spiritualism and associationism[edit]




William James in a séance with a spiritualist medium


James studied closely the schools of thought known as associationism and spiritualism. The view of an associationist is that each experience that one has leads to another, creating a chain of events. The association does not tie together two ideas, but rather physical objects.[38] This association occurs on an atomic level. Small physical changes occur in the brain which eventually form complex ideas or associations. Thoughts are formed as these complex ideas work together and lead to new experiences. Isaac Newton and David Hartley both were precursors to this school of thought, proposing such ideas as "physical vibrations in the brain, spinal cord, and nerves are the basis of all sensations, all ideas, and all motions..."[39] James disagreed with associationism in that he believed it to be too simple. He referred to associationism as "psychology without a soul"[40] because there is nothing from within creating ideas; they just arise by associating objects with one another.
On the other hand, a spiritualist believes that mental events are attributed to the soul. Whereas in associationism, ideas and behaviors are separate, in spiritualism, they are connected. Spiritualism encompasses the term innatism, which suggests that ideas cause behavior. Ideas of past behavior influence the way a person will act in the future; these ideas are all tied together by the soul. Therefore, an inner soul causes one to have a thought, which leads them to perform a behavior, and memory of past behaviors determine how one will act in the future.[40]
James had a strong opinion about these schools of thought. He was, by nature, a pragmatist and thus took the view that one should use whatever parts of theories make the most sense and can be proven.[41] Therefore, he recommended breaking apart spiritualism and associationism and using the parts of them that make the most sense. James believed that each person has a soul, which exists in a spiritual universe, and leads a person to perform the behaviors they do in the physical world.[41] James was influenced by Emanuel Swedenborg, who first introduced him to this idea. James stated that, although it does appear that humans use associations to move from one event to the next, this cannot be done without this soul tying everything together. For, after an association has been made, it is the person who decides which part of it to focus on, and therefore determines in which direction following associations will lead.[38] Associationism is too simple in that it does not account for decision-making of future behaviors, and memory of what worked well and what did not. Spiritualism, however, does not demonstrate actual physical representations for how associations occur. James combined the views of spiritualism and associationism to create his own way of thinking.
James was a founding member and vice president of the American Society for Psychical Research.[42] The lending of his name made Leonora Piper a famous medium. In 1885, the year after the death of his young son, James had his first sitting with Piper at the suggestion of his mother-in-law.[43] James was soon convinced that Piper knew things she could only have discovered by supernatural means. He expressed his belief in Piper by saying, "If you wish to upset the law that all crows are black, it is enough if you prove that one crow is white. My white crow is Mrs. Piper."[44] However, James did not believe that Piper was in contact with spirits. After evaluating sixty-nine reports of Piper's mediumship he considered the hypothesis of telepathy as well as Piper obtaining information about her sitters by natural means such as her memory recalling information. According to James the "spirit-control" hypothesis of her mediumship was incoherent, irrelevant and in cases demonstrably false.[45]
James held séances with Piper and was impressed by some of the details he was given, however, according to Massimo Polidoro a maid in the household of James was friendly with a maid in Piper's house and this may have been a source of information that Piper used for private details about James.[46] Bibliographers Frederick Burkhardt and Fredson Bowers who compiled the works of James wrote "It is thus possible that Mrs. Piper's knowledge of the James family was acquired from the gossip of servants and that the whole mystery rests on the failure of the people upstairs to realize that servants [downstairs] also have ears."[47]
Jamesian theory of self[edit]
William James developed a theory of self that was divided into two main categories. The first was the "Me" self, and the second was the "I" self.[48] The "me" self refers to the aspects of someone that come from that person's experiences. James broke the "me" self down into three sections, The Material Self, The Social Self, and The Spiritual Self.[49] For James, the "I" self was classified as the thinking self. James linked this self to the soul of a person, or what we now think of as the mind.[50] The Pure Ego was the name given to the "I" self.[49]
Material self[edit]
The material self consists of things that belong to us or that we belong to. Things like family, clothes, our body, and money are some of what makes up our material selves.[48] For James, the core of the material self was the body.[50] Second to the body, a person's clothes were important to the Material Self, as well. James believed that people's clothes were a way that they expressed who they were, or a way to show status, thus contributing to the formation of self.[50] Money and family are also part of the material self. James felt that if we lost a family member, a part of who we are was gone as well. Money was a part of the material self in the same way. If at one point we had a lot of money then lost it, who we are as a person would change, as well.[50]
Social self[edit]
Our social selves are who we are in a given social situation. For James, people change how they act depending on the social situation that they are in. James believed that people had as many social selves as they did social situations they participated in.[50] For example, a person may act in a different way at work when compared to how that same person may act when they are out with a group of friends. James also believed that in a given social group, an individual's social self may be divided even further.[50] An example of this would be, in the social context of an individual's work environment, the difference in behavior when that individual is interacting with their boss versus their behavior when interacting with a co-worker.
Spiritual self[edit]
For James, the spiritual self was who we are at our core. The spiritual self is more concrete or permanent than the other two selves. The spiritual self is our subjective and most intimate self. Aspects of an individual's spiritual self include things like their personality, core values, and conscience that do not typically change throughout their lifetime. The spiritual self involves introspection, or looking inward to deeper spiritual, moral, or intellectual questions without the influence of objective thoughts.[50] For James, achieving a high level of understanding of who we are at our core, or understanding our spiritual selves is more rewarding than satisfying the needs of the social and material selves.
Pure ego[edit]
The pure ego is what James refers to as the "I" self. For James, the pure ego is what provides the thread of continuity between our past, present, and future selves. The pure ego's perception of consistent individual identity arises from a continual stream of consciousness.[51] James believed that the pure ego was similar to what we think of as the soul, or the mind. The pure ego was not a substance and therefore could not be examined by science.[48]
Works by James[edit]

The Principles of Psychology, 2 vols. (1890) Dover Publications 1950, vol. 1: ISBN 0-486-20381-6, vol. 2: ISBN 0-486-20382-4
Psychology (Briefer Course) (1892) University of Notre Dame Press 1985: ISBN 0-268-01557-0, Dover Publications 2001: ISBN 0-486-41604-6
The Will to Believe, and Other Essays in Popular Philosophy (1897)
Human Immortality: Two Supposed Objections to the Doctrine (the Ingersoll Lecture, 1897)

The Will to Believe, Human Immortality (1956) Dover Publications, ISBN 0-486-20291-7


Talks to Teachers on Psychology: and to Students on Some of Life's Ideals (1899), Dover Publications 2001: ISBN 0-486-41964-9, IndyPublish.com 2005: ISBN 1-4219-5806-6
The Varieties of Religious Experience: A Study in Human Nature (1902), ISBN 0-14-039034-0
Pragmatism: A New Name for Some Old Ways of Thinking (1907), Hackett Publishing 1981: ISBN 0-915145-05-7, Dover 1995: ISBN 0-486-28270-8
A Pluralistic Universe (1909), Hibbert Lectures, University of Nebraska Press 1996: ISBN 0-8032-7591-9
The Meaning of Truth: A Sequel to "Pragmatism" (1909) Prometheus Books, 1997: ISBN 1-57392-138-6
Some Problems of Philosophy: A Beginning of an Introduction to Philosophy (1911), University of Nebraska Press 1996: ISBN 0-8032-7587-0
Memories and Studies (1911) Reprint Services Corp: 1992: ISBN 0-7812-3481-6
Essays in Radical Empiricism (1912) Dover Publications 2003, ISBN 0-486-43094-4

critical edition, Frederick Burkhardt and Fredson Bowers, editors. Harvard University Press 1976: ISBN 0-674-26717-6 (includes commentary, notes, enumerated emendations, appendices with English translation of "La Notion de Conscience")


Letters of William James, 2 vols. (1920)
Collected Essays and Reviews (1920)
Ralph Barton Perry, The Thought and Character of William James, 2 vols. (1935) Vanderbilt University Press 1996 reprint: ISBN 0-8265-1279-8 (contains some 500 letters by William James not found in the earlier edition of the Letters of William James)
William James on Psychical Research (1960)
The Correspondence of William James, 12 vols. (1992–2004) University of Virginia Press, ISBN 0-8139-2318-2
The Dilemma of Determinism
William James on Habit, Will, Truth, and the Meaning of Life, James Sloan Allen, ed. Frederic C. Beil, Publisher, ISBN 978-1-929490-45-5 [52]

Collections[edit]

William James: Writings 1878–1899, (1992). Library of America, 1212 p., ISBN 978-0-940450-72-1




Psychology: Briefer Course (rev. and condensed Principles of Psychology), The Will to Believe and Other Essays in Popular Philosophy, Talks to Teachers and Students, Essays (nine others)




William James: Writings 1902–1910, (1987). Library of America, 1379 p., ISBN 978-0-940450-38-7




The Varieties of Religious Experience, Pragmatism, A Pluralistic Universe, The Meaning of Truth, Some Problems of Philosophy, Essays




The Writings of William James: A Comprehensive Edition, (1978). University of Chicago Press, 912 p., ISBN 0-226-39188-4




Pragmatism, Essays in Radical Empiricism, and A Pluralistic Universe complete; plus selections from other works




In 1975, Harvard University Press began publication of a standard edition of The Works of William James.

See also[edit]




Philosophy portal



Psychology portal




"The Moral Philosopher and the Moral Life"
Psychology of religion
Functional psychology
American philosophy
List of American philosophers
William James Lectures
William James Society
Stream of consciousness (psychology)

References[edit]


^ "Bill James, of Harvard, was among the first foreigners to take cognizance of Thought and Reality, already in 1873...", Lettres inédites de African Spir au professeur Penjon (Unpublished Letters of African Spir to professor Penjon), Neuchâtel, 1948, p. 231, n. 7.
^ T.L. Brink (2008) Psychology: A Student Friendly Approach. "Unit One: The Definition and History of Psychology." pp 10
^ "William James: Writings 1878–1899". The Library of America. 1992-06-01. Retrieved 2013-09-21.&#160;
^ "William James: Writings 1902–1910". The Library of America. 1987-02-01. Retrieved 2013-09-21.&#160;
^ Dr. Megan E. Bradley. "William James". PSYography. Faculty.frostburg.edu. Retrieved 2013-09-21.&#160;
^ Haggbloom, Steven J.; Warnick, Jason E.; Jones, Vinessa K.; Yarbrough, Gary L.; Russell, Tenea M.; Borecky, Chris M.; McGahhey, Reagan; et al. (2002). "The 100 most eminent psychologists of the 20th century". Review of General Psychology 6 (2): 139–152. doi:10.1037/1089-2680.6.2.139.&#160; CS1 maint: Explicit use of et al. (link)
^ "William James". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Center for the Study of Language and Information (CSLI), Stanford University. Retrieved 2013-09-21.&#160;
^ James, William (2009). The Varieties of Religious Experience. The Library of America. pp.&#160;74–120. ISBN&#160;1598530623.&#160;
^ Sachs, Oliver (2008). Musicophilia: Tales of Music and the Brain, Revised and Expanded Edition. New York: Vintage Books. pp.&#160;xiii. ISBN&#160;1-4000-3353-5.&#160;
^ Antony Lysy, "William James, Theosophist", The Quest Volume 88, number 6, November–December 2000.
^ Ralph Barton Perry, The Thought and Character of William James, vol. 1, (1935), 1996 edition: ISBN 0-8265-1279-8, p. 228.
^ Duane P. Schultz; Sydney Ellen Schultz (22 March 2007). A History of Modern Psychology. Cengage Learning. pp.&#160;185–. ISBN&#160;978-0-495-09799-0. Retrieved 28 August 2011.&#160;
^ Schmidt, Barbara. "A History of and Guide to Uniform Editions of Mark Twain's Works". twainquotes.com. Retrieved 1 October 2014.&#160;
^ Haggbloom, S.J.; et al. (2002). "The 100 Most Eminent Psychologists of the 20th Century". Review of General Psychology 6 (2): 139–15. doi:10.1037/1089-2680.6.2.139.&#160;. Haggbloom et al. combined 3 quantitative variables: citations in professional journals, citations in textbooks, and nominations in a survey given to members of the Association for Psychological Science, with 3 qualitative variables (converted to quantitative scores): National Academy of Science (NAS) membership, American Psychological Association (APA) President and/or recipient of the APA Distinguished Scientific Contributions Award, and surname used as an eponym. Then the list was rank ordered.
^ John J. McDermott, The Writings of William James: A Comprehensive Edition, University of Chicago Press, 1977 revised edition, ISBN 0-226-39188-4, pp. 812–58.
^ William James' The Moral Equivalent of War Introduction by John Roland. Constitution.org. Retrieved on 2011-08-28.
^ William James' The Moral Equivalent of War – 1906. Constitution.org. Retrieved on 2011-08-28.
^ Harrison Ross Steeves; Frank Humphrey Ristine (1913). Representative essays in modern thought: a basis for composition. American Book Company. pp.&#160;519–. Retrieved 28 August 2011.&#160;
^ James, William, Pragmatism: A New Name for Some Old Ways of Thinking Lect. 6, "Pragmatism's Conception of Truth," (1907)
^ Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Vol.6, "Pragmatic Theory of Truth", pp. 427–428 (Macmillan, 1969)
^ William James. "Pragmatism's Conception of Truth". Lecture 6 in Pragmatism: A New Name for Some Old Ways of Thinking. New York: Longman Green and Co (1907): p. 83.
^ H. O. Mounce (1997). The two pragmatisms: from Peirce to Rorty. Psychology Press. ISBN&#160;978-0-415-15283-9. Retrieved 28 August 2011.&#160;
^ The Meaning of Truth, Longmans, Green, &amp; Co., New York, 1909, p. 177
^ See his Defense of a Pragmatic Notion of Truth, written to counter criticisms of his Pragmatism's Conception of Truth 1907 lecture
^ Ralph Barton Perry, The Thought and Character of William James, vol. 1, p. 323; Letters of William James, vol. I, p. 147
^ a b The Dilemma of Determinism, republished in The Will to Believe, Dover, 1956, p. 149
^ The Dilemma of Determinism, republished in The Will to Believe, Dover, 1956, p. 153
^ The Dilemma of Determinism, republished in The Will to Believe, Dover, 1956, p. 155
^ William James, "Subjective Effects of Nitrous Oxide"
^ John Lachs and Robert Talisse (2007). American Philosophy: An Encyclopedia. p.&#160;310. ISBN&#160;0415939267.&#160;
^ a b c d e Buss, David M. Evolutionary psychology: the new science of the mind. Pearson. 2008. Chapter 1, pp. 2–35.
^ Giuseppe Sergi, (1858) L'origine dei fenomeni psichici e loro significazione biologica, ISBN 1271529408, Milano, Fratelli Dumolard
^ Giuseppe Sergi, (1894) Principi di Psicologie: Dolore e Piacere; Storia Naturale dei Sentimenti", ISBN 1147667462, Milano, Fratelli Dumolard
^ Joseph E. LeDoux, (1996) The Emotional Brain: the Mysterious Underpinnings of Emotional Life, ISBN 0-684-83659-9, p. 43.
^ "What is an Emotion?" Mind, vol. 9, 1884, pp. 188-205
^ Grinin L. E. 2010. The Role of an Individual in History: A Reconsideration. Social Evolution &amp; History, Vol. 9 No. 2 (pp. 95–136). p. 103
^ James, W. 2005 [1880]. Great Men and Their Environment. Kila, MT: Kessinger Publishing. p. 174.
^ a b James, (1892)
^ Richardson, (2006)
^ a b James, (1890).
^ a b Richardson (2006)
^ Eugene Taylor. (2009). The Mystery of Personality: A History of Psychodynamic Theories. Springer. p. 30. ISBN 978-0387981031
^ Deborah Blum. (2007). Ghost Hunters: William James and the Search for Scientific Proof of Life. Penguin Group. p. 98. ISBN 978-0-14-303895-5.
^ Gardner Murphy, Robert O. Ballou. (1960). William James on Psychical Research. Viking Press. p. 41
^ Francesca Bordogna. (2008). William James at the Boundaries: Philosophy, Science, and the Geography of Knowledge. University Of Chicago Press. p. 127. ISBN 978-0226066523
^ Massimo Polidoro. (2001). Final Séance: The Strange Friendship Between Houdini and Conan Doyle. Prometheus Books. p. 36. ISBN 978-1573928960
^ Frederick Burkhardt and Fredson Bowers. (1986). Essays in Psychical Research. Harvard University Press. p. 397 in William James. The Works of William James. Edited by Frederick H. Burkhardt, Fredson Bowers, and Ignas K. Skrupskelis. 19 vols. Cambridge, MA and London: Harvard University Press. 1975-1988.
^ a b c http://www.iep.utm.edu/james-o/
^ a b Cooper, W. E. (1992). William James's theory of the self. Monist,75(4), 504.
^ a b c d e f g http://psychclassics.asu.edu/James/Principles/prin10.htm
^ http://www.uky.edu/~eushe2/Pajares/hunt.html
^ beil.com


Sources[edit]

Essays Philosophical and Psychological in Honor of William James, by his Colleagues at Columbia University (London, 1908)
R, W. B. Lewis The Jameses: A Family Narrative (1991) Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux
James Sloan Allen, Wiiliam James on Habit, Will, Truth, and the Meaning of Life (2014). Frederic C. Beil, Publisher, ISBN 978-1-929490-45-5
Émile Boutroux, William James (New York, 1912)
Werner Bloch, Der Pragmatismus von James und Schiller nebst Exkursen über Weltanschauung und über die Hypothese (Leipzig, 1913)
K. A. Busch, William James als Religionsphilosoph (Göttingen, 1911)
Jacques Barzun. A Stroll with William James (1983). Harper and Row: ISBN 0-226-03869-6
Deborah Blum. Ghost Hunters: William James and the Search for Scientific Proof of Life After Death (2006). Penguin Press, ISBN 1-59420-090-4
Wesley Cooper. The Unity of William James's Thought (2002). Vanderbilt University Press, ISBN 0-8265-1387-5
Howard M. Feinstein. Becoming William James (1984). Cornell University Press, ISBN 978-0-8014-8642-5
Théodore Flournoy, La Philosophie de William James (Saint-Blaise, 1911)
Sergio Franzese, The Ethics of Energy. William James's Moral Philosophy in Focus, Ontos Verlag, 2008
Sergio Franzese &amp; Felicitas Krämer (eds.), Fringes of Religious Experience. Cross-perspectives on William James's Varieties of Religious Experience, Frankfurt / Lancaster, ontos verlag, Process Thought XII, 2007
Peter Hare, Michel Weber, James K. Swindler, Oana-Maria Pastae, Cerasel Cuteanu (eds.), International Perspectives on Pragmatism, Newcastle upon Tyne, Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 2009
James Huneker, "A Philosophy for Philistines" in his The Pathos of Distance (New York, 1913)
Henry James's A Small Boy and Others (1913) and Notes of a Son and Brother (1914)
H. V. Knox, Philosophy of William James (London, 1914)
Louis Menand. The Metaphysical Club: A Story of Ideas in America (2001). Farrar, Straus, and Giroux, ISBN 0-374-52849-7.
Ménard, Analyse et critique des principes de la psychologie de W. James (Paris, 1911) analyzes the lives and relationship between James, Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr., Charles Sanders Peirce, and John Dewey.
Gerald E. Myers. William James: His Life and Thought (1986). Yale University Press, 2001, paperback: ISBN 0-300-08917-1. Focuses on his psychology; includes 230 pages of notes.
Giuseppe Sergi L'origine dei fenomeni psichici e loro significazione biologica, Milano, Fratelli Dumolard, 1885.
Giuseppe Sergi Principi di Psicologie: Dolore e Piacere; Storia Naturale dei Sentimenti, Milano, Fratelli Dumolard, 1894.
James Pawelski. The Dynamic Individualism of William James (2007). SUNY press, ISBN 0-7914-7239-6.
R. B. Perry, Present Philosophical Tendencies (New York, 1912)
Robert D. Richardson. William James: In the Maelstrom of American Modernism (2006). Houghton Mifflin, ISBN 0-618-43325-2
Robert D. Richardson, ed. The Heart of William James (2010). Harvard U. Press, ISBN 978-0-674-05561-2
Jane Roberts. The Afterdeath Journal of an American Philosopher: The View of William James (1978. Prentice-Hall. ISBN 0-13-018515-9.)
Josiah Royce, William James and Other Essays on the Philosophy of Life (New York, 1911)
Linda Simon. Genuine Reality: A Life of William James (1998). Harcourt Brace &amp; Company, ISBN 0-226-75859-1
Michel Weber. Whitehead’s Pancreativism. Jamesian Applications. Ontos Verlag, 2011, ISBN 978-386838-103-0
Wiseman, R. (2012). Rip it up: The radically new approach to changing your life. London, UK: Macmillan

External links[edit]





This section's use of external links may not follow Wikipedia's policies or guidelines. Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links, and converting useful links where appropriate into footnote references. (June 2011)





Find more about
William James
at Wikipedia's sister projects




Media from Commons



Quotations from Wikiquote



Source texts from Wikisource



Data from Wikidata



William James at DMOZ
William James Society
William James Studies
Emory University: William James&#160;– major collection of essays and works online
William James correspondence from the Historic Psychiatry Collection, Menninger Archives, Kansas Historical Society
Harvard University: Life is in the Transitions: William James, 1842–1910&#160;– online exhibition from Houghton Library
Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy: William James
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy: William James
William James on Information Philosopher
William James: Looking for a Way Out
Great Men and the Environment: William James
"Biological Consciousness and the Experience of the Transcendent: William James and American Functional Psychology"
"Oh Those Fabulous James Boys!" article from Psychology Today March/April 1995
New York Times obituary
Works by William James at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about William James at Internet Archive
Works by William James at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
William James at Find a Grave
A short interview with Robert D. Richardson, author of the biography William James: In the Maelstrom of American Modernism
Biography of William James
European William James Project&#160;: Centre de philosophie pratique «&#160;Chromatiques whiteheadiennes&#160;»



Educational offices


Preceded&#160;by
George Trumbull Ladd
3rd President of the American Psychological Association
1894–95
Succeeded&#160;by
James McKeen Cattell


Preceded&#160;by
William Lowe Bryan
13th President of the American Psychological Association
1904–1905
Succeeded&#160;by
Mary Whiton Calkins










v
t
e


Parapsychology







Outline






Topics



Apparitional experience
Astral projection
Auras
Bilocation
Clairvoyance
Deathbed phenomena
Dermo-optical perception
Dream telepathy
Ectoplasm
Electronic voice phenomenon
Extrasensory perception
Ganzfeld experiment
Ghosts
Kirlian photography
Materialization
Mediumship
Near-death experience
Out-of-body experience
Pam Reynolds case
Past life regression
Plant perception (paranormal)
Poltergeist
Precognition
Psychic
Psychic detective
Psychic reading
Psychic surgery
Psychokinesis
Psychometry
Pyrokinesis
Reincarnation
Remote viewing
Retrocognition
Second sight
Sensory leakage
Spoon bending
Telepathy
Thoughtography
Xenoglossy
Zener cards








Organizations



American Society for Psychical Research
College of Psychic Studies
Institute of Noetic Sciences
International Association for Near-Death Studies
Koestler Parapsychology Unit
National Laboratory of Psychical Research
Parapsychological Association
Parapsychology Foundation
Princeton Engineering Anomalies Research Laboratory
Rhine Research Center
Society for Psychical Research








Parapsychologists



William Barrett
John Beloff
Daryl Bem
Hans Bender
Stephen E. Braude
Whately Carington
Hereward Carrington
Tony Cornell
William Crookes
Eric Dingwall
Peter Fenwick
Camille Flammarion
Nandor Fodor
Alan Gauld
Bruce Greyson
Erlendur Haraldsson
John Hasted
Rosalind Heywood
Richard Hodgson
Hans Holzer
Charles Honorton
James Hyslop
Brian Inglis
Robert G. Jahn
William James
Raynor Johnson
Brian Josephson
Stanley Krippner
Thomas Lethbridge
Oliver Lodge
James McKenzie
Edgar Mitchell
Raymond Moody
Robert L. Morris
Gardner Murphy
Frederic Myers
Karlis Osis
Sam Parnia
Michael Persinger
Guy Lyon Playfair
Frank Podmore
Joseph Gaither Pratt
Harry Price
Walter Franklin Prince
Andrija Puharich
Harold Puthoff
Dean Radin
J. B. Rhine
Charles Richet
D. Scott Rogo
William Roll
Helmut Schmidt
Gary Schwartz
Rupert Sheldrake
Henry Sidgwick
Samuel Soal
Ian Stevenson
Russell Targ
Charles Tart
Montague Ullman
Jessica Utts
Evan Harris Walker
Caroline Watt








Publications



Extrasensory Perception
Irreducible Mind: Toward a Psychology for the 21st Century
Journal of Near-Death Studies
Journal of Parapsychology
Journal of Scientific Exploration
Life After Life: The Investigation of a Phenomenon—Survival of Bodily Death
Life Before Life: A Scientific Investigation of Children's Memories of Previous Lives
Mental Radio
Old Souls: The Scientific Evidence For Past Lives
Parapsychology: Frontier Science of the Mind
The Roots of Coincidence
Twenty Cases Suggestive of Reincarnation
Varieties of Anomalous Experience








Skeptics



James Alcock
Robert Baker
Barry Beyerstein
Susan Blackmore
John Booth
Derren Brown
Mario Bunge
William Carpenter
Robert Todd Carroll
Sean Carroll
Milbourne Christopher
Edward Clodd
Brian Dunning
Bergen Evans
Antony Flew
Kendrick Frazier
Chris French
Martin Gardner
Thomas Gilovich
Henry Gordon
G. Stanley Hall
Trevor Hall
C. E. M. Hansel
Melvin Harris
Daniel Webster Hering
Terence Hines
Bruce Hood
Harry Houdini
Nicholas Humphrey
Ray Hyman
Joseph Jastrow
Paul Kurtz
Daniel Loxton
Scott Lilienfeld
Charles Mackay
David Marks
Joseph McCabe
Albert Moll
Joe Nickell
Steven Novella
Robert Park
Henry Maudsley
Massimo Pigliucci
Massimo Polidoro
George Price
Benjamin Radford
James Randi
Graham Reed
Joseph Rinn
Milton Rothman
Carl Sagan
Theodore Schick
Michael Shermer
John Sladek
Gordon Stein
Victor Stenger
Stuart Sutherland
John Taylor
Sarah Thomason
Ivor Lloyd Tuckett
John Wheeler
Richard Wiseman











 Category
 Commons
















v
t
e


Psychology









History
Portal
Psychologist








Basic psychology



Abnormal
Affective science
Affective neuroscience
Behaviorism
Behavioral neuroscience
Cognitive
Cognitive neuroscience
Comparative
Cross-cultural
Cultural
Developmental
Differential
Evolutionary
Experimental
Intelligence
Mathematical
Neuropsychology
Personality
Psycholinguistics
Psychophysics
Psychophysiology
Social
Theoretical








Applied psychology



Anomalistic
Applied behavior analysis
Assessment
Clinical
Community
Consumer
Counseling
Educational
Ergonomics
Feminist
Forensic
Health
Industrial and organizational
Legal
Media
Military
Music
Occupational health
Pastoral
Political
Psychometrics
Religion
School
Sport and exercise
Suicidology
Systems
Traffic








Methodologies



Animal testing
Archival research
Behavior genetics
Behavior epigenetics
Case study
Content analysis
Experiments
Human subject research
Interviews
Mindfulness
Neuroimaging
Observation
Qualitative research
Quantitative research
Self-report inventory
Statistical surveys








Orientations



Adlerian
Analytical
Behaviorism
Cognitive behavioral therapy
Cognitivism
Descriptive
Ecological systems theory
Emotionally focused therapy
Existential therapy
Family therapy
Feminist therapy
Gestalt psychology
Humanistic
Logotherapy
Narrative therapy
Philosophy
Psychoanalysis
Psychoanalytic theory
Psychodrama
Psychodynamic psychotherapy
Rational emotive behavior therapy
Transpersonal









Psychologists




Alfred Adler
Gordon Allport
Albert Bandura
Aaron T. Beck
John Bowlby
Raymond Cattell
Kenneth and Mamie Clark
Albert Ellis
Erik Erikson
Hans Eysenck
Leon Festinger
Viktor Frankl
Sigmund Freud
Harry Harlow
Donald O. Hebb
Clark L. Hull
William James
Carl Jung
Jerome Kagan
Daniel Kahneman
Kurt Lewin
Ole Ivar Lovaas
Abraham Maslow
David McClelland
George Armitage Miller
Neal E. Miller
Walter Mischel
Jacob Levy Moreno
Ivan Pavlov
Jean Piaget
Carl Rogers
Stanley Schachter
B. F. Skinner
Edward Thorndike
John B. Watson
Wilhelm Wundt








Lists



Counseling topics
Disciplines
Important publications
Organizations
Outline
Psychologists
Psychotherapies
Research methods
Schools of thought
Timeline
Topics











Wiktionary definition
Wiktionary category
Wikisource
Wikimedia Commons
Wikiquote
Wikinews
Wikibooks
















v
t
e


Philosophy of mind






Philosophers



Anscombe
Austin
Aquinas
Bain
Bergson
Bhattacharya
Block
Brentano
Broad
Burge
Chalmers
Churchland
Dennett
Dharmakirti
Davidson
Descartes
Goldman
Heidegger
Husserl
Fodor
James
Kierkegaard
Leibniz
Lewis
McDowell
Merleau-Ponty
Minsky
Moore
Nagel
Parfit
Putnam
Popper
Rorty
Ryle
Searle
Spinoza
Turing
Vasubandhu
Wittgenstein
Zhuangzi
more...








Theories



Behaviorism
Biological naturalism
Dualism
Eliminative materialism
Emergent materialism
Epiphenomenalism
Functionalism
Idealism
Interactionism
Materialism
Monism
Naïve realism
Neutral monism
Phenomenalism
Phenomenology

existential
neurophenomenology


Physicalism

identity theory


Pragmatism
Property dualism
Representational
Solipsism
Subjectivism
Substance dualism








Concepts



Abstract object
Artificial intelligence
Chinese room
Cognition
Cognitive closure
Concept
Concept and object
Consciousness
Hard problem of consciousness
Hypostatic abstraction
Idea
Identity
Ingenuity
Intelligence
Intentionality
Introspection
Intuition
Language of thought
Materialism
Mental event
Mental image
Mental process
Mental property
Mental representation
Mind
Mind–body problem
New mysterianism
Pain
Problem of other minds
Propositional attitude
Qualia
Tabula rasa
Understanding
Zombie
more...








Related topics



Metaphysics
Philosophy of artificial intelligence&#160;/ information&#160;/ perception&#160;/ self











Portal
Category
Task Force
Discussion
















v
t
e


Philosophy of religion






Concepts in religion



Afterlife
Euthyphro dilemma
Faith
Intelligent design
Miracle
Problem of evil
Religious belief
Soul
Spirit
Theodicy
Theological veto








Conceptions of God







Aristotelian view
Brahman
Demiurge
Divine simplicity
Egoism
Holy Spirit
Maltheism
Pandeism
Personal god
Process theology
Supreme Being
Unmoved mover








God in



Abrahamic religions
Buddhism
Christianity
Hinduism
Islam
Jainism
Judaism
Mormonism
Sikhism
Bahá'í Faith
Wicca











Existence of God




For



Beauty
Christological
Consciousness
Cosmological

Kalam
Contingency


Degree
Desire
Experience
Fine-tuning of the Universe
Love
Miracles
Morality
Ontological
Pascal's Wager
Proper basis
Reason
Teleological

Natural law
Watchmaker analogy


Transcendental








Against



747 Gambit
Atheist's Wager
Evil
Free will
Hell
Inconsistent revelations
Nonbelief
Noncognitivism
Occam's razor
Omnipotence
Poor design
Russell's teapot











Theology



Acosmism
Agnosticism
Animism
Antireligion
Atheism
Creationism
Dharmism
Deism
Divine command theory
Dualism
Esotericism
Exclusivism
Existentialism

Christian
Agnostic
Atheistic


Feminist theology

Thealogy
Womanist theology


Fideism
Fundamentalism
Gnosticism
Henotheism
Humanism

Religious
Secular
Christian


Inclusivism
Theories about religions
Monism
Monotheism
Mysticism
Naturalism

Metaphysical
Religious
Humanistic


New Age
Nondualism
Nontheism
Pandeism
Panentheism
Pantheism
Perennialism
Polytheism
Process theology
Religious skepticism
Spiritualism
Shamanism
Taoic
Theism
Transcendentalism
more...








Religious language



Eschatological verification
Language-game
Logical positivism
Apophatic theology
Verificationism








Problem of evil



Augustinian theodicy
Best of all possible worlds
Euthyphro dilemma
Inconsistent triad
Irenaean theodicy
Natural evil
Theodicy









Philosophers
of religion

(by date active)




Ancient
and
Medieval



Heraclitus


Augustine of Hippo
Boethius
Anselm of Canterbury
Gaunilo of Marmoutiers
Averroes
Thomas Aquinas
Maimonides


Pico della Mirandola
Desiderius Erasmus








Enlightenment



René Descartes
Blaise Pascal
Baruch Spinoza
Nicolas Malebranche
Gottfried W Leibniz
William Wollaston
Thomas Chubb


David Hume
Baron d'Holbach
Immanuel Kant
Johann G Herder








1800
1850



Friedrich Schleiermacher
Karl C F Krause
Georg W F Hegel


William Whewell
Ludwig Feuerbach
Søren Kierkegaard
Karl Marx
Albrecht Ritschl








1880
1900



Ernst Haeckel
W K Clifford
Friedrich Nietzsche
Harald Høffding
William James


Vladimir Solovyov
Ernst Troeltsch
Rudolf Otto
Lev Shestov
Sergei Bulgakov
Pavel Florensky
Ernst Cassirer
Joseph Maréchal








1920
postwar



George Santayana
Bertrand Russell
Martin Buber
René Guénon
Paul Tillich
Karl Barth
Emil Brunner
Rudolf Bultmann
Reinhold Niebuhr


Charles Hartshorne
Mircea Eliade
J L Mackie
Walter Kaufmann
Martin Lings
Peter Geach
George I Mavrodes
William Alston
Antony Flew








1970
1990
2010



William L Rowe
Dewi Z Phillips
Alvin Plantinga
Anthony Kenny
Nicholas Wolterstorff
Richard Swinburne
Robert Merrihew Adams


Peter van Inwagen
Daniel Dennett
Loyal Rue
Jean-Luc Marion
William Lane Craig
Ali Akbar Rashad


Alexander Pruss











Related topics



Criticism of religion
Ethics in religion
Exegesis
History of religions
Religion
Religious language
Religious philosophy
Relationship between religion and science
Political science of religion
Faith and rationality
more...











 Portal
 Category













Authority control



WorldCat
VIAF: 56625773
LCCN: n78095539
ISNI: 0000 0001 2134 0790
GND: 118556851
SELIBR: 191438
SUDOC: 028526732
BNF: cb12034524d (data)
BIBSYS: x90069936
ULAN: 500252086
MGP: 29244
NLA: 35242044
NDL: 00444510
NKC: jn20000603186
BNE: XX889868















					
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=William_James&amp;oldid=691247253"					
				Categories: 1842 births1910 deaths19th-century American writers20th-century American writers19th-century philosophers20th-century philosophersAmerican academicsAmerican philosophersAmerican psychologistsAmerican religion academicsEducational psychologistsFunctionalist psychologistsHarvard Medical School alumniHarvard University facultyParapsychologistsPeople from Staten IslandPhilosophers of mindPragmatistsPsychedelic drug researchersPsychical researchersPsychologists of religionSocial philosophyEpistemologistsPresidents of the American Psychological AssociationConsciousness studiesHarvard School of Engineering and Applied Sciences alumniHidden categories: CS1 maint: Explicit use of et al.Articles with hCardsAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from September 2015Wikipedia external links cleanup from June 2011Wikipedia spam cleanup from June 2011Articles with DMOZ linksAC with 14 elementsWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with BIBSYS identifiersWikipedia articles with ULAN identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiers				
							
		
		
			